UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:25 MAY 1982
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2367) . , . , , . . . . . . . . , , , . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry established under
resolution 4% (1981) (S/14905/Rev.l) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.2367 and Corr. I

NOTE
Symbols of LJnited Nations documents are cotnposed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol 3, . ,) are normally published in
quarterly Suppletwrzts of the Ojjjcinl Re~urds of the Securily Courzcil. Tile date
of the document indicates the supplemenl in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rrsofu~ions and
Drcisiom of t/w Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2367th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 25 May 1982, at 4 p.m.
Pw.vidonf:

Mr. LING

Qing (China).

Pw.srnt: The representatives of the following States:
China. France. Guyana, Ireland. Japan. Jordan.
Panama. Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2367)

1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of
Inquiry established under resolution
496
(1981) (S/14905/Rev.l)

Adoption

of the agenda

Complaint by Seychelles:
Report of the Security Council Commission of Inquiry
cstnblished under resolution 496 (1981) (S/14905/
Rev. 1)

I.

The

PRESIDENT

(intclrpi’rtotion

,f,om

2. The PRESIDENT
(i,?tc/pt’c’totiorl ~>CII,I C’hi/71~.~1~):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Bangladesh. Mongolia, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Swaziland
and Zambia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, 1 propose. with
the consent of the Council. to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote. in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

C‘hi-

l7P.SCJ): In accordance

with decisions taken at previous meetings on this item [235Yth, 236/st trnd
2365th mwtin~~:.s), I invite the representative of SeychIclIes to take a place at the Council table: I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan. Algeria, Angola,
Argentina.
Barbados. Benin, Botswana. Bulgaria,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Egypt. the German DemocWic Republic, Grenada. Honduras, Hungary, India,
Kenya. the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. the
Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.
Madagascar,
Maldives,
Mali. Malta, Mauritius.
Mozambique,
Nicaragua.
Pakistan. SW Tome and Principe, the Syrian Arab
Re:public, the United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam
and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

7- .

Mr. S.INCLAIR
(Guyana): Mr. President, since it
is less than six hours since I extended my delegation’s
oongrutulations
to you and to Mr. Kamanda
wa
Kamanda of Zaire. I shall ut this stage merely extend
a very hearty welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Seychelles, Mr, Jacques
Hodoul.
4. The Council is meeting to consider the report of
the Security Council Commission
of Inquiry established under resolution 496 ( 1981). The specific context for the creation of that Commission
was the
dastardly act of aggression committed
by ;I band of
mercenaries against the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Seychelles

African behaviour towards neighbouring independent
African States fortifies my delegation in its conviction of an official South African role. That outlaw
rigime has demonstrated total disregard for the norms
and principles of international law and the demands
of international
opinion. Despite universal condemnation. it continues brutally to implement its inhuman
r4xrrthcid
policy.
It defiantly continues in illegal
occupation of Namibia. It invades at will the territory
of neighbouring African States. wreaking incalculable
destruction to life and property. Why then should the
international community not believe that South Africu
had a direct hand in the mercenary act of 25 November
I%l’?

on 25 November last. My delegation at once wishes to
express its gratitude to the members of that Commission- its Chairman. Mr. Azores Typaldos of Panama,
Mr. Jeremy Craig of Ireland, and Mr. Katsumi Sezaki
of Japan-for
their report contained in document
S/ 149051Rev. I.
5. My delegation has carefully studied the report and,
bearing in mind the serious constraints faced by the
Commission,
most particularly
the unto-operative
attitude of the South African authorities.
as highlighted in that report. we feel that the Commission
has performed creditably. fulfilling a substantial part
of the mandate given it by the Council in resolution 496
(1981).

:
j
j

IO. Its own unto-operative
attitude in refusing to
\
have the Commission question members of the mcrr
cenary gang only adds to our suspicions about Sol~th
Africa’s role in this aggression. We call on those
authorities to act responsibly by lending their CL)operation to the Commission appointed by this Council
when it continues its inquiry.

6. My delegation regrets. of course, that the Commission was unable to fulfil that part of its mandate
regarding the origin. background and financing of the
aggression committed
ugainst Seychelles.
As was
indicated in paragraph 282 of its report, the Commission wtils unable to reach. in its own words, “a definitive conclusion on the extent or level of South African
knowledge or responsibility”.
The Commission
is
in no way to be blamed on this score. since it confronted certain obstacles from the South African side
which frustrated it in its efforts to obtain a full picture
in this regard.

1I, The phenomenon of mercenarism has been and
continues to be a matter ofgrowing concern to the international community.
This most recent manifestation
vindicates the concern so widely felt in the interniltional community
about this practice. My delegati~~n
reiterates its strong condemnation of the mercenary
attack against Seychelles and restates its position
of
principle in opposition to the activity of mercenaries
’
in general. Small States are particularly vulnerable
to
the mnchinations
and violence of groups of meI-ccnaries. Guyana therefore joins in supporting
the
Commission’s recommendation that the ongoing w~11.k
in the United Nations on the elaboration of an intcrnational convention
against the recruitment.
USC.
financing and training of mercenaries should be uccelerated. As an active member of the Ad Hoc Committct’
charged with the early elaboration of that convention.
my delegation pledges to redouble its efforts for the
early and successful conclusion of ihat most imput’tnnt
exercise, which will provide, for the first time.
in
international legal framework for dealing exclusively
with and, it is to be hoped, eventually eliminating
the
repugnant phenomenon of mercenarism.

7. Yet there is enough evidence of a significant
South African role and complicity, at very high official
levels, in the mercenary aggression against Seychelles.
The Commission was able to substantiate
that the
preparations and planning for the mercenary attack
took place in South Africa. Some of the mercenaries
had previous military service in the South African
armed forces, while a number of them were reservists
in the South African defence forces to whom call-up
papers had been issued. The mercenaries’
weapons
were tested by them in South Africa prior to thei]
departure. One of the mercenary gang, Martin Dolinschek, revealed to the Commission
that he was a
serving member of Ihe National intelligence
Service
of South Africa. Moreover, as the trial of some of the
perpetrators of the mercenary aggression proceeds in
South Africa, an even clearer picture of South African
complicity and high official involvement
has begun
to emerge.

12. The Commission’s
investigation has shown thut
attack resulted in considcrnble
the mercenaries’
material damage to airport facilities and has had CCTtain additional adverse consequences for the econcrmq
of Seychelles. Guyana whole-heartedly supports
the
recommendation
by the Commission
for finuncial,
technical and material assistance to Seychelles.
In
particular. 1 wish to express our support for the idea
of :I voluntary fund, as proposed by the repr-esentittive
of France on Thursday, 20 May [23SYth ~rw~tj~~~:,
/~/l’tr. 64 1. and we pledge our fullest co-operati l>n ‘in
this respect.

8. It is in the light of that consider&ion and the Commission’s admission of inability,
because of South
Africa’s obstructionist attitude, to carry out its mandate fully that my delegation expresses its support fol
that recommendation
of the Commission
that it be
authorized to furnish a supplementary
report providing the Council with ;I more complete and comprehensive account of the background,
origin and
financing of the mercenary attack on Seychelles,
9. My delegation believes, without any doubt. that
South Africa cannot escape blame for an act that
originated on its territory.
Moreover,
past South

13. In general, my delegation would like to C,XC,~~SS
its support for the thrust of the report of the cum
2

mercenaries. which should, we feel, constitute a crime
against the peace and security of mankind,

mission of Inquiry and its recommendations.
We
would lilke to take this opportunity to reiterate our firm
and unequivocal solidarity with the Government and
people of the Republic of Seychelles as they confront
South Africa’s continuing threats to their national
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

20. When the General Assembly, on 4 December
1980. adopted resolution 35/48 relative to the drafting
of that convention, a number of Member States seemed
unconvinced of its usefulness, We venture to believe
that the attack by mercenaries against the Republic
of Seychelles, scarcely a year after the adoption of
that resolution and at the very moment when the Ad
Hoc, Committee established by the United Nations
was dealing with that problem, will have helped to
allay any lingering doubts. It is obvious that the activities of mercenaries sap the very foundations of
civilizotion. undermine relations of trust between nations and peoples and damage the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
international law. It is for that reason that we have
always believed and shall continue to believe that the
activities of mercenaries must be regarded as a crime
against the peace and security of mankind.

14. Mr. KAMANDA
wa KAMANDA
(Zaire) (inllJ\*l?,.c~tution,fi.o,n FWIIC~): First, I should like to welcome
here Mr. Mogwe. the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Botswana and current Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
and Mr. Jacques Hodoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Seychelles, a fraternal and friendly
country, the entire progress of whose accession to
independence we have followed with particular interest. We should especially like to thank Mr. Jacques
Hodoul for his remarkable statement to the Council
[2-%J1h mwtir~,~].
IS. I s,hould next like to address my sincere congratulations to the Chairman and members of the Security
Council Commission
of Inquiry established under
resolution 496 ( 1981) on the excellent work they accomplished, their methodical approach to the problems
and the clear presentation of the report that they submitted to us.

21, Therefore, the speedy adoption of an international convention
would represent an important
contribution to the progressive development of international law, in accordance with the spirit of the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.’

16. Allthough the Commission’s
report as published
in document S/l4905/Rcv.l
is an interim report. it
already contains very important information whereby
we can follow all these events and obtain quite a
clear. albeit preliminary,
idea about the reasons for
which l.he Commission was established, nameI:/: first,
to investigate the origin, background and financing
of the mercenary aggression against the Republic of
Seychelles on 25 November
1981 and, secondly, to
assess and evaluate economic damages.

22. The use of mercenaries to establish political,
economic and cultural domination over other peoples
and nations directly attacks the principles of national
independence, sovereignty, non-interference
in the
internal affairs of States and the non-use of force
in international relations, principles on the respect fol
which the peace and security of the world depend.
23. Since any threat to the peace in one region can
imperil the security of the entire world--and I should
like to emphasize here i.hat Seychelles is in one of
the world’s most sensitive regions-it is essential that
the international community assume collective responsibility for eliminating those activities that jeopardize
international peace and security.

17. In resolution 496 ( 198 I), the C,ouncil condemned
the mercenary aggression and the subsequent airplane
hijacking and affirmed that the territorial integrity and
politicnl independence of the Republic of Seychelles
must be respected.
18. My delegation would like here to reaffirm its full
support of that condemnation,
as well as its total
solidarity with the people and Government of Seychelles during that painful trial.

24. The delegation of Zaire shares the opinion that
a State in which groups of mercenaries organize incursions into the territory of another State violates international law, just as does a State that uses mercenaries
in armed attacks against another State.

19. The fact that during this second half of the
twentieth century most of the activities of mercenaries
for the purposes of political, economic and cultural
destabilization
are concentrated
on our continent
-against,
in particular, such countries as Guinea,
Sudan, Nigeria, Benin, Zaire, which was then called
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Seychelles
and many others-has justified our resolve to secure
from the international
community
and the United
Nations the adoption of an international convention
against the recruitment,
use, financing and training
of mercenaries and to put an end to the activities of

25. Accordingly, the delegation of Zaire supports. on
the one hand, the legitimate demands of the Government and people of Seychelles and. on the other, the
recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry.
26. My delegation unreservedly supports the establishment of a voluntary fund as well as material, technical and economic assistance to help the Republic
of Seychelles repair the damage done its economy
and. in particular, to assist it in rebuilding the airport,
3

35. It is our duty to denounce once again the no\r
familiar scornful attitude shown by the Pretoria rcgimr
to the international
community
in refusing to cooperate with the Commission. thereby preventing it
from completing
its investigation and consequently
impeding compliance with resolution 496 ( 198 I ). Thih
attitude clearly shows that the South African rncir;ts
were accomplices in the planning and financing of the
invasion.

as well as supporting the establishment of an l/t/ /Eric,
committee to co-ordinate and mobilize the fund’s
resources, On behalf of my delegation. I should like
here to thank the representative of France who offered
to play a part in this fund. as well as the representative
of the United Kingdom, who offered help in rebuilding
the destroyed airport.
notwithstanding
the revelations
27. Furthermore,
of the mercenary Mike Hoare. revelations that shed
new light on the planning, organization and preparation of the mercenaries’ aggression against Seychelles.
we believe that the Council should accede to the Commission’s request. namely, that it be authorized to
pursue its investigntion and to present a complementary report containing any other data relevant to
aspects of its mandate that could not be covered by
the present report.

36. In this connection.
Mike Hoarc himself. the
leader of the mercenary forces. stated in Johannesburg.
as reported in T/71) NPII~ Yolk Tiu7o.s of IO Muy. that
“he was informed by the Deputy Director of the Nibtional Intelligence
Service, N. J. Claasens, that the
Cabinet had approved his plans to oust President
France Albert Rend”: that *‘the operation was to be :
handled by Military
Intelligence”:
and that after :I I
“bureaucratic
obstacle was , . . overcome . . . he wil%
provided with arms and offered a training area in thr:
northern Transvaal.”
[SCCJS//5065, (//~/?(J.v.I

28. We also believe that the Council should request
South Africa not to impede the work of the Commission. but rather to co-operate with it to establish the
whole truth in this matter.

37. We must not forget that the racist rigime in Pretoria has been receiving unconditional
support from
~1permanent member of the Council, as happened with
Israel in the Middle East. and that it feels supporled
in its acts of aggression and destabilization
pl:b~l\
against the front-line States. Seychelles dnd the So~*th
West Africa People’s Organization as it tries LO ptlrpetuutc its reprehensible policy of uprrrlhricl.
AS klfl&!
as it receives this support, South Africa will continue
to defy the international
community,
threaten intwnational peace and security and commit aggi-essiun
against sister countries which wish only to detwminr:
their own destiny.

29. Before concluding. 1 should like to say how
much I admire the Government
and the people of
Seychelles for having successfully repelled the aggressors and having defended with such resolve theil
territorial integrity and hard-won independence.
30. The PRESIDENT
(i,7lc~p,,rtrrli~~/7
f?r~m
(‘hinc2.s~);The next speaker- is the repr-esentaiive of Nical-agun.
I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
3 I.

Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua)
(inrc/*j&~/n Spr,/?is/?): Mr. President. I should like
to express my thanks to you and to the other members of the Council for this opportunity to participate
in the deliberations on the item before us.

38. We believe it is necessary to respect the dccisions and aspirations of the African peoples and of tht!
rest of the world for the elimination
of this crime
against mankind, rrprrr~theid, for an independent
and
sovereign Namibia and for the ending of these uggressive policies against the front-line States.

pwttrtion

32. The mercenary aggression against the sister
people and Government of Seychelles not only was a
flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a Member State but also constituted
a
serious threat to international peace and security, and
for these reasons my Government
cannot remain
indifferent and silent.

39. Nicaragua wishes to state once again th:&t i1
stands by its African brothers in their fight for their
sovereign claims and in their struggle against SLluth
Africa and South Africa’s attempt to continue
yllnndering African resources.

33. We wish at the same time to express our appreciation to Mr. Azores Typaldos of Panama, Mr. Craig
of Ireland and Mr. Sezaki of Japan for their efforts
made in compliance with its resolution 4’36 ( 1% I). by
which the Council decided to send a commission to the
scene to investigate the mercenary aggression against
the Republic of Seychelles.

40. There is something else which we find pill-ticularly significant and which should not be overlooked,
hccuuse it is common practice not only in Africa
but
in Asia and in other continents. The leader of Ihe
mercenaries himself. Mike Hoare. said. according
1~1
TI’W NVII* York Tin7rJ.v of 10 May.
“that he had met a representative from the C‘cIltr3
Intelligence Agency in Pretoria and informed hi nl o
the c~lup plans. The United States was inter’c’stcd
hc asserted. because of ‘the strategic value rlr thl
Seychelles’ ” lihirl. 1.

34. It is clear from the report of the Commission
that its efforts had the full assistance and co-operation
of the Governments
of Seychelles and Swaziland.
which deserve praise for- that.
4

L

41.
We can say that such actions constitute
a common practice
of the CentraJ
Intelligence
Agency
IClAl
because we have had first-hand
experience
of
this both in Central America generally
and specifically
in Nicaragua.
Members
of the Council know that such
:Uions,
both open and covert. have been engaged in
aguinst my country.
In addition,
Latin America
has
had bi,tter experience
with regard to the CIA, which has
left ;I deep impression
on the Latin American
peoples,
especially
those of Guatemala
nnd Chile.

destabilizing
actions, including
the use or threat of the
use of force, endeavouring
thereby to undermine
the
efforts that independent
nations are making to build
more just societies.
49. The people of Seychelles,
by emerging victorious
from this action.
show that their determination
to
march towards
their liberation
is more powerful
than
any attempt to return to the past and exploitation.
Seychelles is not, nor will it be, alone. The entire world
stands with it. For our part, we reiterate to the people
and Government
of Seychelles
that the People’s
Sandinist
Revolution.
in spite of the thousands
of
kilometres
that separate us geographically,
will always
stand with them, Our peoples are marching with determination and united in a single body towards the future.
consolidating
the final liberation.

42. ‘The constant
threats and the possibility
of aggression by mercenaries
are ;I serious threat to the sovereignty
of our countries.
For this reason we fully
support the statement of the Government
of Seychelles
and the recommendation
of the Commission
of Inquiry
regarding
an international
convention
against
the
recruitment.
use, financing
and training
of mercenaries, and believe that the work on this matter should
be speedily completed.

SO. The
PRESIDENT
(ir7tr~l’l,/‘c~lfrtic,17 ,/i.c)/17 C‘hi/I(J.~JI); The next speaker is the reprcsentativc
of Kenya.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

43.
Nicaraguu
believes
that the Council
should
condemn
this new act of mercenary
aggression,
perpetrated
and directed
by South
Africa.
this time
against the Republic
of Seychelles.
The violation
of
the territorial
integrity,
airspace.
independence
and
sovereignty
of that country constitutes
a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
The declarations
of the mercenaries
themselves
regarding
the
planning
of that aggression
with the Pretoria
rhgime
and the facilities
in the way of training
areas, financ’ing.
and assistance
with weapons
given to the
mercenaries
make it essential that we condemn
South
Africa.

51. Mr. MAINA
(Kenya):
I thank the Council
fat
allowing
me to make a statement.
The Council
is
meeting to consider the report of the Security Council Commission
of Inquiry
established
under resolution 496 ( 19X1). I should like to thank the members of
the Commission
of Inquiry,
and particularly
its Chairmim, Mr. Carlos Azores
Typaldos
of Panama,
fol
producing
this report in such ;I short time. despite
luck of co-operation
on the part of South Africa.
52. We note that the Commission
has recommended
that it be authorized
to furnish R supplementary
report
in due course. This appears reasonable.
since furthe
information
could be obtained
through
the pending
or incomplete
court cases in Seychelles
or in South
Africa. In view of this. my delegation
will regard this
as an interim report and comment
on it accordingly.

44.
Similarly.
my delegation
considers
the recommendations
of the Commission
of Inquiry
to be very
appropriate.
and we support them wholly, but we also
believe that it is necessary
that it present
a more
detailed
report.
45.
We also support the recommendation
concerning
financial,
technical
and material
assistance
to Seychelles to enable it to cope with the consequences
of
the aggression,

53. The report
bears testimony
to the events of
25 November
I981 and sheds some light on their
planning.
The events lending to the attack on the Republic of Seychelles have been carefully reconstructed.
The identity
and the motives
of the mercenaries
involved
in this crime have been sufficiently
established,
both in the report
and in the internntional
press. There
is sufficient
evidence
in the report to
indicate that South Africa played a major role in the
planning
and execution
of the aggression.

46.
We support
the suggestion
of the Government
of France
regarding
the creation
of a special fund,
to which, from today, and in spite of our difficulties.
we pledge our support,
47.
Nicaragua
wishes to assure the Government
and
people of Seychelles
of its complete
and unconditional
support and solidarity
at this time and whenever
it may
need the militant
support
of our people and Government.

t

S4. Testifying
at the hi.jacking
trial in South Africa,
Mike Hoare revealed that the aggression
was carried
out with the help of South Africa. Preparation
for the
planning
of the mercenary
attack. including
recruitment, took place in South Africa. The weapons used
in the attack were obtained
and tested in South Africa.
An officer of the South African
Intelligence
Service
was among the seven mercenaries
captured
by security forces
in Seychelles
following
the mercenary
attack.

48. The blood shed by the heroes among that people
in victoriously
repulsing
and defeating
the mercenary aggression
is a lesson for those who violate
international
law and continue
to intervene
in the
internal
affairs of States.
engaging
in all kinds of
5

55. The behaviour of South Africa after this infamuus attack clearly indicated an attempt to cover up
its involvement in the aggression. South Africa released 39 of the 44 mercenaries without charging them
at first, or even disclosing their identities. after they
had committed an act of piracy by hijacking an Ail
India aircraft to South Africa. The racist rlgime refused to co-operate with the Commission of Inquiry
and did not allow the Commission
to interview the
mercenaries, This kind of behaviour by South Africa
can be seen only as an attempt to conceal its involvement in the planning and execution of this aggression.

ognize the independence and sovereignty of Mauritius.
the country that I huve the honour to represent here.
when it shed the yoke of colonialism on 12 Mnrch
IY68. In fact. China did so even before the outgoing
colonial Power. Therefore. I feel gratified to be participating in the delibelations
of the Council when it
is being presided over by an illustrious son of China.
62. To wish a mature diplomat of your well-estitblished skill and stature, endowed with the proverbiul
Chinese wisdom, success during your present term
of office as President of the Council would be prcsumptuous on my part. 1 take it for granted that you
will steer the rocking ship safely to harbour. in spite
of the storm I-aging during this month of May. a month
that is normally symbolic of so many good omens.

56. Since the Commission of Inquiry was not able to
interview the mercenaries in South Africa, and in the
light of the revelations coming from the trial of the
mercenaries in South Africa, the report that we are now
considering is clearly incomplete.
A more comprehensive report should be prepared after all aspects of
the attack are examined.

63. This occasion is also special for me, Sir. since
your immediate
predecessor happened to be an enlightened son of Africa. I therefore pay a very special
tribute to my beloved African brother, Mr. Kamnndn
wa Kamanda
of Zaire, who faced the thorny problems
before the Council squarely and dealt with them justly.
calmly and with harmony during the delicate and
difficult month of April. He was obviously guided in
his task by the supreme architect of the universe.

57. But while waiting for a complete report. we must
respond to the call by the Commission of Inquiry fol
international assistance to the Republic of Seychelles
to repair the enormous economic damage it has suffered as a result of the attack. The report contains an
assessment and evaluation of economic damage sustained by the Republic of Seychelles. We strongly
nppeal to the international community to come to the
aid of that peaceful country, which was subjected to
;I carefully planned aggression. We urge that an appropriate fund be set up to channel voluntary contributions from Member States.

64. I have studied the report of the Security Council Commission
of Inquiry established by the Council
under its resolution 496 ( 1981) with a mandate to
inquire into the origin, the financing and the economic
damages caused to the Republic of Seychelles by ~1
band of mercenaries. I note with regret that the Commission has not been able to complete its report, issued
on IS March of this year, because of difficulties placed
in its way, especially by a certain rigime. Neverthcless. the report as prepared under the presidency of
the representative
of Panama, Mr. Carlos Azores
Typaldos, assisted by Mr. James Craig of Ireland and
Mr. Katsumi Sezaki of Japan, is quite thorough. In
my opinion it contains sufficient evidence to allow the
Council to draw an interim but telling conclusion.
I believe it would be proper for the Council to extend
the mandate of the Commission so that it may complete the work entrusted to it.

58. We are painfully aware of the threat that mercenary activities pose to small independent States. We
in Africa have witnessed the destructive activities of
these mercenaries in various countries.
African
States have been the main targets of these mercenaries. whose breeding ground appears to be South
Africa. It is for this reason that my delegation supports
the recommendation
of the Commission concerning
the early conclusion of an international
convention
against the recruitment,
use, financing and training
of mercenaries. The attack on the Republic of Seychelles by a group of mercenaries emphasizes the need
for the conclusion of such a convention.

60. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius):
I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to make :I statement.

65. I have also listened with special attention to the
speech of my distinguished, beloved African brother.
friend and neighbour, Mr. Jacques Hodoul, the Minister for Foreign AfiXrs of Seychelles, whose presence
among us I salute. His tone has been firm yet polite.
his requests modest and reasonable. I have no doubt
that the case of his country which he has so ably presented has already aroused the sympathy and won the
support of the Council.

61. FOI. quite some time I have held the view that
compliments to the President of the Council should
be left to the members of the Council, except in special circumstances or on special occasions. For me
this is indeed a special occasion, China, your great,
proud and valiunt country, was the first State to rec-

66. The views of African States on the issue under
consideration have already been eloquently expressed
by my beloved African brother, Mr. Abdel Meguid
of Egypt, in his capacity as Chairman, for the month,
of the African Group at the United Nations. Yesterday,
Mr. Archibald Mogwe, Chairman of the Council
of

59. The PRESIDENT
(inl~~rp/.c~f~rtion ,fiwm
C’hiIIV.SIJ): The next speaker is the representative of Mnuritius. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

6

Ministers
of the OAU. whom I salute.
case of Seychelles
even more brilliantly
ically. Urn behalf of my country.
I fully
statements.

presented
the
and dramatsupport these

ory of them or to learn of them for the first time. I refel
to my statement of 6 April 1977, when I addressed the
Council on the complaint
of Benin [200Orh nlc)rtiugI.
7 I. The
PRESIDENT
fillfe/p,‘c’r~rtit,n
.fhm
C’hiIIOSV): The next speaker is the representative
of the
Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.
I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

67.
Having said this, I feel I have very little to add
except
to place on the record of the Council
certain
facts.
Immediately
after the unprovoked.
wanton
and dastardly
aggression
against
Seychelles
took
place, the Government
of Mauritius.
through
its Governor-General
and its Prime Minister.
strongly
condemned this criminal
act of banditry.
Mr. Seewoosagur
Ramgoolnm
reiterated
his feelings on this issue in his
end-of-year
address to the nation when he said:

72. Mr. ADDABASHI
(Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya):
Mr. President,
I should like first of all to congratulate
you on your assumption
of the presidency
for this
month. I am confident
that you will wisely and ably
guide the deliberations
of the Council.

“Po‘litical
and military
adventurism
are very
much alive in the world of today. A most flagrant
example.
an example
which has a profound
lesson
for us., is the recent event in the Seychelles.
The
Seychelles
are important
to us because they are our
neighbours,
and the attempted
takeover
by outside
guns-for-hire
illustrates
only too well and clearly
that some interests will stop at nothing to gain political power.
It is well worth noting that even peaceful nations
which
desire nothing
more than the
well-being
of their citizens
are not immune to this
violent
phenomenon.
We are glad, however,
that
law and order have been re-established
in Seychelles.”

73. I should also like to express my appreciation
of
the manner in which the representative
of Zaire fulfilled his mandate as President
of the Council during
last month.
74. The question with which we are concerned
today
involves
an act of aggression
against an independent
and sovereign State member of the Movement
of NonAligned
Countries,
the OAU
and the United
Nations. That act of aggression
was perpetrated
by a band
of international
criminals
at the expense of a peaceful
African people committed
to raising their standard of
living and to the progress of their country.
75. The unsuccessful
criminal
act undertaken
by the
mercenaries
against the Republic of Seychelles resulted
in substantial
material
damage
to the international
airport and to loss of human life among the courageous
people of Seychelles,
who offered their lives in the
cause of defending
their country,
its freedom and its
dignity
against the ravages of that criminal
gang of
mercenaries
sent by the racist rlgime of South Africa
in order to topple the nationalist
Government
of Seychelles and create a puppet rigime which would tolerate the crimes of uprrr?hcdid in southern Africa.

68.
Perhaps I may add that if law and order have been
re-established
in Seychelles,
the Republic
has been
left bleeiding
economically.
The Commission
of Inquiry informs
us in its first report that the global loss
sustained
by Seychelles
amounts to $18 million-peanuts, perhaps,
to some countries,
but to one like Seychelles
with limited
resources
it is very significant
if
it is to redress its listing economy
and bring it back to
an even keel. I therefore
hope and pray that Member
States and international
organizations,
including
the
United
Nations
and its agencies,
will not hesitate in
coming
voluntarily
to the economic
support of Seychellcs by way of a special fund to be created for this
purpose.
In this connection,
I am very encouraged
by
the statement
of the representative
of France [235Yth
mc>cJting, prrtr. 64 1.

76. This is not the first time that mercenaries
have
attacked peaceful African nations that refuse to submit
to racist and colonial
domination,
We have witnessed
several similar acts before.
77. When the continent
of Africa awoke in the second hitIf of the twentieth
century.
it found itself enchained and deprived
of freedom,
its resources
being
plundered
and its people being exploited.
When Africu
began II bitter struggle to restore its freedom,
its resources and its dignity, it was expected thtit the colonialist interests
would
not accept the termination
of
their domination.
The imperialist
forces
have attempted to use every possible means in order to maintain their domination
of the African continent
and its
peoples. These means have included
the use of mercenaries.

69.
Regarding
the
question
of “mercenarism”
--I under-stand
the word does not appear in the English
dictionary--i
pay a tribute to Nigeria for its initiative
in connection
with the elaboration
of an international
convention
against
the recruitment,
use, financing
and training
of mercenaries.
Such :I convention
has
today become more necessary than ever before. I look
forward
to a near future
when it will be ready fol
signature
by States Members
and Observers
of the
United
Nations.
70.
My views on the question
of “mercenarism”
are
well known
to the Council
and they are on record.
I shall therefore
refrain from repeating
myself. For the
benefit
of those who may wish to refresh their mem-

78,
Why were the people of Seychelles
the victim
of aggression
in this manner,
as were the people of
Congo, the people of Guinea,
the people of Benin
7

and the people of Angola? Why are the African Frontline States faced with direct threats? Indeed, why
should the African peoples in those arcas and others
be confronted with aggression. murder and terrorism?
79. The answer to these questions can be found in the
fact that those peoples have rejected the domination,
control and exploitation which the racists and colonialists try to impose upon them and are supporting
the struggle of the peoples of Namibia and South Africa
ta achieve independence and eliminate the ~r/>trrtheitl
rcyime of South Africa. Those imperialists will not
Icirve the African continent and its peoples alone to
build their own future by themselves.
80, What happened in Seychelles on 25 November
1981 was an act of aggression not only against the
people of Seychelles but also against the world community 11sa whole. One of the most basic objectives
of this Orgnnization is to ensure the safety and security of its Members. especially the small States which
have recently attained independence.
Those small
States halve difficulty in defending their freedom and
dignity against those who hold ambitions to reimpose
their domination and exploitation.
The United Nations has already condemned
the recruitment
of
mercenaries and has called upon all nations to withhold all assistance from such mercenaries. The OAU.
fur its part, has done the same several times. Furthermore. the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, at its fourteenth session, held at
Librevitle from 2 to 5 July 1977. adopted a convention on mercenarism which contains the basic measures ta eliminate the activities of mercenaries,
XI. In the particular case of Seychelles, the Council
of Ministers of the OAU at its thirty-eighth session,
held at Addis Ababa from 22 to 28 February 1982.
adopted a resolution in which, i/rtcrs crlirr , it
‘*.stw/7g/~ 1~~~7d~17717.v
this armed aggression
against the people and the State of Seychelles:

“Strong!\’ condcn7n.v
South Africa and all countries that support it in carrying out its odious policy
of expansionism :md repeated acts of destnbilization ancl aggression against independent and sovereign African States.“’
82. That is not enough. We call for the speedy conclusion of the work of the Acl Hw Committee on the
Drafting of an International
Convention against the
Recruitment.
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries.
83. Even though the Commission
of Inquiry did not
reach ;I definitive conclusion on the complicity of the
racist regime of South Africa in the invasion by the
mcrccnuries, in paragraph 2X2 of its report the Commission states that it “finds it difficult to believe that

the South African authorities
knowledge of the preparations

did not at least have
. . .“.

X4. The present situation is not the same ;ts that at
the time of the submission of the report, There is more
information about the mercenaries. the operation and
the role of the racist regime of South Africa. The ~*evclotions made by the mercenary Michael Hoar-e clearly
indicate that South Africa was the author of the operation. and we believe that. in accordance with its
recommendations.
the Commission should be authorized to furnish a supplementary report containing any
further information
relevant to its mandate, including
the revelations by the mercenaries that might emerge
from the trials in South Africa and Seychelles.
WC also believe that the Council should ask South
Africa to submit all the information emerging from
the trial to the Commission and permit the Commission
to interview the mercenaries.
85. Regarding the material damage inflicted on the
Seychelles economy as a result of the invasion by the
merccnuries, my delegation supports all the recommendations made by the Commission, especially the
idea of creating a special fund for the repair of ths
damages and to assist the economy of the country.
86. Before I conclude I should like to pay it special
tribute to the gallant people of Seychelles for the victory they achieved over the mercenaries on behalf of
Africa and the international community as 11 whole.
I should also like to express the sympathy of the people of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamnhiriya
and its solidarity with the people of the Republic of
Seychelles. We hope that the United Nations will
undertake the measures necessary to prevent such :I
criminal act by mercenaries from taking place in the
future.
87. The PRtlSIDENT
(inte,p~~~trrtiot~
,fi’om
ChiIZ(J.Y(J):The next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
58. Mr. LUSAKA
(Zambia): Mr. President. permit
me first of all to express nppreciiltion
to you, and
through YOLIto the Council, for allowing my delegation
to participate in the discussion of the report of the
Security Council Commission of Inquiry established
under resolution 4Y6 (1981). It is a source of grent
Pleasure to my delegation that the issue is being considered during your presidency this month. My delegation is confident that with your skill and tact. which
you have already demonstrated, YOLIwill ably steer the
work of the Council to a successful conclusion. My
delegation
also
wishes to express appreciation
to
Mr. Kumanda wa Kamanda of Zaire. who successfully
presided over the Council’s work during the month
of April.
89. When the Republic of Seychelles was the victim
of mercenary aggression on 25 November
198 I. my
Government condemned that atrocious action. It was

clear to my country that the mercenary aggression
against the Republic of Seychelles. a non-aligned
member State of the third world. was engineered by
forces of imperialism.
colonialism.
neocolonialism
and racism. The intentions of those forces have always
been to (ensure that developing countries like the
Republic of Seychelles should not be allowed to develop in peace for the good of their people. The strong
opposition to racism and r/plrrth~id and the, support by
the people and Government of Seychelles for efforts
aimed at the eradication of colonialism,
racism and
trprrrtlwid
in southern Africa have not been to the
taste of thlose forces of colonialism and tr/~r,t/rf~itl.

continues to pruclisc its policy of rcptrrthc~itl it cannot
expect peace from the people on whom it is practised.
it cannot expect peace from independent African
States in the region. indeed it cannot expect peace
from the rest of the pence-loving nations of the world.
94. The Republic of Seychelles suffered much
damage to its property at the airport as a result of the
mercenary aggression. That aggression had very
adverse consequences on the country’s overall economy, as was explicitly stated in paragraphs 287 to 292
of the report which is before this Council. I wish on
behalf of my delegation to congratulate the reprrsentatives of Panama. Japan and Ireland who are
members of the Commission of Inquiry on producing
the report in difficult circumstances, The costs that
the Government of Seychelles has already incurred
and will incur in making good the damage c:tused are
very high. Seychelles cannot undertake this enormous responsibility on its own. It requires the international community to provide assistance in its reconstruction efforts.

90. The despicable premeditated
acts of aggression by the dogs of WCII’ on 25 November last against
the independent sovereign State of Seychelles should
be seen in the context of the overall strategy of rrpcrrt/I(+/ South Africa to destabilize the peace and stability
prevailing in countries opposed tor/ptrrt/rc>id and racism
in South Africa.
91. The involvement
of South Africa in the mercenary aggmssion against Seychelles cannot be swept
under the carpet by the Pretoria regime. From a
rending of the Commission’s report, and from information contained in the statement made to this Council
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Seychelles, Mr. Jacques Hodoul [23SYrh mrting],
and also from other sources, there is overwhelming
evidence IO this effect.

95. It is against this background that my delegation
fully supports and endorses the six recommendations
of the Commission of Inquiry in paragraph 293 of its
report. including that on the establishment of the
fund. With regard to the Commission’s discharge of
its mandate in establishing the origins, background
and financing of the mercenary invasion of Seychelles,
my delegation fully endorses the request made to the
Council on 20 May by the Foreign Minister of Seychelles that the Commission’s
mandate should be
extended to enable it to prepare ii supplementary report
on these essential points.

92. For example, volume 6, No. 7, of a publication
by the African-American
Institute entitled So//t/?
Afrim Nrrrnihin Update says the following in respect
of South Africa’s involvement in the abortive colrp:

96. I should like to conclude by reaffirming. on
behalf of my delegation, the importance of the Commission’s recommendation
for the speedy conclusion
of the work at present under way on an international
convention against the recruitment. use. financing
and training of mercenaries. We believe that this will
be a very important convention which all States Membcrs of the United Nations must sign. I am certain that
by outlawing mercenaries in the world we shall be
contributing greatly to international peace and SWLIrity.

“The South African Government
is reported
worried over the charges by the leader of the bungled Seychelles coup-COI.
‘Mad Mike’ Hoare-that
the South African Cabinet approved the attempt and
the army supplied the weapons and ammunition.
“Five days after Hoare’s court testimony, the
security police raided the offices of three newspapers and confiscated reporters’ notebooks and
documents relating to another major figure in the
abortive coup, Martin Dolinschek. He is detained
in the !Seychelles and claims to work for South
Africa’s intelligence
service, which Dolinschek
SUYS
is now trying to kill him.

97.

The PRESIDENT
fi/rtc/p/‘c~trrtio/~
,fiw~
(‘hiThe next speaker is the representative of Mongolia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

IIC.SP):

“The Prime Minister’s
office. the intelligence
service and the army declined to comment on
Houre’s charges, and the Speaker of the Assembly
turned clown a request for a special debate because
the issue was before the court.”

98. Mr. DASHTSEiREN
(Mongolia): Mr. President,
I should first of all like to join the previous speakers
who have congratulated you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of May
and to wish you every success in discharging YOUI
responsibilities.

93. This involvement by South Africa is a reflection
of that regime’s apparent fear and insecurity arising
out of the pursuit of its r/pc/rth~~id policy. My country
has repeatedly warned South Africa that as long as it

99. I also wish to pay a tribute to Mr. Kamanda wa
Kamanda of Zaire for his skilful guidance of the work
of the Council during the month of April.
9

100. I th;mk you and the other members of the Council fat- iLllowing me to speak today on this important
item before the Council: “Report
of the Security
Council Commission of Inquiry established under
resolution 496 ( 1981)“.

fessed that before the Victoria fiasco
he had met with
II representative of the CIA and informed him of the
plans for the C’OH/I [.voo S/lSO6S, (I/IH(#.\.].
105. Therefore the Mongolian
People’s Republic
supports the legitimate demand of the Government of
Seychelles that those responsible for the act of mercenary aggression and their accomplices should he
brought to justice and should be made to compensate
fully for the damages inflicted upon the Governmcnl
and the people of Seychelles.

101. The use of mercenaries is not a new phenomenon. With the collapse of the colonial system of
imperialism,
which met with frantic resistance from
colonialist and other reactionary forces trying to prulong their direct or indirect domination over the strategically and economically important areas throughout
the world and especially in the south of the African
continent. the use of mercenaries has acquired even
more ominous dimensions. The Council is well aware
of these developments
and has adopted numerous
relevant resolutions, including resolutions 239 (1967),
405 ( 1977) and 496 ( 198 I).

106. As stated in the report, particularly in pnrt VI.
the information
available to the Commission was fiU
from complete, and the Commission still does not have
full knowledge of the origin and background of lhe
mercenary operation. Therefore, the Mongolian dclegation fully supports the sixth recommendation
of
the Commission,
reflected in paragraph 293 of the
report, that the Commission should be authorized to
furnish a supplementary
report based on investigation of the origin, background and financing of the
mercenary aggression of 25 November I98 1 against the
Republic of Seychelles, as originally envisaged in
paragraph 3 of resolution 496 (1981). In our view this
report should, inter rrlio. examine the root causes of the
mercenary aggression. We also fully endorse the othcl
recommendations
of the Commission.

102. Following its policy of principle directed at
strengthening international
peace and security and
supporting the just struggle of peoples for national
and social liberation, the Mongolian People’s Republic
strongly condemns the use of mercenaries and all other
means employed by imperialism
and other reactionary
Forces to halt the process of national and social liberation.
103. Prompted by the desire to contribute to the
final outlawing and abolition of mercenarism.
Mongolia became a member of the Ad Hoc. Committee on
the Drafting of an International
Convention against the
Recruitment,
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries.

107. For our part, as a member of the ncl Hl1c9 Committee we shall spare no efforts to elaborate nn effective international
convention against the recruitment.
use. financing and training of mercenaries with a view
to bringing it to the speediest possible conclusion.
108. The PRESIDENT
fintcrp/‘c’t~/ti(,n .fi.c~ll C’lriI~OSO):The next speaker is the representative of Nigcria. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

104. The report of the Commission
of Inquiry,
which was so ably presented to the Council by the
representative of Panama on 20 May [ihid,], contains
sufficient evidence to show that South Africa played
;I major role in initiating
and organizing the act of
aggression against the Republic of Seychelles, a sovereign. non-aligned country situated in a strategically
important region of the Indian Ocean. The hi-jacking
trial shed additional light on this case, As is evident
now. the act of aggression against the Republic of Seychelles was carried out with the knowledge of the
South African Government and the participation of its
intelligence service. The trial also revealed, as was
rightly pointed out by many preceding speakers. that in
September 1981 the South African Cabinet had taken
a decision to topple the legitimate Government of the
Republic of Seychelles through the use of mercenary
forces. The revelation further enriches the criminal
record of the racist rCgime of South Africa, which is
still occupying Namibia illegally and constantly undertaking hostile acts, including
acts of aggression,
against the neighbouring African States, It should be
pointed out that it is an open secret that the abovementioned policy of the Pretoria rkgime is being
inspired. encouraged and supported by certain Western Powers. As was reported in TITP NCJII, York Timc~s
of 10 May, the leader of the gang of mercenaries con-

1OY. Mr. FAFOWORA
(Nigeria): May I first of all
thank you. Mr. President, and the other members of
the Council, for giving my delegation this opportunity
to participate in the debate on the complaint by the
Seychelles regarding the mercenary attack on that
country on 25 November I98 I, Since my delegation is
also taking the floor in the Council for the first time
this month, I should also like to take this opportunity
to express my delegation’s pleasure and satisfaction
at seeing you preside over the meetings of the Council. The month of May has been an exceptionally busy
and difficult one in which, under your wise and able
leadership, the Council has had to deal with :L host
of very difficult, complex and grave issues demanding
from all the members of the Council ;I display of the
greatest diplomatic skills. It is no surprise to my delegation. Sir, that you have discharged your responsibilities to the Council so admirably. I should also like.
if I may. to pay a warm tribute, on behalf of the Nigerian delegation, to your predecessor as President,
Mr. Kumandu wa Kamanda of Zaire, for the equally
able manner in which he guided the deliberations of the
Council last month.
IO

I IO. My Government
has instructed
me to participate in this important
debate because of its great concern itbout the menace that the activities
of mercenilries have for so long constituted
for Africa.
I need
not bore you with additional
details
of mercenary
activities
in Africa, for previous
speakers
have adeyuntcly
documented
the nefarious
activities
of those
international
gangsters.
It is sufficient
to say that the
catalogue
of mercenary
activities
in Africa is a long
c)ne. stretching
from the Congo in the early 1960s to
Benin. Zimbabwe.
Angola and now Seychelles.
As a
matter of historical
fact, Nigeria
itself did not totally
escape the disruptive
consequences
of the activities
0f mercemiries,
for it was itself a target of mercenaries
from 1967 to 1970, when it was engaged in an internal
battle
to lput down ;I misguided
internal
attempt
at
secession.
At the time,
those shameless
and irres ponsible ,gungsters took advantage of Nigeria’s
internal
security
problems
to intrude
their ugly faces into an
issue that ‘was of no concern to anyone but Nigerians.

people. and we are determined
that we shall not allow
oursclveh to be distracted
from our ol?jective.
113. In the cuse of Seychelles.
the irresponsible
atti\ck of mercenaries
on that peaceful
country
is
i\bsolutely
shocking and can in no way be .justified 01
condoned
even by its worst enemies. Seychelles
is iI
small country with a population
of only 63,000. It does
not by any stretch
of the imagination
constitute
iI
thre:lt to anyone.
it cannot even be said that it barbours any African
freedom
fighters.
As a matter of
filet. it was ;I favourite
tourist spot for racist South
Africil.
Yet on 25 November.
mercenaries,
i\fteI
concocting
their malign and evil plan in South Africa.
launched
;I vicious,
unwarranted
and premeditated
attack on that peaceful island in ;I brazen and callous
attempt to topple its Government,
damage its economy
and create much chaos and disaffection
in the country.
There was obviously
no foreknowledge
on the pnrt
of the Government
of Seychelles
of the clandestine
activities
of the mercenaries.
Had the c’c~r/p attempt
been successful.
the people of Seychelles would have
had foisted on them a government
not of, their own
making. one neither answerable
to them nor sub.ject
to their control. Seychelles would have become iI vassal
State of South Africa
and would
have lost all its
attributes
of national
independence.
That would have
been a considerable
set-back to us in Africa. It is therefore with much pleasure
that the Government
and
people of Nigeria
congratulate
the vigilant and pntriotic people of Seychelles
for beating back and eliminating the vicious attack of the mercenaries
on that
fateful day.

1 1 I. Similarly,
in the past 20 or so years, virtually
every African nation has had to contend with the real
possibility
that it might be the next target of mercenary
:ictivities,
activities
that are totally un.justifiable
and
that are very often prompted
by personal
ambition
as
well as pt,omoted
by foreign
economic
and political
interests.
Ilt might not be out of place to mention here
the fact that in some cases those mercenaries
have
been found to be in the employ
of foreign
Govcrnn-tents that have a vested
interest
in overthrowing
Governments
they consider
unfriendly.
The activities
of those “dogs of war”, as they were so aptly called
by the novelist
Frederick
Forsyth,
are so ludicrous
that they border on sheer lunacy. In one particular
case,
the mercenaries
were simply
prompted
to move by
nothing
miore than the contents of a novel that rathel
playfully
described
how the Government
of a small
African
State might be toppled.
The point of all this is
to stress t.hat these mercenaries
engage in their nefiirious
activities
sometimes
for sport, sometimes
foi
money.
but never for any substantial
or legitimate
rc;1sons . .

114. There is a noticeable
tendency in some quarters
to ignore and underestimate
the great dangers
mercenaries pose, not only to the stability of Africa. but
to international
peace and security as well. Yet it is
not inconceivable
that States may be drawn into wilt
on account
of the activities
of these soldiers of fortune. A few years ago. two African States were almost
driven to war as iI result of the intrusion
of mercenaries
into their countries,
Mercenaries
require
a
friendly
bi\se for their operations.
If every State were
to tukc its international
obligations
seriously ilnd deny
these dogs of war il base from which they could operate, they would cease to constitute
any serious threat
to anyone. That is why in the OAU we have adopted
i\ convention
on mercenaries
and their activities.
It is
also why we are seeking at the international
level a
similar convention
that will prohibit the recruitment
of
thcsc dogs of war. The existing
legislation
in some
countries
on the recruitment
of mercenaries
contains
several loopholes
that are being exploited
daily to
make nonsense
of the existing legal provisions.
It is
the hope of my delegation
that the draft international
convention
on mercenaries
will soon become ;I reality.

I 12. The mercenary
activities
constitute
a serious
threat
to the national
sovereignty
and integrity
of
African
States. They represent
;I very serious violation of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and should be severely condemned
by all Members of the Organization
collectively.
We in Africa
have had to wage a tong and difficult
struggle for OUI
national
independence.
The liberation
struggle
in
Africa,
which is continuing
with unabated
fury. was
in most cases a bloody one, leading to a considerable
loss of life in our continent.
The ending of colonialism
in Africa is being achieved
at enormous
cost to OUI
people,
and we have not made this enormous
sacrifice
only
to have a band of irresponsible
international
gangsters
take away from us what was so dearly won.
We in Africa need all the time, peace and energy that
we can find to rebuild
our countries.
to develop our
economies
and to improve the living conditions
of 0111

I IS. Turning
now to the report of the Security Council Commission
of Inquiry
established
under resolution 496 ( 1981). my delegation
has considered
its
findings very carefully
and is satisfied with the scope
II

.,. * an d its thoroughness. I would
of the mvcstlb‘ltlon
thcl.cforc like to associate my delegation with the
deep ptit&
expressed by pi-evious
speakers to the
Chnirm;ln of the Commission,
Mr. OZ~IYS Typaldos
of P;initmil.
as well
;\s to the two
other members of the
Commission.
MI..
Craig of Ireland and MI’. Sezaki of
J;~u~. My delegation
is particularly delighted that the
Commission was able to establish South Africa’s
foreknowledge of the mercenary operations. Had the
Commission been allowed by the racist South African
:tLlthorities to interview the mercenaries who fled to
South Afric:t after their abortive (YUI~, particularly
the notorious “Mad Mike” Hoarc, it would no doubt
have been able to establish South Africa’s complicity
us well.

opments and revelations that may emanate from the
ongoing trial of the merccnuries.
122. The report before the Council makes V~W~OLIS
references to my country and to its airline. the Royal
Swnzi Airline.
When the Council considers those
references it may understand why we in Swaziland
also
regard ou~~lves.
like the people of Seychelles.
the sister country. to be abused victims of the mrrcenary aggression. The magnitude of the psychological
and economic damages suffered by Seychelles cannot.
of course, be compared with OLII’S. They were the
primary tilrget of aggression. In our case. the circumstances of geoproximity
were exploited and abused
by the aggressors. so much that we too felt insulted.
in-jured and ubuscd. .just like the people of Seychelles.
when our only aircraft was caught in the cross-fire of
that mad adventurism.
The report stutes in paragraph 27X:

116. Fin;Jly. before concluding my statement. I wish
to express my Government’s
readiness to assist the
Government and people of Seychelles in their effort
to repair the considerable economic damage they
suffered us ;1 result of the itbortive U~UP.

“The immediate
preparations for and planning
of the mercenary aggression. including recruitment
of over
SO mercenaries , . . took place in South
Africa. A small number of those concerned had
previous experience as mercenaries. For the moht
part they were persons who had military experience
in the South African and former Rhodesian forces.”

I 17. The PRESIDENT
(irlt~J/p/.c’t~rfion ,fkom
C-hi~v.\v): The next speaker is the representative
of
Swaziland. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
118. Mr. MALINCA
(Swaziland): My delegation
extends its profound felicitations to you. Sir. on YOUI
accession to the prcsidcncy of the Council for the
month of May.

123. To get to Seychelles they came through Swuziland and boarded a regular scheduled flight. In Mnnzini. they posed as tourists. The detailed account of
whut took place is contained in the report, so that my
dclegntion will not dwell in great detail on it.

I tY. The same sentiments apply to your predecessor. the representative of Zaire, Mr. Kamandn
wtl Kamanda. for the outstanding manner in which
he guided the deliberations of the Council in April,

124. For this body to get the full import of how the
events of 25 November angel-cd and revulsed the peapie of Swnziland. I shall begin by giving the Council
a brief account of what the Royal Swazi Airline
represented in the hearts of my people.

120. My delegation would be failing in its duty if it
did not convey its gratitude to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Seychelles [2.?SY?k mrefirrg
1 for the clarity
of his presentation and for the decision of his Government to bring this matter before the Council. As ;I
result. the Council took a decision to send a Commission to investigate the origin. background
and
financing of the mercenary aggression of 25 November 1981 committed against the Republic of Seychelles and also to assess and evaluate economic
damages.

125. As a small, independent land-locked countl’y.
we have often desired to establish contacts with othel
sister African countries in the region as an act underlining the authenticity of our independence. The Council will recall that the region is experiencing a mushrooming of so-called independent countries in South
Africa under the rrp~rthrid system. To the Swazis.
the airline was therefore more than a commercial
undertaking.
It was a flying symbol of peace and solidarity with the rest of independent Africa. Hence it
W:IS nicknamed in our vernacular “LOl/htr-Nt(~izdsr/r”.
menning a kind of dove quail. In August 1978, when
the airline was inaugurated, most Swazis were present
to see a new era of communication
being ushered in.
The event represented the reulization of a dream to
communicute
independently
with OLIV sister neighIX)LII.S.
The sentiments behind the decision to establish direct contact with independent Africa were the
same us those that found full expression in the establishmcnt of the Southern African Development
c.‘oordination Conference. 11subregional economic association of independent States of southern Africa.

121. The Council now has before it the report of the
Commission. My deleg;ition therefore wishes to take
this opportunity equally to express
through you, Sir,
its gratitude to the Chairman of the Commission and
to its members for the excellent way in which the
Chairman has presented the report. The kind sentiments expressed by him regarding the co-opetiition
the Commission received while in Swaziland have
been conveyed to my Government.
The Government
and people of SwLtziland will not hesitate to be of help.
In whatever wuy. in the future if and when the Council extends the Commission’s mandate further to curry
out investigations that may bc required by new devel12

L

126. When the news of the mercenary
aggression
committed
against Seychelles
rcnched Swaziland
and
the fact became known
that our only arm to the outside world lhad been amputated
in the cross-fire
there,
every Swazi felt that a part of himself was destroyed.
Our life artery of contact.
as stated in my letter to the
Chairman
of the Commission,
really
was severed
then, We estimated
the cost to be in the region of
some $2.5 million.
and that it would continue
to increase until the aircraft was operational.
To my knowledge, the aiircraft is still in Seychelles:
but thanks to
the kind gesture of solidarity
and brotherhood
of the
Republic of Mozambique.
which placed its aircraft at
our disposal, Swaziland
still en-joys contact
with its
neighbours
in spite of this unforeseen
handicap.

of Swaziland
had no knowledge
gression until after it had taken

I3 I. The Council
is frequently
faced with situations
in which the will of the people is no longer considered
as the basis for dispensing
power,
and as a result.
external and dangerous
forces of destruction
are often
co-opted and employed
as vehicles to achieve power.
In my delegation’s
opinion,
the international
community can deal with this problem
only by speeding
up the drafting
of a draft international
convention
against the granting
of security,
financing
and hospitality to mercenaries.
132. The Swaziland
delegation
sympathizes
with
the Government
of the Republic
of Seychelles
ovei
the expenditure
incurred
in connection
with the urgent
repair works needed to reopen the airport
and ovel
the economic
damage caused to its tourist industry.
The Swaziland
delegation
endorses
the recommendation of the Commission
that Member
States and
international
organizntions
should urgently
provide
financial,
technical
and material assistance
to enable
the country to deal with the difficulties
that it is facing
because of the mercenary
aggression.

128. The Swaziland
Government
offered
every
assistance
to the Commission
that subsequently
came into Swaziland,
The Commission
met the Prime
Minister
and other officials
of my Government.
The
report says in paragraph
I49 that the head of Government expressed regret and said that:
“Swaziland’s
sister country,
Seychelles.
and the
people there had suffered
a great deal because of
that incident: Swaziland
had also suffered as a result
of having, lost its only commercial
aircraft
and
hnving its name connected
with such an attempt.
The people of Swaziland
were very happy to know
that the mercenaries
had been brought to account.”
on to address the practice
He is quoted, in paragraph
that:

133. We also share the view that the Commission’s
mandate
should be extended
in order to enable it to
carry out its task, and that a special fund should be
established
for voluntary
contributions
by Member
States to channel
assistance
to the reconstruction
of
the damaged economy
of the Republic
of Seychelles.

of destabilizing
150 of the report,

134. The PRESIDENT
finfr/‘l,,‘[~r~rtio/l
,fbo/i~ I’lli/I(J.\(J): The next speaker is the representative
of Sri
Lanka. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

“people
had now realized
that Africa was coming
together to try to speak with one voice. Swaziland
WIS
worried
by some evil elements
which
were
trying by all means to destabilize
African
countries
and disrupt their unity.”
129,
graph
that:

It gives my delegation
284 of its report,
the

iig-

130. My delegation
wishes to remind
the Council
that this is not the first time my country has been iin
object of abuse. Some time ago a large haul of arms
intended for South Africa, contrary to ;I Council resolution l/.c,.\.o/r/lion 418 f IY77) 1, was confiscated
by our
customs
officers.
Those responsible
were tried and
convicted
in the courts of Swaziland.
This demon
strates beyond any shadow of doubt that if our officers
at the customs post had discovered
the mercenaries’
guns. they would immediately
have confiscated
them.
as is our practice,
and the mercenaries
would
have
been put under arrest.

and people of Swaziland
were
127. The Government
deeply shocked and saddened
to learn that a certain
group of persons who arrived in Seychelles
on 25 November subsequently
committed
serious acts of nggression against the people and legitimate
Government
of Seychehes.
The Government
dissociated
itself
immediately.
as it does now. from that naked act of
aggression
against a sovereign
sister State. My Government
co-operated
fully with the Government
of
Seychelles from the moment
we learned of the tragic
event. We sent a delegation
to Seychelles.
and the
relevant authorities
in Swaziland
were instructed
to
ciir1.y out thorough
investigations
of this regrettable
abuse of our airline,

He went
countries.
as saying

of the planned
place.”

135. Mr. DE SILVA
(Sri Lanka):
Let me take this
opportunity.
Mr. President,
to express the uppreciation and admiration
of my delegation
for the mannei
in which you are handling
the work of the Council
during this month. Similarly.
I should like to express
the appreciation
of my delegation
to Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamnnda of Zaire, who conducted
the affairs of the
Council during the particularly
difficult month of April.

pleasure
that. in parnCommission
concluded

“the mercienaries
used Swaziland
merely as a means
of transit to Seychelles
and that the Government

136. My delegation
wishes to express its gratitude
to the Chairman
and mcmbcrs
of the Council
ComI3

mission of Inquiry.
who so painstakingly
and meticulously reconstructed
the events surrounding
the act of
aggression
against
Seychelles.
My delegation
is
aware of the difficulties
and limitations
within
which
the Commission
wtls forced
to carry out its work.
Notwithstnnding
those limitations.
the Commission
has provided
the Member
States. through
its report.
with an impartial
and factual
account
of what took
place in Seychelles
on 25 November
1% 1.

140. Small
independent
countries
should
not be
exposed to thrents such as the one faced by Seychelles
in November
lY8 I, The international
community
has
to s;\feguard
their right to exist without
fear of being
sub.juputed
by ambitious
nations.
Further,
everything
within our means must be done to bring to book those
who were involved
in the act and take appropriate
:lction to eradicate
the threat that mercenaries
pose
to small independent
nations.
Finally.
the intc‘rnntional community
has a responsibility
to provide assist;mce to those countries
th;\t become the targets of these
acts of destabilization.

137. The report of the Commission
of Inquiry
has
focused
attention
on several
important
aspects
to
which
the international
community
should
give its
urgent consideration.
First, it deals with the recurring
problems
of armed aggression
against
independent
States with a view to overthrowing
their Governments.
in violation
of the principles
of the Charter
of the
United Nations. Secondly,
it deals with the role played
by foreign
mercenaries.
a common
phenomenon
in
African
politics.
It is hardly
necessary
for me to go
into details of the activities
of foreign mercenaries
and
their impact on the newly
emerging
African
States
during the past decade or two. us the members
of the
Council
are fully aware of the role played by mercenaries in Africa during this period.
Thirdly.
the report
draws
the attention
of the world
community
to air
piracy.
which
threatens
the lives of innocent
pnssengers who become unsuspecting
victims
of aggression and international
terrorism.
Such crimes
have
become
possible because
the criminals
are provided
with safe havens by certain
States that directly
OI
indirectly
support such illegal acts. Finally,
the report
highlights
the short-term
and long-term
impact on the
economies
of States which become targets of foreign
aggression.

141.
While expressing
our solidarity
with the Governmcnt
of Seychelles,
my delegation
shares the views
expressed
by previous
speakers
and supports
the
recommendations
contained
in paragraph
293 of the
report of the Commission
of Inquiry.
142. The
PRESIDENT
(intcJrpr’~lrtrtic~~~ ,fi~rn C’lliUO.\(~): The next speaker is the representative
of Bangladesh. 1 invite him to take the place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
143.
Mr. SOBHAN
(Bangladesh):
It gives me great
pleasure.
Sir. to congratulate
you on your assumption
of the high office of the presidency
for this month. We
have the highest regard for you and a profound
sense
of respect and friendship
for the people of your great
country.
We are confident
that under your able leadership and wise guidance,
the Council
will be able 10
accomplish
its many difficult tasks during this month.
144. Our congratulations
also go to your predecessor.
Mr. Kumanda
wa Kamanda,
for the able manner
in
which he steered the work of the Council
during the
month of April.

138.
Paragraph
282 of the report is of much interest
to countries
in the region.
It says *‘the Commission
finds it difficult
to believe
that the South
African
authorities
did not at least have knowledge
of the preparations
in this matter.”
The Commission
reached
this conclusion
after taking
into account
the identity
of the mercenaries,
where they came from and where
they returned
to. having failed to achieve their objective. We are confident
that a clearer picture will emerge
during
the trial of the seven mercenaries
who were
arrested
by the authorities
in Seychelles.
We note
that the Minister
for Foreign
Affairs of Seychelles
has
ugreed to send full details of the trial, which is scheduled to take place on I6 June in Seychelles.

145.
We have listened
carefully
to the detailed
Xcount of the event and its consequen.ces,
presented
by Mr. Jacques
Hodoul.
the Minister
for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic
of Seychelles
[2350rh Inc>cVi)?!! I.
Wvc have noted with great regret and dismay
that his
country
was ;l victim of a mercenary
aggression
un
25 November
198t,
146. On I.5 December
1981. the Council.
by its resolution
496 (1981).
unanimously
condemned
this act
of aggression
and decided
to establish
a commission
of inquiry
to investigate
the origin.
background
and
financing
of the mercenary
aggression.
We wish to
take this opportunity
to express our appreciation
to
Mr. Ozores Typuldos
of Panama and the members
of
the Commission
for the report which they submitted
to the Council.
We have noted from paragraph
272
of this report that the Commission
was not permitted
to interview
the mercenaries
who fled from Seychelles
to South Africa by a hijacked
Air India aircraft.
The
report
further
indicates.
in paragraph
274, that the
work of the Commission
was far from complete.
Therefore. we support
the views expressed
by the large
majority
of delegations
that have participated
so far in

139. Those who have spoken
before me have commented
on the problems
faced by countries,
particularly small States. as a result of mercenary
activities
against them by those Powers
that wish to destabilize
independent
nations.
To achieve
this ob.jective
they
recruit,
finance and train mercenaries
and eventually
unleash
them
upon unsuspecting
countries,
Their
targets are strategically
vital but economically
unstable
countries.
The report amply
demonstrates
the ease
with which II mercenary
operation
can be launched
to
take over small countries.
I4

the debate in the Council that the mandate of the Commission
of inquiry should be extended and that a supplementiu-y report should be presented to the Council,
147. The report submitted by the Commission to
the Council. however, provides us with incontrovertible evidence that the mercenary aggression was
planned. orgonized and financed in South Africa. In
paragraph 278. it is clearly stated that the recruitment of the mercenaries took place in South Africa and
that some of them had well-known records as mercenaries and were also reservists in the South African
Defence Force. We also learn from the report that the
weapons used by the mercenaries were tested in South
Africa. Though the Commission could not conclude
how the weapons were procured, it is inconceivable to
think that the weapons could have been procured
itnd tested without the knowledge and active connivance of the racist rigime in Pretoria,
148. The incident of last November
against the
people of Seychelles is not an isolated crime against
II small country by a gang of mercenaries. but has to
be seen in the context of the overall South African
policy of destabilizing
a number of African States
and committing
a variety of acts of aggression against
them. What we are witnessing is a form of State
terrorism
that not only is contrary to international
law and practice but is clearly against the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
149. Bangladesh, as a member of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International
Convention against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing and
Training
of Mercenaries, has actively supported the
speedy drafting of this convention. The mercenary
aggression
against Seychelles has underscored the
importance
of the need for the early conclusion of the
work of the .4tl Hoc Committee.
150. The hijacking of an Air India aircraft by the
mercenaries
also clearly underlined the vulnerability
of innocent civilians at the hands of the mercenaries.
In this context, Bangladesh welcomes the resolution
adopted
by the Council of the International
Civil
Aviation
Of-,ganization on 17 December 1981:’ We
hope that further consideration will be given to ensuring
the safety of innocent passengers and to preventing
the illegal transportation of arms through commercial
airlines.
151. The aggression against Seychelles caused considerable material, financial and economic damage.
Tourism,
which is the main source of the economy,
has also suffered a serious set-back. South Africa bears
fill1 responsibility
for such damages. The Commission
of Inquiry
concluded, in paragraph 291 of its report,
that it “is clear that there will be a significant adverse
impact on the Seychelles economy resulting from the
:lggression.”
Bangladesh,
therefore. supports the
recommendations
of the Commission calling for financiul, material and technical assistance to be given

to Seychelles. Such itssistnnce can be directed through
;I special voluntary fund.
122. In conclusion, I should like to reiterate on
behalf of the delegation of Bangladesh that my country remains firmly opposed to any interference. direct
or indirect, in the internal affairs of any Member
State. The fact that such interfereilce should have
occurred through an act of armed aggression committed by :I band of mercenaries makes it doubly
objectionable and in matter of unequivocal condemnation by the entire international
community.
The
South African aggression against Seychelles is contrary to all norms of international
behaviour and it
is the responsibility of the United Nations to do everything possible to prevent such incidents from recurring.
153. Mr. CRAIG
(Ireland):
My delegation hi\s
followed closely the many statements made in this
debate. We listened with particular interest to the
statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Seychelles. Mr. Jacques Hodoul. whom
we are privileged to have here with us, and to his clear
exposition of the issues which the Council should
address [iAid. I.
1.54. My country was honoured to have been asked
to serve as a member of the Commission which was
set up following the debate in the Council last December [23/4th mcrfing]
under the terms of resolution 496 (1981), in which the Council condemned the
mercenary aggression against the Republic of Seychelles. I do not intend in the course of this statement
to go into detail regarding the work and the conclusions of the Commission with which my delegation
is associated. The report largely speaks for itself.
Given the view generally expressed during the debate
that it would be useful for the Commission to prepare
a supplementary report, 1 do not think that my delegation should comment on or try to assess the information that has come to light since the Commission completed its report. This task will fall to the Commission
itself, if the Council so decides.
155. My delegation would, however, wish to make
a number of comments at this stage of our dcliberihns.
In the statement by Ireland in the Council
on IS December I98 I. we expressed concern at the
attack from outside involving mercenaries directed
at a small State which is particularly vulnerable to
such attack Ii&d., pr//~. YY1, That small States ;Ire
vulnerable to attacks by relatively small forces is
brought out clearly in the report of the Commission. Seychelles successfully resisted this attack.
Yet small countries, in particular developing countries with limited resources, are faced with a cruel
choice. They must either trusi for their protection to
the international community and the machinery which
has been established for the maintenance of international peace :md security. in particular the Security Council, or take steps to defend themselves
against aggression mounted from outside and thereby

divert to military
purposes scarce resources that
are sorely needed for economic and social development. If the internationul community cannot give
small States some assurance of security and deat with
the causes of insecurity. then they will inevitably be
driven towards the second option. My delegation
profoundly hopes that Seychelles will not again be
subject to an attack on its territorial integrity and
political independence. But the more general problem must be addressed by the Council. That is why it
is important that the origin and background of the
mercenary
aggression be clearly established so as to
assist the Council in determining what to do about it.
156. The distinctive
feature of the aggression against
Seychelles was that it was carried out by mercenaries. The term “mercenary”
is one with a long
history. Simply put. a mercenary is one who carries
out military functions for monetary gain rather than
because of national or other loyalties. A mercenary
need not necessarily be dishonourable.
There are
many examples in history of those who have for
remuneration supported just and honourable causes
and gained renown in so doing. But circumstances
change. First, mankind has moved on from glorifying
war to endeavouring by all possible means to avert it.
Secondly. the term “mercenary”
has come to have
a more specific meaning-that
is. the sale of services
on demand to those who request them, ~~suully for the
overthrow of established Governments.

157. Nowhere is this more evident than in the recent
history of Africa. Mercenary forces have been used
in ;I particular context and have come to have a particular significance. At several stages during the emancipation of Africa from colonial rule. merccnnry forces
played a role in resisting this historic process. They
have all too often lent support to efforts to preserve
privilege and to deny the right of peoples to determine
their own form of government.
1%. The unhappy association of mercenaries
with
the maintenance of racial privilege is demonstrated
only too clearly in the present instance. The intimate
South African connection with the mercenary aggression is evident from the report and from the information that has since emerged. As members of the Council are :lwiu-e. the Commission felt, for reasons that
it has explained, that it could not reach a definitive
conclusion on the extent or level of South African
knowledge or responsibility.
I do not wish here to
make a judpement based on the additional
information that has become available, The Commission
will
no doubt wish to do so if its mandnte is extended.
I wish rather to make the point that from the testimony
of the mercenaries who were interviewed by the Commission it is clear that at least some of those who took
part in the operation were motivated not only by moneWry concerns but also by a certain view of the world.
Those who hold this view find it difficult to accept the
right of peoples to determine their own destiny free
from outside intervention.
This view unfortunately

arises from the nature of and the distortions inhcrenl
in South African society, bllsed as it is on cll~rr~/~itl
and systematic racial discrimination.
In this context.
the mercenary sees himself involved not simply for
personal gain but almost as part of a crusade. This
aspect in particular points up the need for international
agreements directed against the recruitment.
use.
finuncing and training of mercenaries and for the di+
semination of information about mercenary activities
so as to enable Governments to take precautions.
159. I have already mentioned the expenditure which
small States may feel obliged to incur through feur af
external aggression. The consequences of an actuitI
attack, albeit successfully thwarted in the case of
Seychelles. are themselves serious. The Commission’s report gives details of the direct damage caused
at the airport in Mnhi. It also draws attention to the
potentially
much larger effects on the economy of
Seychelles as a whole, Dependent on tourism to :L
cunsidernble extent, the Seychelles economy is pnrtitularly
vulnerable to outside perceptions of safety
and stability. My own country has reason to know
that such perceptions. accurate or not, can influence
the tourist business. The need for international assistance is evident. and the Irish delegation is confident
that the Council will take appropriate action accordingly.
160. As a matter of principle, my delegation considers that investigative
commissions can in certain circumstances assist the Council in discharging its oblipations under the Charter of the United Nations. This
has been borne out by the experience of my delegation in the present instance. The primary purpose of
such commissions
must of course be to establish the
fL\cts and to lay these facts out in a manner that makes
comprehensible
to members of the Council the subject
of the investigation.
In discharging this duty. commissions of the Council are of course dependent on the
full co-operation
of Governments.
They have ntl
independent investigative powers. The degree to which
:I commission can be successful in carrying out a mandate is largely dependent on this co-operation
by
Governments.
161. Depending on the terms of reference. a commission of the Council may. of course, have responsibilities that go beyond mere fact-finding. Such was
the case in the present instance. In accordance with
its mandate. the Commission endeavoured. within the
constraints to which the delegation of Panama. on
behalf of the Chairman, has alluded [235LJth /~rli~,r: 1.
to reach conclusions and to elaborate recommendntions. A commission composed of a limited number of
members of the Council can help the Council in this
regard. It is the Council itself which has the ~OWC‘I
of decision and the competence to make :I final
judgement.
162. Before concluding. I should like. on my own
behalf. to thunk. through the Minister for Foreign

Affairs. the Government and people of Seychelles fol
the unstint’ed co-opelntion and hospitality which they
extended to the members of the Commission during
our visit tc~ Seychelles. I hope I may have the opportunity of visiting the Minister’s beautiful country again
in circumstances
that will give me greater leisure to
enjoy its mlany attractions.

its aggression and expansion. This insidious design
must be sternly censured by the African countries
and world opinion.
168. The Chinese Government and people firmly
support the just struggle of the African countries and
peoples to defend their independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We warmly hail the victory
of the Government and people of Seychelles under
the leadership of President France Albert RenC in
foiling the mercenary invasion. As Premier Zhao
Ziyung of the People’s Republic of China pointed out
in his message to President Rend dated 1 Dccembel
1981. “all criminal acts of invasion of independent
African States by foreign mercenaries are doomed to
ignominious defeat.”

163. The PRESIDENT
(intc,,p,‘cttrtion ,fiwm ChiOV.S(~):I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of CHINA.
164. The Chinese delegation warmly welcomes the
attendance
at this series of Council meetings by
Mr. Jacques Hodoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Seychelles, and Mr. Archibald Mogwe,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the OAU and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana.

169. In our view. the Council should strongly condemn the racist ligime of South Africa for launching
the criminal mercenary invasion of Seychelles. It
should, at the same time, reaffirm the principle contained in the Charter that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, irrespective
of their size, should be respected. In view of the heavy
damage to the international airport as well as the
national economy of Seychelles resulting from the
invasion, the Council should accept the recommendation of the Commission regarding the establishment
of an aid fund for Seychelles, Furthermore, the Council should authorize the Commission to continue its
work and submit a supplementary report in due course.

165. The Security Council Commission of Inquiry
established under resolution 496 (1981) and chaired by
Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos of Panama submitted
its report on 15 March 1982, after painstaking efforts
of nearly three months. It can be seen from the report
that the Commission has conducted extensive investigations and gathered numerous data, on the basis of
which it has drawn certain conclusions and made a
number of positive recommendations.
It has thus fulfilled the mandate entrusted to it by the Council. The
Chinese delegation wishes to express its thanks to
the members of the Commission of Inquiry.

170. The report of the Commission further points
out that as the possibility of aggression by mercenaries remains a grave threat to the sovereignty and
independence of States, particularly small developing
countries, the work at present under way on an international convention against the recruitment,
use,
financing and training of mercenaries should be brought
to a speedy conclusion. Meanwhile, States and the
international community as a whole should make every
effort to prevent mercenary operations. The Chinese
delegation supports the above recommendations
of
the Commission of Inquiry.

166. The numerous facts listed in the report and
recent disclosures in the press clearly show that the
armed inv,asion of the Republic of Seychelles by
foreign mercenaries on 25 November 1981 was a carefully laid political plol to overthrow, by means of a
(*mrrp cl’c;rat, the legitimate Government of the Republic
of Seychellles.
The racist rigime of South Africa
masterminded
and organized this despicable operation
and supplied the weapons used by the mercenaries.
This is a glaring revelation of its hostile attitude towards the Government and people of Seychelles. The
Chinese delegation is indignant at this grave crime
against the African people and strongly condemns the
racist rigime of South Africa for its heinous conduct.
167. The Republic of Seychelles is an independent
and non-aligned sovereign country. Its independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity should be rcspected by all. The South Africa-sponsored merccnary invasion of Seychelles was a grave incident
violating it’< independence and sovereignty and trampling upon the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. There were reports that in this criminal enterprise South Africa had been motivated by the need
for a strategic outpost in the Indian Ocean to facilitate

NOTES
I General ,Assemhly resolution
? A/37/161.
annex. resolution

17

2625 (XXV).
annex.
CM/Res.
906 (XXXVIII),

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
world.

Consult

COMMENT

ma> be obtained Rom bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

LJNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agencesdCpositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventcs, New York ou Genhe.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estln en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.
Las

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

8%60989-October

IYW--2,050
