THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
rd

MEETING:

NEW

8 MARCH

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2063)

Adoption

of the agenda

. . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. .

. , . ., .. ., , , . . .. , , .. , , . , , . , . . . . , . . .. . . .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the ChargB d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Upper Volta to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12578)
, ,. . .. , . ., . . . . . . . . . . . , . .. ,. . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/+ . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2063rd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 8 March 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
Participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, MaurWs,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great 3ritain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

3. In view of the limited number of places at the Council
table, I invite the representatives of Sierra Leone and the
Sudan to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber on the usual understanding that they
will be invited to take a place at the Council table whenever
they wish to speak.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2063)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Conteh (Sierra
Leone) and Mr. Medani (Sudan) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. Question
concerning
the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charg6
d’ Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Upper Volta to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12.578)

4. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela) (interpretation
fvom Spanish): I should like first to introduce myself as the
new Permanent Representative of Venezuela to the United
Nations and to assure you of my co-operation as well as
that of the Government of Venezuela, which I have the
honour to represent.

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.

5. Our delegation believes that we are faced with a delicate
problem, perhaps one of the most delicate problems in the
process of decolonization, in view of the unusual manner in
which a solution to the question of Rhodesian independence is being presented to us and the position that we take
in the Security Council may lend itself to different
interpretations. It is therefore not at all easy to take a
satisfactory stand.

Adoption of the agenda
711e agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Char& d’Affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of the Upper Volta to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12578)

6. The illegal Rhodesian rQ$me continues to act on its
own and tries ways and means of accommodating its own
interests, disregarding factors and institutions which are
veIy important in terms of reaching a true negotiated
solution to the problem of the independence and of the
very fate of the majority of that country’s inhabitants.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at its 2061st and 2062nd meetings, I
invite the representatives of Angola, Benin, Kenya, Mozambique, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta
and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

7. We are now told that Mr. Smith has reached a compromise with some leaders who represent certain political
factions in the Territory, while disregarding very important
sectors which are waging a patriotic struggle for the
liberation and independence of their country. He has also
disregarded the recommendations and decisions of the
Security Council and turned his back on the negotiated
solutions sponsored by two members of the Council, one of
which is the colonial Power that has responsibility for that
region of Africa.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Maina Kenuab
Mr. Lobe (Mozambique), Mr. Salitn (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. Bamba (Upper Volta) and Miss Konie
(Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the side Of
the Council chamber.
2. the PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that letters have been received from the
representatives of Sierra Leone snd the Sudan in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion.
In accordance with the usual practice, I ProPose, with the

8. our delegation feels that even though the information
we have received on the recent agreement reached at
1

Salisbury is incomplete, it is quite clear that that agreement
constitutes just one more hoax perpetrated by the illegal
minority regime in its desperate efforts to maintain the
odious privileges and forms of discrimination whose existence is the raison d’&tre of the movements struggling for
Liberation and independence and for the recognition of
inalienable political, economic and social rights,

teristic of the mental and psychological processes on which
the racist practice of apartheid is based. And in this case a
monstrous attempt is being made to legalize discrimination
by means of a contract which, by its legal nature, resembles
a constitutional formula that will be of at least 10 yea.rs’
duration.
14. On the other hand, our delegation believes that the
best way to determine who represents the majority of ,the
people of Zimbabwe is to hold free elections; only after
that can arrangements, settlements or agreements be
reached. We should not presume that we can determine the
support enjoyed by the various national movements within
or outside the country; that would be unpardonable and we
should be acting against the self-determination of a people
which is about to attain its independence.

9. In the present case, the aspirations of the people of
Zimbabwe have not been fulfilled and some of their leaders
have been ignored. Nor are the aspirations of the international community being satisfied. The international
community aspires to a just solution to the problem which
has been created by the Salisbury rebels. In both cases, it is
only just and reasonable that discouragement should
prevail, because the agreement, which does not include two
factors that are essential if it is to work-one
of a national
and the other of an international nature-will
hardly
guarantee peace in that region of the African continent.
Here in the Council, our endeavour is to fmd solutions that
will further peaceful and civilized coexistence within and
among countries of the international community.

15. In this situation there is reason for deep concern; :it is
something which affects the very fate of the United
Nations, its credibility and its international reputation, We
have to adopt a historic decision by which the Organization
may either be strengthened or irreparably eroded. That
entails grave responsibility for all of us, and especially for
those countries which have greater resources to strengthen
and back up the implementation of the decision we ad.opt
here.

10. Our delegation is aware of the fact that, to a certain
extent, there are internal factors involved in this problem.
But since the agreement is not the result of a freely
expressed self-determination,
but rather stems from
imposed solutions, we must conclude that colonialism
based on military occupation is being replaced by a
constitutional mockery that will entrench time-honoured
economic, social and political privileges. The situation is
made even worse since part of the African indigenous
population is being encouraged to engage in internal
disputes, rivalries and confrontations among brothers, all of
which make the situation in that unfortunate land even
more painful and tragic.

16. The rebels at Salisbury have responded with a desperate manoeuvre to the rather effective sanctions that have
been voted against them so as to bring them back to law
and reason. It would be an unpardonable crime for US to
consider this response a positive step-when that which in
fact has been positive is the just position we have sat far
maintained with regard to the regime’s Fascist and ~holfy
illegal practices-and to abandon the sanctions just when
they begin to bear fruit.

11. The national groups that have accepted a settlement
with the illegal Smith regime have placed themselves in the
same position of illegality which the Council has condemned. Hence, we feel that free elections must be held
with the participation of the United Kingdom, whose
responsibility continues to be disregarded by the Rhodesian
rebels, and under United Nations supervision. We insist on
that, because its disregard of such essentials was precisely
what led to the declaration of the illegality of that regime
which today is offering us a new piece of trickery in the
guise of an alleged solution.

17. The international community has applauded allcl
supported the measures and sanctions voted by the Council
in order to bring the rebels to reason. Our delegation
interprets the step taken by Ian Smith’s regime as a modest
victory for the United Nations, because it shows that if WG
act on this occasion with the same firmness as befor’e WG
shall soon be approaching our goal.
18. The Council must adopt a constructive, well-thou&tout and well-balanced resolution expressed in positive
terms, a resolution that will bring us closer to a democxatic
solution of one of the most delicate problems that we have
been called upon to discuss. Our stand on this problem
must be unequivocal and clear and at the same time it IIIUS~
express restraint, maturity and firmness. It would be cruel
irony if the process of decolonization of Rhodesia were to
be left in the hands of Mr. Smith and his rebels.

12. For these reasons, my country, which has remained
faithful to its anti-colonialist doctrine and practices, maintains its firm position that the Security Council should
adopt appropriate measures that may lead to a true and just
solution of the problem of the effective decolonization of
the people and Territory of Zimbabwe.

19. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Venezuela for his kind words. I am sure I speak on behalf
of all the members of the Council in welcoming him Ito Isis
new position at the United Nations and to his membe:rship
on the Council. We look forward very much to co-operating
with him in our joint work.

13. Even though we might be inclined to think that the
recent settlement was a positive step by Smith’s illegal
regime, we have to take into account the fact that that
settlement is very different from the solution which the
United Nations and the peoples of the international
community consider satisfactory and equitable. On the
contrary,
the electoral system under which there are
different or separate electoral rolls is an aberration cbarac-

20. Mr. FUENTES IBAREZ (Bolivia) (interpretation fh-2772
SpanishJ: My delegation is most honoured, Mr. Pres:iden t 1
2

to be participating in this debate under Your guidance. We
are familiar with Your brilliant career as a parliamentarian
and internationalist and we wish you every success in your
very delicate task.
21. My delegation has followed with the closest attention
and interest the statements made so far on the question
inscrj.bed on the agenda at the request of the African
Grou,p. This question arises in connexion with the so-called
internal agreement signed at Salisbury by Bishop Muzorewa, Chief Chirau, Reverend Sithole and Mr. Ian Smith,
whereby an attempt is being made to put an end to the
situation of illegality and to guide that country along the
path of institutional legality. Of course, it is obvious that
what we have here is a partial negotiation whose fragility is
all the more conspicuous because of the absence of other
authoritative political leaders, such as Mr. Robert Mugabe
and Mr. Joshua Nkomo of the Patriotic Front, who took
part in the Malta talks and whose participation in any
agreement would seem indispensable since they represent
the groups fighting for freedom.

Security COUnCilto act in a way consistent with its previous
decisions, thus avoiding further tragic risks to international
peace and security. If we were to permit the illegality of the
Southern Rhodesian regime to be compounded by the
arbitrary creation of a successor government to its apocryphd authority, we should be promoting an indefinite
continuation Of an anomalous situation and an open
defiance to the authority of the Organization. That would
be a serious situation that would give rise to further friction
and create the immediate risk of a civfi war whose
rePCrCUSSiOnS
would extend beyond the African continent
and might plunge the whole world into darkness,
2.5. We are faced with a situation which has been planned
and directed bY those who hold the reins of illegal
government. They have created a situation that appears
based on and aimed at nothing but the idea of transmitting
the apparatus of power, in a way that will be to their own
satisfaction, to a segment of the population of Zimbabwe
that is in complete disagreement with the majority,
26. My delegation has not wanted to overlook the
attendant circumstances. In my country we believe that the
best policy is always for peoples to adjust to the historical
circumstances in which fate has placed them. Thus, even
though we consider that the principles laid down by the
Charter and the resolutions adopted pursuant to it chart the
most reasonable and the simplest course for the normal
progressof peoplestowardsthe realization of their most
sought-aftergoals,we cannot fail to recognizethat sometitnes, becauseof the very dynamicsof political events,it is
the peoples-which are, at bottom, the architects and
protagonistsof their own history-that are alone called
uponto seektheir own solutions.

22. Apart from those facts, we have examined most
carefully the background of the situation and have not
failed to consider any factor that would enable us to have a
more impartial and objective picture of the situation. We
are confronted with a new situation of fact, a situation
which will be difficult to maintain, inasmuch as it falls
outside the framework established by the international
community with respect to Rhodesia and amounts to a
further case of non-compliance with the recommendations
of the General Assembly and the injunctions of the
Security Council.
23. We understand as well as anyone the urgency which
must be felt by some African political leaders in regard to
putting a peaceful end to a conflict situation whose
continuation would be fraught with new and bloody
sacrifices of unforeseen dimensions, At times, when one is
too preoccupied by the need to alleviate immediate
suffering, and with natural apprehension of the risks of
giving rise to greater evils, one may lose a proper perspective of political events and succumb to the deceptive fallacy
of the lesser of two evils. But in this case that theory does
not apply, since the solutions are not Utopian. They exist
in practical form in the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, which represent irreversible
principles, as well as in the proposals of the United
Kingdom submitted by you, Mr. President, in your letter of
1 September 1977 [S/12393] to the then President of the
Council, We say they are irreversible since their only
purpose and goal is to create the essential condition for any
negotiations, that is to say, a return to legality before the
establishment of the new State. And the return to legal
order can only be achieved by a cessation of the state of
rebellion which gave rise to the state of illegality and which
itself has been impeding any further development.

27. This factor haspromptedusto examinewith interest
the so-calledinternalsettlement.Webelievethat, despiteits
complete lack of any legal foundation, a fact which
invalidatesit ipso facto, there is a ray of hope and that,
althoughonly the leadersthat are considered“moderates”
have participatedin it, it is a tacit recognitionon the part
of the Smith regimethat it is no longerpossibleto swim
againstthe current of history and that the time haspassed
for defiant arrogance.But to that must be addedthat it is
alsotoo late for subterfuge,which only servesto harden
hearts and increasedifficulties. Those who have been
accustomedto dominatingthe humbleby the strengththat
power givesthem musthavelearnt the lessonthat oppression cannot continue indefinitely and that the schoolof
sufferingin which convictionsare hardenedisalsoa source
of experience and wisdom. Those peopleswhich have
survived foreign dominationand which are striving for the
total recovery of their nationalidentity maturerapidly and
areno longersoeasilydeceived.
28. But eventhis tardy realizationcannotof itself Savethe
rebel reene from the seriouscrisisof confidencewhich
afflicts it. Obviously,the distinguished
African Personalities
who have set forth their reasonsand informedus of their
views in the Security Council agree that the so-called
internal agreementis unacceptable,sincethe structlfre of
be governmentit proposeshasthe samebasisand relieson
&e same mechanismswhich have accounted ff)r the
persistenceof the rebel regime ever sinceits unilateral
declarationof independence
on 11November1965.

24. We are confronted with a concrete situation that falls
outside the international framework, inasmuch as it would
replace that framework by a unilateral decision which
cannot possibly be considered national since none of the
parties is fully qualified to be completely representative.
Faced with this kind of situation, it is the duty of the
3

29. Needless to say, a transfer of power in such circumstances would be invalid not only in terms of its origin but
also in terms of its intentions and objectives. For that
reason, the atmosphere of mistrust surrounding the rebel
minority r&me affects the “internal agreement” too and,
what is even more serious, renders suspect those moderate
leaders whose co-operation I consider would be of great
value within that wide political and racial spectrum that
+hould be a feature of a genuinely representative people’s
government of Zimbabwe,

35’. Over the last six years, the All Africa Conference cf
Churches has followed closely events in Zimbabwe and
endeavoured, where possible, to assist every legitimate
effort to achieve a peaceful and just solution of the
problem of minority rule in that country. When the
Security Council met at Addis Ababa in 1972, I had the
privilege of stating our outright rejection of the Smith.
Home proposals, and of pledging our fullest support to the
then current efforts to prove their unacceptability to the
people of Rhodesia as a whole [1634th meeting/.

30. To continue a policy of deceit and subterfuge is to try
the patience of that people and to compel it to make mass
action in defence of the public interest, a course that could
end in the calamity of a civil war undesirable from all
points of view.

36. Later, we were involved in efforts to reconcile the
leaders of the nationalist factions waging the armed struggle
against Smith and his racist clique. All along we have sought
to provide material and moral assistance to those who,
through
no choice of their own, have been forced to
abandon the joys and privileges of adolescence, the warmth
of family life, the thirst for learning, the joys of frolicking
and the complacency of age in order to take up arms,
indeed, to lay down their lives in defence of the indivisibility of human freedom and dignity. Consequently, the
All Africa Conference of Churches has given and continues
to give its unequivocal support to the liberation movements
waging the armed struggle in southern Africa. It is our view
that that struggle represents a sign of hope-hope that the
expectations of political independence through majority
rule brought to Africa a generation ago may yet be fulfilled.
The armed struggle is a moral issue not only because it
challenges the immorality of systemic violence and repression but also because it affords opportunity for a new
solidarity in suffering to be forged among those who find
slavery, racial bigotry and the egotism that fosters repression reprehensible.

31. The Bolivian delegation, in expressing the concern of
its Government at this new episode that has temporarily
hindered progress towards the just and realistic solutions
that we all so much hope for, would like to express its
encouragement to the people of Zimbabwe in its struggle
for independence and aIso its hope that those who are
participating in the “internal agreement” will recognize that
there can be no partial agreement and will come to realize
that peace cannot be based on privilege for a certain
segment of the population but only on the will of the
people united around its authentic leaders.
32. The PRESIbENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter dated 8 March from the
representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria, which will
be distributed as document S/12586 and which reads as
follows:

37. Two years ago, the General Committee of the All
Africa Conference of Churches, during its meetings in
Egypt, attempted to give theological meaning to its support
for the liberation movements in the historic Confession of
Alexandria. Let me cite a relevant section:

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to consideration of the ‘Question concerning the
situation in Southern Rhodesia’, the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Canon Burgess Carr, Secretary-General of
the All Africa Conference of Churches.”

“Our current concern with issues related to economic
justice, to the total liberation of men and women from
oppression and exploitation, and to peace in Africa . . .
have led us to a deeper understanding of the Christian
heritage delivered to us by the Fathers of the early
Church in North Africa.

If 1 hear no objection I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.
It WQSso decided,

“Our commitment to the struggle for human liberation
is one of the ways we confess our faith in an Incarnate
God. . . . Through the continuing work of Christ, God is
charting His Highway of Freedom from Alexandria to the
Cape of Good Hope.”

33. The PRESIDENT: I invite Canon Carr to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
34. Canon CARR: Mr. President, allow me to thank YOU
for the honour and privilege accorded me in permitting me
to participate in this historic debate at this critical moment
in the history of Zimbabwe and, indeed, of southern Africa
as a whole, I extend to you the congratulations and best
wishes of the All Africa Conference of Churches. We in the
Conference are fully aware of your own personal commitment to human dignity, justice and peace in Africa and of
your untiring endeavours to assist in resolving the unfinished business of liberation from racism, minority rule and
exploitation on our continent. That you should be presiding over this debate on Southern Rhodesia is Providential. We ask God to grant you the discernment and
wisdom as well as the courage that this moment demands.

38. I am taking part in this debate today because we.
detect in the recent “internal settlement” signed at Salis’bury last week a cynical and demonic attempt to supplanlt
God’s work of building this “Highway of Freedom”. We are
not here to condemn anyone, but we are here to denounce
the diabolical intrigues of the illegal racist regime at
Salisbury, and especially the insidious strategy of beguilinlg
Africans-some
of whom may have no less of a con+
m.itment to the freedom and dignity of the people of
Zimbabwe than anyone else-into becoming co-conspirators
in a cruel and costly farce that only entrenches illegality.
4

We cannot avoid underlining our total and complete
abhorrence as well as our dread of the potential for violence
and fratricidal ethnic conflict that this so-called settlement
will unleash upon the peoples of southern Africa in general,
and in the first instance on the people of Zimbabwe.

rendered infinitely more indefensible when that minority
not only controls all the state apparatus but also exercises
an entrenched veto, even in the Parliament, where Africans
have a numerical majority. We cannot indulge in such
self-deception when innocent men, women and children,
when Young and old are every day brutaIized, terror&d
and murdered by atrocious r&imes, particularly in southern
Africa, and when the boundaries of front-line States are
violated with impunity, as was the case recently in Zambia.

39. It is beyond the bounds of our competence to
comment meaningfully upon the details of the internal
agreement. We must leave that to the representatives of
Member States and the liberation movements. Our task is to
associate the member Churches of the All Africa Conference of Churches with the moral indignation that has
been evoked throughout the African continent by this
latest contrivance of Mr. Smith to delay the liberation of
the peoples of Zimbabwe, to plant the seeds of perennial
civil war in that country and to create conditions that will
further destabilize the independence of the front-line
States.

43. We are tired of civil strife in Africa. We are tired of
one group of Africans beingusedagainstother Africans for
the benefit of aliens.Wearetired of runningaway from our
homesto seekrefugein foreignlands.Wearetired of it all.
44. So I would make this appealto the United Nations:
Let us not be diverted from the work of building God’s
“Highway of Freedom”, evenif at thisjuncture the terrain
is intractable. Let usrememberthat it is God’swork we are
doing and not our own, so we must not abandonit too
readily. The Bible urgesus not only to seekpeacebut to
pursueit.

40. This trick must be condemned because it is patently
evil. We would urge that the Security Council should be
wary of aligning the United Nations with this evil trick. For
more than a decade, the people of Zimbabwe have endured
the brutalities of Mr. Smith’s usurped, illegal rule. Throughout that period, some of the Churches in Rhodesia, notably
the Roman Catholic Church, and leaders of some of the
Protestant Churches, through the Christian Council of
Rhodesia, have consistently taken clear and forthright
positions against any accommodation with Mr. Smith’s
illegal and repressive regime. The All Africa Conference of
Churches therefore views the internal settlement as nothing
less than appeasement. The Security Council must therefore
reject this internal agreement, because it is self-serving, and
those who claim to live by the ethics of Jesus Christ should
not be involved in schemes that are self-serving.

45. Let usstrive to build the unity of all the Zimbabwean
people, first of all by strengtheningthe solidarity already
achievedin the Patriotic Front. It is thePatriotic Front that
controls the men and womenwho are wagingwar. Unless
they areinvolved, no peacecan cometo Zimbabwe.
46. Let usstrive to broadenthe measure
of unity that has
been achieved.Zimbabweans
of every political, ideological
and ethnic backgroundhave a solemnobligation to their
country, to the remainderof southernAfrica, to all of
Africa and to the world asa wholeto abolishthe legacyof
the animositiesthat dominatedthe pastin order to build
structuresof mutual confidence,unity, justice andpeacein
the future.

41. The All Africa Conference of Churches recognizes the
earnest desire of all the Zimbabwean leaders to rid their
country of domination by and dependence upon an alien
minority. That is not a matter at issue in this debate. What
is at issue is the relevance or even the appropriateness of
half-measures that are in essence retrogressive at this time.

47, Finally, let us intensify the pressuresthat forced
Mr. Smith to the negotiatingtable.Wecannotandmustnot
diminishour support for the Patriotic Front. The Council
mustnot lift the mandatorysanctions,not yet. The Council
must refuse to bestowinternationalrecognitionupon this
conspiracyfurther to entrenchminority rule in Zimbabwe.

42. No one will deny that this internal agreement stands
no chance whatsoever as long as the Patriotic Front and its
fighting forces are left out. It is also illusory to believe that
the freedom fighters will acquiesce in any arrangement in
which the primary instruments of power continue to be
wielded by a tiny privileged racist minority. We must not
deceive ourselves. To claim majority rule on the basis of
parity in power sharing between Africans and Europeans in
Zimbabwe is ludicrous, to say the least. The matter is only

48. The strugglemust continue until all the Peoplesof
Zimbabwe,not just a few, andindeedall the peoplesof the
United Nationsfamily have their sharein the victory for
decency, human dignity, justice and peace that must
inevitably be won in Zimbabwe.
me meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

publications
des Nations
Unies sont cn vente dans les librairies
et les wgences
deposit&es
du moncle entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre iibraire ou adressez-vous
k : Nations Unies. Section hes ventes, New York ou GenBve.
Les

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&in
buidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Consultc
Unidas, Scccicin de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en vcnta en librerias
y casas distria su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

7%700054anuary

1980-2,200
