UNJTEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2279”

MEETING:

4 JUNE

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisionalagenda (S/Agenda/22791 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Tribute to the memory of Madame Soong Chingling, Honorary Chairman of
the People’s Republic of China, Mr. Jaime Roldos Aguilera, Resident of the
Republic of Ecuador, and Mr. Ziaur Rahman, President of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Expression of thanks to the retiring President .,............I........,....

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . ...*.**.....*.....**....*..........*...**..

I

The situation in Cyprus:

Reportof the Secretary-Generalon the United Nations operationin Cyprus
(S/14490and Add.11 . . . . ...*..**...........*.*..................*,,

2

Expressionof farewell to Mr. Mikhail Sytenko, Under-Secretary-Generalfor
Political and Security Council Affairs . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , ,. . . . . . . . .

9

SIPV.2279

NOTE
S;,mbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. MentL of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1%5, became filly operative
on that date.

2279th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 4 June 1981, at 4 p.m.
fr&/rnt:

Mr. Porfirio MUlirOZ LED0 (Mexico),

PIV,XJ~~:The representatives of the followingStates:
China, France,GermanDemocratic
Republic,Ireland,

respective nations and to the bereaved families of the
deceased the deep sense of regret felt by the COunCii
for such sad losses.

Japan,Mexico, Niger, Panama,Philippines,Spain,
On the proposal of the President,
the tnembers of the
Tunisia,Uganda,Unionof SovietSocialistRepublics, Count/l observed u mittute of silence Iu tribute to the
UnitedKingdomof GreatBritainandNorthernIreland, memory
of Madtune
Soong
Chin&g,
President
UnitedStatesof America.
Roldds and President
Rahtnen.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/22791

5. Mr. YANG Hushan (China) (interpretation
from
First of all, I should like to thank you sincerely, Mr. President, in the name of the Chinese
delegation, for the words of condolence you expressed
on behalf of the Security Council on the death of
Madame Soong Chingling, the Honorary President of
the People’s Republic of China and Vice-Chairman of
the Standing Committee of the National People’s
Congress. Madame Soong devoted herself to the cause
of liberation of the Chinese nation and people alongside
the great revolutionary Mr. Sun Yat&n and was one
of the founders of the Peooie’s Rebubiic of China.
ihe &de outstanding contiributions’ to the Chinese
people’s cause of revolution and nation building as
well as to the development of friendship among peoples
of various countries and the defence of world peace.
Her death is a great loss to the people of China.

Chinese):

1. Adoptionof the agenda
2, The situationin Cyprus:
Reportof the Secretary-General
on the United
Nationsoperationin Cyprus (S/i4490and
Add.11
The meeting

W(IS culled

to order

at 4.20 p.m.

Tribute to the memory of Madame Soeng ChlngUag,
Honorary Chairman of the People’s Repubiic of
China, Mr. Jaime RoidC Aguiiera, President of tbe
Repubiic of Ecuador, and Mr. Zlaur Rahman,
President of the I’eepie’s Repubik of Banglade&
I. The PRESIDENT(Irrtrrpretatlon
J)om Spanish):
On behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I should like to express at the beginniw of this meeting
our deep regret at the sad loss of the Honorary Chairman of the People’s Republic of China, who served
her country for several generations with singular
dedication and unflinching patriotism.

6. The Chinese delegation will transmit the ex ressions of condolence made at this meeting to the Ch Pnose
Government and people and to the family of Madame
sow.
Expreubn

ef tbankn te the retwIg

Praident

2. The intemationai community also mourns with
7. The PRESIDENT UnterDntation from Spanish):
great regret the tragic death of the President of the
Before proceeding wltb the 6uurineu f& thir ineetin&
Republic of Ecuador, Mr. Jrime Rold6s Aguikm, who
embodied thedemocraticwillof hispeopleandwhose I should like. on behaif of the members of the Councli.
passingis so deeplyfelt by the countriesof Latin to pay a tribute to Mr. Masahiro Nisibori, represeni

tative of Japan,whoseefforts as Presidentof the
Councilwe &I highly appreciated.
The presidencyof
3. Wealsolamenttheshocking
deathof thePresident Mr. Nisiboriwasa modelof efficiencythat wouldbe
of the People’sRepublicof Bangladesh,
Mr. Ziaur difficult to equal.He resolvedall the problemswhich
Rahman,who wasanenlightened
leaderof hispeople aroseduringthe monihof May without a singledisandof the lessdeveloped
countries.It isour hopethat pute. He earnedgreaterpersonalprestigefor himself
his work *-iillbe perpetuatedin the peacefulinstitu- asa diplomatandfor hiscountryasa great,stableand
independent
nation.
tionaldevelopment
of hiscountry.
America,particularlymy own.

4. 1 ventureto requestthe representative
of China
and the representatives
of Ecuadorand Bangladesh
to conveyto the Governmentsand peoplesof their

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

lvas ctdopted.

The situation in Cyprus;
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation In Cyprus (S/14490 and AddJ)
8, The PRESIDENT firtrc~ri~rcJttrr/l~,1 from Spdsit):
I wish to inform members of the Security Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
At the irwilcrlior~ of the Presiderrt,
Mr. Muvrommds
(Cyprrrs),
Mr. Ka/trpo&
(Greece)
und Mr.
Klrcu
f Turkey)
took places
(11 tire Cowrcii tub/e.

9. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
front Spanish):
I wish to recall that in the course of consultations
members of the Council agreed that the Council would
extend an invitation to Mr. Nail Atalay under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of Procedure. If
I hear no object&, I shall take it thai the Council
decides to invite Mr. Atalay under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure,

IO. The PRESIDENT fhrerpretarion
from Spanish):
At the appropriate time, I shall request Mr. Ataiay to
take a place at the Council table in order to make his
statement.
I I. The Council will now begin its consideration of
the item on its agenda. Members of the Council have
before them the reoort of the Secretarv-General on
the United Nations &ration in Cyprus for the period
I December 1960 to 27 May 1981. Members of the
Council also have before them the text of ad& nsolution contained in document S/ilJOO, which was
prepared on the basis of consultations carried out by
the President.
12. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution which
is before it. Unless I hear any objection,
I shall put the
draft

resolution

to the vote.

14. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have noted the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council, and
I wish to assure the Council that I am taking the necessary steps to give effect to that resolution.
IS. As provided in the resolution, the United Nations
Peace-keeuinr! Force in Cyorus (UNFICYP) will
continue iorthe
next six Months to discharge its
important responsibilities along the cease&e lines and
in the area between the lines, as well as humanitarian
functions. I am satisfied that, despite the recent reduction in the strength ofthe Force by 1IO men, UNFICYP
remains in a position fully to carry out its task.
16. The resolution also requests me to continue my
mission of good offices. From my report of 27 May
1981, the members of the Council are aware that that
task is being actively pursued. The intercommunal
talks are scheduled t& enter a more active phase at the
beginning of July, and the parties have given me reason
to believe that they are prepared to make a serious
effort in the direction of a comprehensive settlement.
This will involve the interconnected consideration of
the territorial and constitutional aspects. My Special
Representative, Mr. Gobbi, has spent the past week at
Headquarters here in New York for consultations with
me and my collaborators about ways and means of
extending &sistance to the parties &ring the forthcoming phase of the talks. I myself have maintained
direct personal contact at appropriate levels with ail
concerned with a view to facilitating the negotiations.
17. I also wish to mention the significant step forward that was taken on 22 April, when Mr, Gobbi
announced, on my behalf, that agreement had been
reached on the terms of reference for setting up the
Committee on Missing Persons. I shall shortly appoint
Mr. Claude Pilioud, an oMciai selected for that purpose by the International Committee of the Red Cross
with the agreement of both sides, as the third member of the Committee. 1 expect that the Committee will
begin its work without delay, and that it will achieve
the long overdue solution of this humanitarian problem.
18. In conclusion. I should like once aaain to ex~rcss
my appreciation to my Special tieprescntptive,
Mr. Gobbi. to the Force Commander. Maior-General
Greindl, and to the officers and men of-UNFICYP
and its civilian staff. I also wish to thank once again the
troop-contributing
Governments
which are carrying
the burden of providing
the contingents
of UNFICYP,
as well as the financial
contributors,
for their support
of this important
peace-keeping
operation.
19. The PRESIDENT
(iiric,~l,~c,lotiott
jkntt Spcurisir):
I thank the Secretary-General
for his statement.
The
first speaker is the representative
of Cyprus,
on whom
I now call.

13. The PRESIDENT
fi,rfc~rpr’c/a/io,l
I now call 011 the Secretary-General,
make a statement.

fr.orlr Spunk/~):
who wishes to

20. Mr. MAVROMMATIS
(Cyprus):
Mr, President,
I should like at the outset, through
you and through
the representatives
of China, Ecuador and Bangladesh,

lo convey the heartfelt condolences of the Government
and people of Cyprus, as well as the condolences of
my delegation, to the Governments, peoples and
families if the deceased Honorary Chalrnian bf China,
the President of Ecuador and the President of Bank
ladesh.
21. I should like now, Sir, to address to you my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. We are convinced that your experience and
skills, which we have on many an occasion had ample
opportunity to witness and admire, are indicative of
the leadership which you will provide from the chair of
this all-important principal organ. But our pleasure at
seeing you preside over the Council Is due not only to
the respect we have for you personally, but also to
the high admiration we have for your great country,
a champion of many noble causes in the international
field and a leader of the third world, a country with
which my own maintains very cordial relations.
22. I would, however, be remiss were I not to address
felicitations as well to the retiring President of the
Council. Mr. Nisibori, representative of Japan, who
so ably .handled preliminary matters connected with
today’s meeting of the Security Council.
23. Furthermore, Mr. President, 1 should like to
extend to you, as well as to all the members of this
body, my thanks for affording me the opportunity to
address the Council, and also our appreciation for
having, by the resolution the Council just adopted,
extended, with the consent of the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus, the mandate of UNFICYP for
a further period of six months.

communal talks “might prove to be a painstaking and
protracted process and thus we have had to arm
ourselves with a large stock of patlence’ftnd good
will”, yot, as I added at that tlmo, “even patience has
its llmlts” [22571/t nreetbg, pnrn. 201.
27. The SIX months that have since elapsed have
Indeed proved that statement to be quite correct, but
WC havo almost exhausted the greatest part of that
patience and good will in order to live with the lack
of any tangible result from that process. For, in a
nutshell, it could be said that the talks aro still alive,
but that they have as yet produced no results whatsoever: oven more significant is the fact that nine
months after the resumption of the talks there is one
important aspect of the problem with reference to
which no concrete proposals have been submitted,
namely the territorial aspect.
28. We can only express the hope that promises given
will bo kept, that declarations made will be matched
by deeds and, abovo all, that the necessary political
will may be summoned, thus making it possible to
arrlvo at a satisfactory conclusion of the intercommunal
dialogue as mandated by the resolutions adopted by
the Security Council and as provided for by the hlghlevel agreements of 12 February 1977 [S//ZJtJ, paru. 51
and 19 May 1979 which provide the framework for
the solution of the problem. For-and let us make no
mistake-it is only through the implementation of
agreements arrlvod at so far, and also by taking further
posltivo stops in tho right direction, that we can hope
for a resolution of the Cyprus problem.
29, The time has come for all to realize that a just
solution of the problem, based on United Nations
principles and resolutions, on international instruments, aspecially in the field of human rights, and on
existing agreomonts, will prove to be beneficial to all
communities and to all the people of Cyprus. Thus, this
is tho moment in our history when the supremo interests of our country dictate ihat we forgive and forget
mistakos and injustices made or committed, and
concontrato on &at should be achieved for the country
as a whole and for itr fbture.

24. Our biannual appearance before the Security
Council and the resolution resulting from the Council’s
meeting, however essential for the preservation in
my country of peaceful conditions, which are so
necessary for the ongoing dialogue, are at the same time
a sad commentary on the ability of the United Nations
to apply the principles of the Charter and the peremp
tory no;ms of international law and justice to a small
and defenceless country in the case of which they
hove been so flagrantly violated.

30. Let us hope that the positive omens to which the
&cntuy-0ewrai
has alluded in hit report will be
translated into concrete proposals, including proposals
on territory, to be submitted early in July and that we
shall be able to celebrate the anniversary of the present
round of talks with the first positive results, and thus
be well on the way to a permanent solution.

25. They are at the same time yet another dirheutening signal to the thousands of refugees and displaced
persons that they are still 10 gaze at their ancestral
homes, including those in Varosha-which
is a priority
item under the IO-point agreement of 19 May I979
[S/IB69, ptr~. S/j-from the wrong side of the demilitarized zone, which is so far away and yet so near.

31. However, let me make it clear that these proposals to be submitted by the other side should not be
a reiteration of old positions in a continued effort to
legalize Jirirs nccontplis
and should not undermine
the legal order in the Republic, but should be pragmatic
and reasonable and contain the necessary elements to
permit serious negotiations.

26. The Security Council has once again voiced its
support of the ongoing process of the intercommunal
talks, which we all consider 10 be the best available
means in the quest for a solution of the internal aspect
of the Cyprus problem. Although, as I had occasion
to state before the Conncil last December, the inter3

32. On another aspect-perhaps
the most tragic
aspect of the Cyprus drama-that
of the missing
persons, we have a development which gives us cause
to rejoice. Our consistent efforts in Cyprus and elsewhere have led us to an agreement on the establishment
of an investigatory body for tracing and accounting for
persons missing as a result of armed conflict in Cyprus.
The Greek Cypriot side has appointed its representative to the investigatory body and both sides have also
given their consent regarding the representative to
be aptminted by the Secretary.Oeneral. It is our
earnest hope that the investigaiory body will begin
its work immediately and that it will, as the SecretaryGeneral has just said, come to positive conclusions
at the earliest possible time, thus alleviating the pain
and suffering of all concerned. Let me say thai we
consider this development to be a good omen-quite
apart from its immensely humanitarian aspect. Let us
hope that there will soon emerge equally positive
developments also in the case of the efforts for the
overall solution of the Cyprus problem.
33, In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our confidence
in the Secretary-General and repeat our heartfelt
appreciation and thanks for the devotion, zeal and
ability with which he is carrying out his tasks regarding
Cyprus. Our thanks also go to his extremely able
collaborators both here and in Cyprus, namely, Messrs.
Urquhart, Mrez de Cubllar, Oobbi, Sherry, Picco
and Schlittler-Silva, who have also laboured hard and
contributed significantly to the efforts towards the solution of the Cyprus problem. Appreciation is also due
to the present and past Commanders and to the officers
and men of UNFICYP and, equally, to the countries
that contribute contingents to UNFICYP and also
absorb a large part of its costs. We do also wish to thank
the countries that contribute to the special account
for UNFICYP.
34. Finally, 1 should like to address a special word of
appreciation and thanks to Mr. Wrez de CublIar. who
has just relinquished his post as Under-SecretaryGeneral for Special Political Affairs. Let me say that we
have greatly admired his personal qualities and the
skill, interest and devotion he brought to all the tasks
he undertook, and particularly that of Cyprus, either
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
or as Under-Secretary-General here in New York. His
significant contribution will be remembered by the
people and the Government of Cyprus and indeed by all
of us, whose confidence he won from the outset.
35. Once again I shall end by expressing the hope that
when I appear before the Council in six months’ time
I may have something on the positive side to report
on the talks. We are ready to work hard in that direction: but is the other side really, this time, willing to do
likewise or is it again going to make a mockery of the
negotiating process? In the mean time, I believe that
I am duty-bound to warn against any provocative acts
such as the repeated violations of the airspace of the
Republic of Cyprus by Turkish jet fighters that

occurred on I and 2 June 1981. Such acts are Posltively ofthe greatest disservice to the ongoing dialogue.
36, The PRESIDENT Iinrwprcartiorr frm
I call on the representative of Greece.

Sputllshb’

37. Mr. KATAPODIS (Greece) fitrterpwtcctiott hJIIt
Sprcrrlsh): 1 should like to begin my statement by
expressing to the representatives of the People’s
Republic of China, of Ecuador and of Bangladesh
the deep condolences of my Government on the
nassing away of the Honorary Chairman of China, the
President of Ecuador and the Preiident of Bangladesh.
38. Mr. President. I wish to convey to YOU our
warmest congratul&lons on your assu-m tion of the
imDortant fbnctions of President of tRe Security
Cduncil for the month of June. In my three years as
Ambassador in your beautiful country, I had the
opportunity to appreciate your great qualities as an
eminent statesman and prominent intellectual. I am
sure that under your leadership this supreme body of
the United Nations will carry out its important tasks
effectively and successfully. I should like also to thank
the members of the Council, through you, for allowing
me the opportunity of expressing my Government’s
point of view on the item on the agenda.
39. The Security Council has just extended the
mandate of UNFICYP once again. This extension is
nothing but an admission of failure on the part of the
Organization in its mission of guaranteeing the independence and territorial integrity of its Members, more
particularly the small countries. Every six months the
international community, in Cyprus, in Lebanon, in
the occupied Arab territories and in other parts of the
world, reconnizes its inability to enforce respect for
the principl& of the Charter and to oblige aggressors to
withdraw from territories they have occupied by force
in violation of the most fundamental rules of international law.
40. In the case of Cynrus. the Dast two Years have
been a time of hope b;i also of disappointment. I say
hope because the agreement of 19 May 1979 [SIIJJbP,
para. 5/] gave the impression that finally the lengthy
and fruitless negotiations between the two communities were going to lead to n settlement that would
allow the inhabitants of that unfortunate island to live in
peace and permit the refugees to 60 home, I also say
disappointment because so far none of this has been
achikbed. Despite the praiseworthy efforts of the
Secretary-General and of his colleagues. which deserve the thanks of all Cypriots, and despite the dedication of the peace-keeping force, which gives the
victims of aggression a feeling of some security, no
real progress has been made in the dialogue. It would
not be useful, at this time when the talks are still going
on, to try to place the blame for this situation on one
or another of the parties. However, it is an incontrovertible fact that, almost seven years after the 1974
invasion, foreign troops are still occupying 40 per cent

.

of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus, whlio one
;hite;f
the people continua to iivo far from thoir
41. The intercommunal talks have roached a turningpoint. It is not possible for them to bo extended indofq
initeiy. The party responsible for the present Cypriot
tragedy has the duty, the moral obligation and I would
oven say it is In its political interest to make a serious
effort to arrive at a peaceful and equitable settlement
of the issue. There is not the slightest doubt that the
other party is more than ready to reciprocate such an
effort.
42. Recriminations, although they may afford the
victims some satisfaction, never help to rosoive poiiticai problems. Unfortunately, we are living at a time
when tho notion that might is right is sanctioned. The
agenda of the Security Council is an almost infinite list
of problems that are insoluble because of the intransigence of those who violate the rights of pooples. The
case of Cyprus is a typical example. However, the
problem could be resolved if the opposing sides, that
is, the two communities, wore allowed to seek a
satisfactory settlement without the interference of
outside elements that in fact are more interested in
promoting their own aims than in the welfare of the
Cypriots. Perhaps this is the last opportunity to achieve
an agreement which would maintain the independence,
unity, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the
Republic of Cyprus. It would be a great pity if the
opportunity were lost through lack of political vision
on the part of those very poop10 who brought about
the present crisis.
43. The PRESIDENT (Interpretarlonjlom
Spanish):
I thank the representative of Oreeco for his gesture
in making his statement in my own language and for
his klnd words addrosssd to me.
44. The next speaker is Mr. Nail Atalay, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
PrOViSiOnal rules of proeeduro. 1 invite him to take a
place at the Council tabio and to make hi8 ttatomont.
43. Mr. ATALAY: Mr. Pretident, 1 thank you and
ail the member8 of tbo Council for having given me
the opportunity of rddm88inl the Council today.
46. Allow mo also, on bohaif of my Oovemmont
and on my own behalf, to express our thanks and grati-

Cypriot side. We wish them the best of happiness and
success in their future endeavours.
47, I take this opportunity also to welcome the now
Farce Commander. Maior-Qoneral Guenther Cireindi,
and to assure him’of 6 fUles~~co=oporation in tho
dlfflcuit task that ties ahead of him.
48. The Security Council hasjust adopted a resolution
on the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP until
15 December 1981. In the third proambular paragraph
of the resolution, there is a reference to the “Oovernment of Cyprus”. I must immodiately point out once
again that that reference is both uqjust and misleading.
The legitimate Government of Cyprus, as sot up by
the 1960 Treaty,! was a bl-communal on& Turkish
Cypriots had participated at ail iovois of the adminis.
tration and without such participation there could have
boon no legitimate Oovernmont. But, in December
1%3, the Oroek Cypriot leaders staged a coup against
this legitimacy and threw the Turkish Cypriots out of
the bi.communai Oovommont. What we are now
trying to do, through intercommunal talks, i8 to reestablish a legitimate Clovornmont to rePresent both
communitios.~Thoroforo, a reference in tlio text to the
Oreok Cypriot administration as the ao-called aovernmont of Cyprus makes the resolution unacceptable
to us from the very outset.
49. Nevertheless, the ~ovommont of the Turkish
Federated State of Klbrls concurs with the decision to
extend the mandate of UNFICYP, and it has instructed
me to convoy Its consent. But, as 1 have already
omphasized on numerous occasions during the Councii’s meetings hero, UNFICYP’s modus operand/
must bo than ed and its present mandate muat be
tWi8Od accord sngiy.
SO. The situation referred to in paragraph 13 of the
report of the Secretary-Oonorai can bo understood
in the light of the following: UNFICYP’s function8
and authority are outlined in its orlglnai mandate of
1964 a8 “to use it8 beat efforts to prevent a rocurrcnce
of fighting and, a8 nocoarary, to contribute to the
maintenance and reatoration of law and order and a
mtum to normal conditiona” Ireso/urlon 186 f/964)].
Under that mandate, UNPICYP ha8 no le~timue
function to porfom in the north of CYPN~ and it ia
conridomd appropriate that UNPICYP ahouid roallgn
itself in the light of its mandate within the present

tudelo theSecretary-General,
10hisstaffin theSecre- realitiesof Cyprus.If that is done,30per centof the
tariat and in the field-especiallyto Mr. Urquhart, personnelof UNFICYP will sufficeto control the
Mr. Gobbi,Mr. Sherry,Mr. PiccoandMr. Schlittler- cease-fire
tinesandthusadequately
fulfil theconditions
Silva-and to thosemilitary and civilian personnel of its mandate.
who are doingtheir bestto find a just and lasting
solutionto the problemof Cyprus, Furthermore, 51. Seeingscoresof UNFICYP membersidling
I shouldalsolike to thank Under-Secretary-Generalaroundcertainunnecessary
pointsin thenorthmustbe
P6rezdeCuelIar,whoretiredfromtheSecretariatvery affectingthemoraleof itsown members,
whilecosting
recently, and Mdor-GeneralJamesQuinn,who has the contributing countries unnecessaryexpense,
completed
histour of duty asthe ForceCommander. In fairnessto boththe contributingcountriesandthe
Their excellent performancein discharginga very TurkishFederatedStateof Kibris, an early reviewof
dificult task will not be forgotten by the Turkish UNFICYP’srolein the north iscalledfor.

32. Furthormoro, the resolution just adopted roquosts
the mission of good o!Ilcos of the Socrotary-Cionoral
In the intorcommunal nonotlations. MY Oovornmont
Wo~comos and suppons that request whole-heartodly.
Woshall do our baet so that our dodicatod SocrotaryQcnoral’s miesion will bo crowned with 8ucccs8.

closely affecting both communities a8 a constt’uCtiv0
and posidvo development.
“The loss of life suffered bv the Turkish Cypriot
oplo in the intorcommunal hghting which s&ted
n December I%3 and the humanitarian orobloms
they wore forcod to face are known 10 ail. since then
tho missing-person8 issue has been an agony deeply
felt by each Turkirrh Cypriot. But, despite the ca808
of their missin poraons documented by the reports
of the United Nation8 Socrotary.Oenoral, the
Turkish Cypriot side ha8 never exploited this
humanitarian issue for political purposes.

p”

53. Howovor, In connection with the resumption
of the intercommunal talk8 last AUgU8L the fifth
proambuiar paragraph and paragraph 2 of the resolution
do not accurately reflect the actual baNi8 on which
talks wore resumed. The intorcommunal dialogue
ha8 rosumod and is continuing on the basis of the
SecrotarvKionoral’s ooenlnn statement of 9 Aueust
1980 [S/i4/00~ urt,rax]; whlah incorporates the highlevel aaroomont of 12 February 1977 IS//2jzJ, DMYL 51,
the t&point aOroomont of ‘19 May. 1979 (S//369,
paru. 5/l and other important olomonts. Although WC
would have wanted 10 change the wording of those two
paragraph8 of the text 80 a8 10 conform 10 the actual
situation, WCdid not insist for the sake of not CrOating
an impa
a1 this jUnCtUr0.

“However, since July 1974 attempts have been
made 10 make political capital out of this question
on every occasion at the expense of the Turkish
Cypriot community. Thie exploitation wa8 carried
10 the point of asking the Turkiah Cypriot community to account for the Orook Cypriots missing
as a result of the fighting among themselves during
the wp of IS July 1974, the aims of which are too
well known. This issue wa8 presented to the world
in a biased perspective, totally removed from the
roalitios.

54. Now I should like lo mention a very important
point which, intentionally or unintentionally, is not
taken seriously by certain circles. 1refer lo the principle
of equality.

“Tho Turkish Cypriot 8idO ha8 advocated, from
the very beeinnine, that this issue be settiod in a
humani fashion 6 alleviate the suffering of the
families of the missin persons of both communities
and ha8 supported, with good will, every initiative
that was not open to political exploitation.

55. The problem of Cyprus is a dispute between the
two national communities, namely the Turki8h
Cypriot8 and the Cirook Cypriots, which wore political
equals undor the bi-national partnership sot-up of
I%O, and the intercommunal talks are being hold
bOtWOOnthe roprosontativos of those two communities on an equal footing under the personal auspices
of the ~CrOt!Ity-OOnOI?#8 roprosontativo in Cyprus.

“Indood, during the contacts that woro started in
rOCOnt months & the 8uggo8tiOn of tho United
Nations, the Turkish Cypriot side ha8 maintained the
Name positive approach and has made constructive
contribution8 for bringinp those effort8 to an accoptable conclusion, Consequently, it has now been
decided to ostabiish a Committee of thmo momben
including, besidos the ropresentativos of the two
communities, an official from the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and lo carry out its task
on the baai of consensus.

$6, We cannot and we ehail not give in ovon an
iota on thi8 principio of equality. Therefore, whenever
and whomvor them ha8 lo be a reference to the intorsommunal negotiations or to the mspeclivo status of
bath community, the principio of equality mubt be
maintained and their mpmuentative8, from the highest
kvoi to the lowest level, must be eddmssed as oquais
!n kespln( with lhi8 principle.

“Undoubtedly, the fact that agreement ha8 been
reached for the ettabiirhment of 8UCh a Committee
Co&tlltO8 a bVolll’&tO develomnent for flneliv
reaolvin@ a humanitarian problem; u well u fort&
continuation of the dialogue between the two

$7. 1 wanted to make those clarifications, and I am
h1-8 that the Council will take note of chow facts.
SE. Mr. President, you have already noted from
paragraph
59 of the report of the Secretary-General
that on 22 April
1981, in Cyprus,
agreement
was
reached
by the two sides-namely,
the Turkish
Cypriot
side and the Greek Cypriot
side-on
the terms
of reference
for the establishment
of a committee
on
missing persons.

communities.
“We would like to hope that with the agreement
a humanitarian
problem
will entirely
cease to be
exploited.
Our wish is that humanitarian
and objective considerations
exclusively
should
guide the
work of the Committee.”

59. The representative
of the Turkish
Federated
State of Kibriv on the Committee,
Mr. Latife Birge%
made the following
statement
on the subject:
.a . * . the Turkish Federated
State of Kibris
the agreement
reached
on this humanitarian

60. On this occasion I welcome also the third member
of the Committee,
Mr. Claude Pilloud, and assure him
of my community’s
co-operation.
I am sure that his
deep knowledge
in this humanitarian
field will be
very helpful during the deliberations
of the Committee.

regards
issue
6

61, In conclusion, we believe that the only way to 67. I think I cancounton the Council’8indulgence
guarantee a lasting peace in Cyprus is to create a bl- if I takoup a little moroof its tlmoto paya particular
communal, bi-zonal federation in which each of the tribute to Mr. Javior PCrozdo CublIar,Under-Seccommunitieson the islandcould manageIts own rotary4enoral for SpecialPolitlcalAffairs, who ha8
internalaffairswithoutanyinterferenceor hindrance just loft hispostwith the UnitedNations.Hohasbeen
fromtheotherside.To thatendWChavosUbmItted
our called to hlnh office by tho Qovommontof Peru.
proposals
for discussion
at the intercommunal
talks, tir.~P&z daCu6llarisa-manof oxcept~onal
qualitiCS,
which Incorporatethe equality of the Greek and particularcharmand a personalitystrongly marked
Turkieh Cypriot partners,becaueethore can be no by a humanitarianand flexible approach.He ha8
gde$‘“” without equality amongthe unit8 which renderedextremelydlstingUl8hOd
8Ot’ViCO
Over many
year8at differentlevelsof the UnitodNationsin tho
searchfor a solutionof the Cyprusproblem.His con62. We, the TurkishCypriota,are lookingforward tdbUtlOn8and hi8 personalimpacton the marchof
to a goldenageIn Cyprus, whenboth of its corn- ovont8will alwaysbe indollblyengravedin our mommunitieswill live harmoniously
8idOby side,sharinga8 orios.WCaregratofUlto him,andwe wishhimovory
in the tituro.
equal partnersthe burden8of government.Only sUCCe88
throuehpositivestenstakennowcanthe future PonerationiofTurk8andbrooksbetaughtto liveasp&nor8 68. Onceanain.In saiteof our obviousdosireto the
in Cyprus,andthe intercommunal
dialogueistheonly contrary;m?couittryhndsitselfobligedto speakin the
channelbetweenthe two neti- communities
thtit SecurityCouncilonthoquestionof Cyprus.At thelast
mootingof tho Councilon the subjectin December
CM leadto peace.
198012257th meerltwl. I madoit clearthat anydi8CU8siontioroonCyprU8%UldintheCUrrOnt
circu&&ncoe
63. ThoPRESIDENT(htterptetatlon from Spanish):
ThOnoxtspeakor
isthe rCprO8entative
ofhrkoy, upon be not only inappropriatebut ovonactuallyharmful
to the sOarCh
for a solutionby moan8of the ongoing
whomI nowcall.
intorcommunal
nettotiatlona.
Novortholo88.
woarehCr0
to repeatoncea&n this not very usetil oxorci8o.
64. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey) flnterprerarlon Porn
I thereforeehallbe brief and do my best to avoid
French): Mr. President,at the outsetI shouldlike to polomica,ovenif the other sidobecorns heatedfor
aseocietothe Turkish Oovemmontand peoplewith obviousreasona,
or maybefor not 80ObViOU8
rOa8on8,
the condolence8which the Security Council has, asis unfortunatelythe casetoday.
throughyou, offoredto theOovornments
andpeoples
concerned
on thedeathsof the HonoraryChairman
of
the People’sRepublicof China, tho Presidentof 69. In the first place,WCnotewith satiefactionthe
I$cuador
andthe President
of the People’s
Republicof fact thattheintercommunal
talk8arecontinuing.Those
R%ttgla&8h.
negotiations
inour viewconstitutethoonlyv&l mean8
for art&innat a.iustandlastinnsolutionof thoProblem
65. Mr. President,the Council is meetingtoday of Cyprus:It idtruo that theinootingshaveb&n 10~8
oonsOnt
in orderto
shortly aftor your assumption
of its presidsncyfor &equentthanplanned,b common
rtiesto holdtheir oleationsin
thomonthof June.l shouldthereforeliketo conveyto @errnitthe two commun
ou my warmest congratulations
andmy bestwishes their respectivesectors.Novortheloss,the dialauo
hasbe0nm&nlnad
Ior 8uccoss
in the o~rformanco
of your task.whichia betweenthe two communities
withoutinterruption.
sodifilcultanddelicate.Oiventb imditio~air&ona
Orfriondahiobetwwn Mexico andTurkey. YOUcan
net usurodof our full co.opemtion.1 Unitit& to 70. It is a pottioukr sowco of rrtlrtrotion to UI, too,
tulatoyou in Spanish,andin that rorpoct,and
to note that, followinga lensthy processof shuttle
“r$: rospoet only, the Ambusulor of Orwce bas
iiNap fbrwud ItM hoott takoft
OcDmd
a point. Permitme,Mr. Ptuakknt, to oxptwsr &~$e$lu
T n of a deIkue and humanltuian
Ourputkular s&faction at your ol&ctlve andcon- problem,that Is, the questionof mirrlnl persons.
8tl’UCtiVO
conductof the habitualconsultation8
on this Indeed,a committeeComposed
of throomember8
and
itemof the agenda,whichhasbeensoadmirable,
chargedwith the task of studyingthis questionhas
finally beenset up, thanksin largemeasureto the
66. Beforeturningto thesubstance
of ourdiscussion tirelesseffortsof the Secretary-General
andhisSpecial
I shouldlike alsoto take this opportunityto express Representative
in Cyprusand their colleagueshere
our sinceregratitudeto Mi\jor-GeneralJamesQuinn, andin Nicosia,but alsobecause
of the perseverance
who, asCommander
of the UnitedNationsForcein and determinationof the two parties.We hopethat
Cyprus,hasrendered
suchexemplaryservice.Wewish the committeewill be in a positionto resolvethis
himevery success
in hisfuture activities.We should questionspeedilyandeffectively. The solutionof this
also like-to welcomethe new Commander,Major- sensitivequestionwill undoubtedlyhelpto eliminate
GeneralGuentherGreindl. I shouldlike to reiterate a sourceof constanttensionwhich ‘haspoisoned
our determination
to co-operatewith him in the per- relationsbetweentheTurkishandGreekcommunities
formanceof histasks.
in Cyprus.
7

71. The agrcomcnt on the question of misslne oerson8
prOVC8that patience and perseverance do not &aysgo
unrowarded and that, orovided that the two oartics
slncorely want to arrive-at a reasonable agroomdnt and
that thoy take account of each OthOr’8 nOOd8 and
ro8pOctivo lcgitimatc requiromonts, it is lndood posslblo
to come to aarcament and it is oossiblo to make Progrose whon (he two communities undertake sorioue
ncgotiationa on an equal footing and wlthout Ottt8ldO
httorfcrenco.

because that titla rofera to a Stat0 organ which Ceased
to exist clu lure and also cle &IO a8 of the end of
December 1963. I do not want to go into details about
what ha8 lonn been cxolaincd and maintained by
Turko , I shaltionfine miaelf in thi8 regard to referrine
to my 7otter to the Secmtarv4leneral of 14 Aorll of this
yoar~IS/144451, On the subject of justice atid respect
for international treaties and constitutional orovisions
and therefore on that of responsibility for ihe crisis,
there exist8 8utIlcient illuminatina material and I shall
not go over it again. I ehould iimply like-to make
8omo remarks on thia particular queetion in the context
of tho rosolutiou just adopted by the Council.

72. WC hope that this agreement will be tho harbingor
of future positive doveiopmont8 in the soarch for a aoltttlon of the Cyprus problem. We should ilko to hope
that, in the period following elections in both aactor
and the roces8 of rcorganization which ma very
well re8u Pt from this in the two communltios, tKe two
oartiea will b0 in a oosltion to make conaroto Pronre88
in the intercommuital negotiations. Clearly, broiross
will dePend on the joint effort8 of the two aides. Each
cotnmtinity mu8t aitempt to put forward ideas, based
on the orinciole of eauitv. with rcnard to the Particular
goncat’ite of ihe other party. In %is regard; 1 ehould
like to Doint out that it is only the Turkish community
which ‘has 8hOWn flexibility- in certain areas of thb
negotiations. It is obvious that there will not be any
progress if one of the partlee alone is expected to make
concessions. Progrese can be achieved only by mutual
concessions; it cannot be won by unrealistic position8
and even. in certain ca.se8. Positions that PO back on
previous agreements, and itcan certainly not be won
on the basis of one-sided accusation8 or flights of
oratory.

75. The roforenco in the third preambuiar paragraph,
Ilk0 the one made in the report of the Secretary-Genoral, to tho ‘Y3ovommont if Cyprus” is totail$ inappropriate. Our position on this ie well known to the
Council. This poaitlon remains valid and unchanged.
Since WC have once again 8et fortb our views in the
document 1 have just mentioned, I shall confine myself
here to bringing to the notice of the member8 of the
Council the fact that consent given by Turkey to the
peace-keoplng efforts of the United Nations in Cyprus
will be conditioned by our position on the subject of
tho so-called “Oovemment of Cyprus”.

76. Another remark I should like to make on the
eubjoct of the resolution juat adopted is a8 follows: the
various t’e8MvatiOn8 made and positions adopted by
Turkey on the subject ofprevious United Nation8 reaolutions mentioned in this text continue to bo valid and
remain unchanged.

73. With regard to the intercommunal talks, w0 share
the concern expressed by the Secretary-General in
his report in document S/14490. He can count on our
wholehearted
support in the continuation of his
mission of good 0~~08. The Turkish Government has
tdWa s OXlM88ed its gratitude to the Secretary-Oonoral
for hr8 tireless efforts to solve the problem of Cyptur.
In the future, we shall give our co-operation to the
&cretary-Ciencrei a8 we have done in the pact.

77. In the course of consultations, we proposed that
reference be mado in paragraph 2 of the reaoiution to
the openlag 8tatement made by the Secretary-Oenerai
on 9 August 1980 [S//4/00, a~rx]. We made this
requoat because we felt that the present wordin of the
resolution is far from reflecting the facts or the deveiopments that have occurred over the past 12 months.
At the lort meeting of the Council on the subject,
I rxplalned that the intercommunal negotiation8 had
been ntumed a8 a rerult of a 8tatement made by the
Beeretuy-Oeneral In Augurt 1980. That statement,
whkh montim not only the high-level agreement8 of
1977 [S//232& palw. 51 and 1979 [S//3369, parli. J/l
hut al80 cart&t very important element8 of 8ubrtance,
provided the appropriate framework for the resump
tion of the intercommunal
talks. We understund
if the
Council prefers, for purely practical reasons, to main-

‘N. Before expressing our view8 on the rerolutlon Just
Mpted by the Council. I rhould like to tnake a brief
mnment on tha report of the Sscmary-Omoml. We
have certain difncuitier with the wording of this
report, although that was not exactly the case with
regard to tbe text of tile previous report. We understand
that these difKculties
may derive from the haste with
which this report was prepared:
nevertheless,
I feel
obliged to dwell on a particular
point so as to put it on
the record of this meeting.
The equality
of the two
national communities
in Cyprus-that
is, the Turkish
Cypriot
community
and the Greek
Cypriot
community-is
not reflected
in the titles used to designate
the respective
officials
on both sides. The officials
of the Greek
Cypriot
community
are represented
erroneously
as representatives
of the Government
of Cyprus.
Undoubtedly,
the reference
to the “Government of Cyprus”
in the report could be misleading,

tain the wording
of the resolutions
unchanged,
but
I must stress that my Government
interurets
the text of
the present resolution,
and in particular
the reference to
the resumption of intercommunal
talks, in the light of
the considerations
I have just indicated,
78. In its operative
part, this resolution
renews the
mandate of UNFICYP
for another
six months.
Since
Mr. Nail Ataiay, representative of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus,
has just informed
the Council
of the consent of his authorities,
we for our part also
8

warmcat wishes for himself, for hi8 family, for his
well-being and for the well-being of his country*

accept its renewal. However, due note should be taken
of the fact that Mr. Atalay has just stressed the need,
a8 he ha8 done in the past, for revising the mandate of
the United Nation8 Force as drawn up in 1964 in order
to adapt it to the current circumstance8 in Cyprue.
We should also note here that ccrtaln limited reduction8
in certain national contingents could be considered in
this regard as a step in the right direction.

85. Mr. LBPRETTE (France) WerPrclarlun
J)‘Jm
/+~vtc/t~: Mr, President, as you wanted this to be a brlcf
meeting I am sure that you will not take it amiss lf
1 leave it until we meet next to express our satisfaction
at seeing you conduct the bUBinC88 of the Council this
month, and our congratulations to your predecessor
for the month of May, Mr. Nisibori. But I do have a
few words to say to associate myself with the tribute
you have just paid to Mr. Mikhali Sytenko. Words
that come from the heart can be brief, and I ehail not
take up much of the Council’8 time.

79. Before concluding my comments I should like to
express our profound gratitude to the SecrctaryGeneral and also to his colleagues for their ceaseless
efforts both in Nicosia and here in New York to find
a solution to the Cyprusproblem.We shouldalsolike
to thank the Member States which have contributed
to the UnitedNationsForcein Cyprus and,of course,
the gallant officers and men of UNPICYP and the
civilian personnel stationed in the island,

86. Since this meeting may be the last in which
Mr. Sytenko, the Under-Secrctary&neral
for Poiiticai and Sccurlt Council Affairs, will take Part,
I should like, a8 tiio oidO8t of the Westernmembers
of
theCouncil, and on their behalf, to say how much we
regret to 8ce him go, For three years, in this highly
important sector of tho Organisation, where the moat
diMcult questions affecting international peace and
security arc tai8Cd and dealt with, Mr. Sytenko has
been a remarkable Under-Secretary-Oenoral
on ail
counts. Attentive, far-seeing, thoroughly well informed and always mindful of trends of opinion in the
Security Council, he ha8 given that body the benefit
of his con8idcrabie diplomatic expcriencc and ha8
ensured its functioning in a way that has earned our
admiration. It is a pleasure and a privilege for me to
pay this tribute to Mr. Sytonko and to thank him for the
services he has rendered to everyone with unfailing
COtJlt88y,a great 8On80 of humour and a wBrm Spirit Of
co-operation. On behalf of the Western members of the
Council I offer him our be&t wishes for his personal
happinese and for the succo18 of the ImpOtUnt mission
that is to be ontrusted to him by the Oovemmont of
hi8 country.

80. The PRESIDBNT Ilttterprctarktn frtttn Spanish):
The representative of Cyprus has asked to be allowed
to speak in exorcise of the right of reply, and I call on
him.
81. Mr. MAVROMMATIS
(CYPNS): With the Council’s indulgence I should like to reply very briefly to
the reference by the representative of Turkey to the
Government of Cyprus, and repeat once again that such
statements seem to be in blissful ignorance of the
provisions of the Charter, the practice of the United
Nations, the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council and international law in general.
82. A8 regards the reference to the opening statoment by the Secretary-General, I should like simply
to refer to my reply to a similar reference on 1I Dccembcr 1980 t2257th meeting, para. 651 and to numerous explanatory statements made by us on the
matter, both here and in Cyprus.
83. The PRESIDENT (htterpretationfitttn Spanish):
Thorn are no further rpoaken, and the Security Council has thu8 completed the present 8tngo of it8 conridoration of the item on its ago&a.

87. Mr. OTUNNU
(Uganda): Permit mo first,
Mr. RetidOnt, to congratulate you on your accotsion to
tho proaidoncy . We am confldont that you will carry out
the task ontruttod to you with your characteristic tkiii
and tho ca ity for hard work wo associate with you.
1 should or 10 Uko to thank Mr. Niribori of Japan for
tE;y
he conducted the work of the Couacil last

84. ThePRESIDENT(itttcJrt~rc~tcttbtt~ottt Stxttr;sh):
Before we adjourn, I should like to say-a few words of

88. I amspeaking
on behalfof the non-allgned
membersof the Councilto pay tribute to Mr. Sytenkofor
Ihewayhehasbeenhandlingourwork. As you know,
he hasbeenan exemplaryinternationalcivil servant.
He hasexhibitedgreat intellectualability which has
enabledhim to grapplewith the complexissuesof
internationalr&tio&, dealingwith peoplecoming
from all cosnersof the world, with different aolitical
systems and cultures. He has shown in hs work
tenacity,perseverance
andthe patienceneededto deal
with varyingpositionsandto discerncommonground
in thosepositions,andthe subjectwe havebeendiscussingis a testimonyof hisability. Furthermore,he

farewell10the Under-Secretary-General
for Political
andSecurity CouncilAffairs, Mr. Mikhail Sytenko.
I am surethat I speak for all Council members in
expressing
to him dur deepappreciationof his many
diplomatictalents,his greatcordialityandhisimpcccablecourtesy,andalsohis constantcontributionto
the Councilin everyaspectof its work. As heleaves
the Secretariat,1 assurehimthat we shallmisshim,
bothin relationto the work of the institutionandfor
himselfasa person.He leavesan indeliblememory
amongus. On behalfof the Council,I offer himout
9

has shown a commitment to the cause of international
peace and security. For those of us in this chamber who
stay only for two years and then leave, he has helped
us to get to know the rules and procedures of the
Council.

for his successful conduct of the work of the Council
during last month.
94. I should like to say a few words about Mr. Mikhail
Sytenko, the Under-Secretary43eneral
for Political
and Security Council Affairs, During his term he
rendered great services to the Security Council in its
work and made his personal contribution thereto.
Upon his imminent retirement, I should like to express
the gratitude of the Chinese delegation for the work
he performed.

89. As he leaves, it is indeed a great loss to the Organization, but we hope that we shall meet him in another
capacity where his qualities will again be put to good
use. We have profited from his advice and we wish him
and his family a safe future.
90.

Mr. FLORIN

(Oerman Democratic Republic)
Al&an): It is a particular pleasure
for me to welcome you, Mr. President, the representative of a great country with which the German
Democratic Republic maintains friendly relations, as
President of the Security Council for this month.
I would like to congratulate in you the well-known
champion of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, with whose diplomatic talents we have had
an opportunity to acquaint ourselves since Mexico
became a member of the Council. I am convinced that
in the course of your presidency you will promote the
attainment of gwd rcaults in the work of the Council.

95. Mr. MIYAKAWA
(Japan): On behalf of my
delegation, may I first of all join in the expression of
congratulations to YOU,Mr. President, on yourassumption-of the presidency for the month of June and bf
confidence in your able leadership in the conduct of
this Council’s work in the days 16come.

(IttfcJrprerurifttl~~tt~

%. My delegation also wishes lo join in the expression of deep appreciation of and praise for the devoted
services arid cdntrlbutions made-by Under-Secretary
General Sytenko during his tenure of office. We should
like also to wish him good health and every success
in the future.

91. At the same time, permit me to refer to the work
of the President of the Security Council for the month
of May, the reoresentative of Japan. It is a oarticular
pleasure for nie to recall that, during that iime, the
head of State of the CJerman Democratic Republic
went to his country on an official visit.

97. Lastly, I should like to take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President, and the other speakers who
have addressed kind words to Mr. Nisibori who is,
unfortunately, away from New York temporarily. But
had he been here, I am sure that he would have responded by saying that whatever little he could do was
made possible only by the kind and full co-operation
of all the other members of the Council.

92. On behalf of the delegation of the German Democratic Republic, 1 should like to associate myself with
the compliments of the President and of my colleagues
addressed to Comrade Mikhail Sytenko, who is leaving
his post in the Organization. Comrade Sytenko certainly deserves the highest praise. His great diplomatic
experience has helped us in our work. We are very
grateful to him for his help and we shall always remember the time we spent together here with great
satisfaction. I should like to say that we shall always
remember his wife also, whose life was cut short so
suddenly in New York, We should like to congratulate
tbc country which possesses such extraordinary
diplomats PI Comrade Sytenko, who is devoted to
the Principles of co-operation among States In the
interests of peace and resolving existing problems.
From the bottom of our hearts we in the delegation of
the German Democratic Republic wish Comrade
Sytenko the very best in the future.

98. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpret&n
frotn
Russian):
First of all, Mr. President, I should like to take this
opportunity to convey to you our cordial congratulations on your assumption of the responsible post of
President of the Security Council. We are very pleased
to be able to welcome to this important post the representative of Mexico, a country with which the Soviet
Union has maintained ties of friendship for so many
years. In the course of the recent negotiations in
Moscow between the Minister for Fore&n Affaha
of the Soviet Union and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mexico, both parties expressed their support
for a further expansion and deepening of the traditional
ties of friendship between the two countries. We have
had many opportunities of acquainting ourselves with
your great diplomatic qualities, Mr. President, and we
are sure that your action in the performance of the
important functions of President will promote effective
and fruitful work by the Council.

93. Mr. YANG Hushan (China) (i/tlcrp~c~/olio,r
ji*o/,r Chirtc~sc~l:First of all, on behalf of the Chinese
delegation, I should like warmly to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are sure that
under your competent guidance the work of the Council will yield fruitful results. The Chinese delegation
would like to pledge to you its full co-operation. We
should also like to thank the representative of Japan

99. Permit me also to express our gratitude to your
predecessor, the President of the Security Council
for the month of May, the representative of Japan,
Mr. Nisibori, for his work in conducting the proceedings of the Council.
10

100. In connection with the forthcoming departure
to his homeland of our countryman, the Under-!&retary-General for Political and Security Council
Affairs, Mikhail Dmitrievich Sytenko, the Soviet
delegation would like to associate itself with those
representatives who at today’s meeting have expressed
to him their feelings of gratitude for his skilful and
fruitful work in the Secretariat and for the considerable contribution he has made to ensuring the effectiveness of the work of the Department of Political and
Security Council Affairs.
101. The great diplomatic experience and valuable
offtcial and personal qualities of Mr. Sytenko have
undoubtedly furthered the creation of an atmosphere
of business-like co-operation in relations between
delegations of States members of the Security Council
and among the staff members of the department he
heads, and this is by no means a small factor in the
search for solutions to the controversial and dlfflcult
problems which are being considered by the Council.
102. The Soviet delegation wishes our distinguished
friend Mikhail Dmitrievich Sytenko great success
in his future diplomatic work, which will be aimed at
the strengthening of international peace and cooperation, and we wish him good health, happiness and
well-being.

tunity to thank you sincerely, Mr. President, and
through you all the members of the Security Council,
partlcuiarly those who felt able to say cordial words
about me.
105. We all know very well that everything has its
beginning and its end, and that is why today I must say
goodbye to you because of the end of my service in
the United Nations Secretariat which began three years
ago. During this period I have tried to make my modest
contribution to the cause we all serve, and I have
endeavoured to carry out my duties in the manner
I thought best,
106. In my brief statement, I should like to express
my heartfelt thanks to the Secretary-General for his
friendship and for the most fruitful co-operation and
help he afforded me in performing my duties.
107. Permit me once again to thank you, Mr. Presb
dent, and all members of the Security Council, for your
kind co-operation and understanding and to wish you
all success in achieving the most noble goal of the
United Nations, international peace and security for
all nations.
Tlw tneetittg

rose at 5.55 p.m.

103. The PRESIDENT (imerpretatbn
from
SpatrIs/t): Finally, I call upon Mr. Mikhail Sytenko.

NOTE

104. Mr. SYTENKO (Under-Secretary-General
for
Political and Security Council Affairs): It is a very
rare occasion for the Under-Secretary-General
to
speak at this table, and I should like to use this oppor-

I Trealy of Guarantee (United Nations,
frear~ Series. vol. 382.
No. 547% p. 4): Treaty conccmlng
fhc Eslabllshment
of the Republic of Cyprus (/h/l.. No. 5476. p. IO): and Treaty of Alliance
between the Kingdom of Onece, the Republic
of Turkey and the
Republic of Cyprus (/b/l., vol. 397, No. 5712. p. 269).

.-

HOW TO OBTAIN

UNlW1)

NATIONS

WBLICAllONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained licm bookstores and distributors throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write IO: United Natlons. Sales Section. New York or Oencva.
comm

sE mocum

us

ruBwcmoNs

cm

NATIONS

mfis

lm publieado~
des Nhwn
Unka so111 en wntc dan lm libraMe SI ks r#mcts d@ositaim du
monde emkr. Inhnez~vous
rupds de vowe llbrain ou drmwz-vow
I : Nalions U&s. Section
de¶ vmle& New York w oalh.
MAY

COMO

IlO:lY’4Yth

CONSEGUIR

YSJ#AHIIW

OII’AYU

PUBLICACIONCS

DAlllW

0U’hU1llNYklHl1U

DE LAS NACIONES

HAllWR

UNIDAS

Las publicacioncs
de Ias Naciones Unidas estin en venta en lib&as
y casas dishibuidoras
en
I&S pancj del mundo. Consulre a su librero o dirijasc a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva Yock o Ginebra.

Litho ia Uaited Nations. New York

.-___
Km0

X6-61 I03-June

19884.050
