United Nations

A/RES/55/58

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 104

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/592)]

55/58. Follow-up to the International Year of Older Persons:
Second World Assembly on Ageing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/24 of 10 November 1999, and its resolution 54/262
of 25 May 2000, by which it decided to convene the Second World Assembly on
Ageing, to be held in Spain in April 2002,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2000/1 of 3 May 2000,
as well as Commission for Social Development decision 38/100 of 17 February
2000, 1
Acknowledging the initiatives undertaken and the momentum generated, at all
levels, towards addressing the challenges of the ageing of populations and the
concerns and contributions of older persons by the celebration of the International
Year of Older Persons,
Bearing in mind that, in its resolution 54/262, the General Assembly decided
that the Commission for Social Development would serve as the preparatory
committee for the Second World Assembly on Ageing,
Reiterating that the Second World Assembly on Ageing should give particular
attention, inter alia, to linkages between ageing and development, with particular
attention to the needs, priorities and perspectives of developing countries,
Reaffirming the necessity of ensuring that the Second World Assembly on
Ageing will provide an action-oriented follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons, and recognizing the importance of an adequate preparatory process,
Reaffirming also that the revised plan of action and the long-term strategy on
ageing will contain realistic financial recommendations for implementation,
Recognizing the continuing process of elaboration of the United Nations
research agenda on ageing for the twenty-first century, which is aimed at providing a
background for policy responses to ageing, in particular in developing countries,

1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 6 and corrigendum
(E/2000/26 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. C.

00 56287

A/RES/55/58

1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up to the
International Year of Older Persons; 2
2.
Decides that the Second World Assembly on Ageing shall be held at
Madrid from 8 to 12 April 2002;
3.
Invites Member States, where appropriate, to consider extending the
mandate of national committees or other mechanisms established on the occasion of
the International Year of Older Persons in order to undertake national preparations
for the Second World Assembly on Ageing, and also invites Member States
currently without them to consider appropriate ways or mechanisms for their
preparations for the Second World Assembly;
4.
Notes the encouraging responses of Member States, United Nations
entities and non-governmental organizations to the request by the Secretariat
eliciting their views on the progress in and obstacles to the implementation of the
International Plan of Action on Ageing, 3 as well as on priority issues to be addressed
in a revised plan of action, and encourages those that have not yet responded to
consider doing so;
5.
Invites the regional commissions to explore the feasibility of holding
regional activities with Member States, non-governmental organizations and other
relevant actors of civil society in their region, in preparation for and as follow-up to
the Second World Assembly on Ageing;
6.
Invites the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat to launch,
in cooperation with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
Secretariat and the host country, an information campaign for the Second World
Assembly on Ageing;
7.
Welcomes the establishment by the United Nations programme on ageing
of the Internet-accessible database on policies and programmes on ageing, and
invites Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to collaborate with the Secretariat in updating and maintaining the database through
the provision of timely information;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

2

A/55/167.
See Report of the World Assembly on Ageing, Vienna, 26 July–6 August 1982 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.82.I.16) chap. VI, sect. A.

3

2
