S/PV.8887

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8887

th meeting
Wednesday, 27 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani/Mrs. Toroitich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Asokan
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Khoroshev
Mr. Bynoe
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 17 September 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2021/805)
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2021/881)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-30810 (E)
*2130810*

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

strategic review of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA).

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 17 September 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/805)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2021/881)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa;
and His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/881, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei, and
document S/2021/805, which contains the text of a letter
dated 17 September 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2021/20.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I am pleased to address the Security
Council today on the situation in Abyei and on the
2/21

27/10/2021

In the implementation of its mandate over the past
reporting period, UNISFA successfully continued its
work to protect the people of Abyei through its military
and mine action presence and support to intercommunal
dialogue, women’s participation in political life and the
rule of law. UNISFA’s humanitarian and recovery work
reached more than 103,000 vulnerable people.
It is encouraging that both South Sudan and the
Sudan have now established national committees on
the question of Abyei. The warming of the relations
between the two countries was visible in Abyei when
I was there a month ago; most of the threats to the
community were of a criminal nature, not of a military
one. UNISFA continued to build on that momentum in
its engagement with the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan on all matters of relevance to the Mission.
UNISFA — in close coordination with the Department
of Peace Operations and the Department of Operational
Support at the Secretariat — also spent significant
energy and resources on the complex military and
logistical planning that will be required as UNISFA
transitions from a single-contingent to a multinational
peace operation.
Most of the new challenges during the past period
related to the mandate of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), where
representatives of the local community in Gok Machar
made it difficult, and eventually impossible, for
UNISFA to continue to support the implementation of
the JBVMM mandate to a large extent. I will come back
to this point when discussing the strategic review, and
I appreciated the Security Council’s focus on the issue
during its closed meeting held on 13 October, followed
by a statement in support of UNISFA and the JBVMM
dated 15 October (SC/14666).
Allow me to move on to the strategic review of
UNISFA. At the request of the Council, a Department
of Peace Operations team, jointly with the Office of the
Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa, the Department
of Operational Support and the Department of Safety
and Security, conducted in-person consultations with
stakeholders in the Sudan, South Sudan and Ethiopia
from 18 to 30 June. The recommendations on the way
forward for UNISFA were shared with the Council in a
letter from the Secretary-General dated 17 September.
I will focus today on four main issues.
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8887

First, the strategic review followed the request
from the Security Council for a possible drawdown and
exit strategy for UNISFA as set out in its resolutions
2550 (2020) and 2575 (2021). What guided the team,
first and foremost, was the rapidly changed situation in
the Sudan and South Sudan over the past 10 years, since
UNISFA was established. The improved relationship
between the two Governments has started bearing
fruit in the border areas as well as in Abyei, and the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for the future of
UNISFA build on that new reality.

peacekeepers and their families, for their commitment
to United Nations peacekeeping. Ethiopia’s women and
men have done an outstanding job in Abyei over the
past 10 years, as evidenced by the improved situation
on the ground. I also take this opportunity to express
my deepest condolences to the Government of Ethiopia
and to the family impacted on the loss of one of
Ethiopia’s peacekeepers in Gok Machar, South Sudan,
on 14 September. Of course, we remember all the
Ethiopian peacekeepers who have made the ultimate
sacrifice during these 10 years.

Despite the internal challenges that the Sudan and
South Sudan each face, their bilateral commitment
towards cooperation on outstanding issues remains.
The upbeat political tone on the issue of Abyei that my
strategic review team heard in Khartoum and Juba in
June appears to have remained intact to date. I heard a
similar message of hope for an overall peace in Abyei
during my visit to the region last month.

With respect to the military side of UNISFA, the
strategic review proposes two viable options for the
force. One option would keep overall force numbers
close to what they are currently; the second option
proposes a lightly reduced troop ceiling, a move that
will require more operational adjustments but should
encourage the Sudan and South Sudan to move forward
on outstanding issues with increased urgency. It is
also recommended that the United Nations establish a
rule-of-law support strategy.

Secondly, the review team identified a significant
trust deficit that remains between the communities
in Abyei, particularly the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka,
and noted an important space for United Nations
peacebuilding, humanitarian, recovery and development
assistance. The United Nations continues to prioritize
support for that issue, and it is my hope that the Council
will provide UNISFA with a continued, and somewhat
strengthened, mandate in that particular area, while
slowly but steadily identifying areas where the military
and security side of the mission could start preparing
for an eventual drawdown.
Thirdly, it is too early to know what the impact of
this week’s developments in Khartoum will mean for
UNISFA on a day-to-day basis, but I am hopeful, as I
know that all parties in the Sudan have so far supported
the Mission. I am also grateful for the continued
cooperation of South Sudan in support of UNISFA. In
view of the dynamics on the ground, we urge the parties
to ensure effective support for our efforts to replace
the contingents in the period ahead while preserving
the gains made to date in building trust and providing
security. The success of that process will be absolutely
critical to make sure that UNISFA is able to continue
as a mission and to continue implementing its mandate.
Thus our planning towards a full replacement of
the current military contingent with a multinational
contingent will continue at full speed. I am grateful
to the Government of Ethiopia, and particularly to its

An additional outcome of the strategic review was
the need for the JBVMM to remain as is. It is indeed
regrettable that there have been serious challenges
at three of the JBVMM’s five locations, that is, Kiir
Adem/Safaha (team site 11); War Abar/As Samaya
(team site 12), in the safe demilitarized border zone;
and Gok Machar, in South Sudan. I appreciated the
19 October statement by the Government of South
Sudan in which it reaffirmed its commitment to the
JBVMM and indicated that its work with communities
in the Gok Machar area was ongoing. I hope that this
will mean a swift return of the JBVMM to those three
locations, as a lack of implementation of the Security
Council mandate could jeopardize the overall peace
and security in the border areas, in breach of the statusof-forces agreement between the Government of South
Sudan and UNISFA.
Fourthly, negotiations towards a political
settlement concerning the Abyei area, with the Sudan
and South Sudan in the lead, remain crucial building
blocks towards an exit strategy for UNISFA. As part
of defining a strategic vision for the mission, it is
important that a set of benchmarks be established in
close coordination with the Sudan and South Sudan.
Such benchmarks should contain specific requirements
for the inclusion of women. In addition, they should
be built around the joint mechanisms that the parties

21-308103/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

have already established towards the settlement of the
Abyei issue.
To conclude, I believe that the UNISFA strategic
review has provided important recommendations for
the mission’s further reconfiguration and contains
solid options that will enhance UNISFA’s mandate
implementation in the near future. I look forward to
the Council’s further guidance on this matter and to the
ongoing cooperation with the Governments of South
Sudan and the Sudan in our support for the communities
of Abyei.
Finally, since this will be the last Security Council
meeting for UNISFA’s Force Commander and acting
Head of Mission, Major General Kefyalew Amde
Tessema of Ethiopia, I wish to thank him for his
steadfast leadership of the Mission and for his support as
UNISFA transitions to a United Nations multinational
peace operation.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the progress made in the implementation
of resolution 2046 (2012), which concerns outstanding
bilateral issues between the Sudan and South Sudan and
the situation in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
Since I am addressing the Security Council for the first
time since Kenya’s assumption of the presidency, allow
me to warmly congratulate you on your competent
handling and skilful stewardship of the business of
this body.
Today’s meeting takes place against the backdrop
of multifaceted challenges posing a serious threat to
the stability of several countries in the Horn of Africa
and the region. That situation has been compounded
by the impact of the coronavirus disease which has
exacerbated the already precarious living conditions.
The tragic events unfolding in the Sudan following
the unconstitutional change of Government reflect the
shaky transitions that many countries in the region are
going through. It will therefore be critical to urgently
restore the constitutional order in the Sudan, in line
with the Constitutional Declaration and the Juba
Peace Agreement.
Despite the limitations imposed by the pandemic,
I was able to engage with national authorities of both
4/21

27/10/2021

countries during the review period, in the company of
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix in Khartoum and
Abyei and here in New York, as well as remotely. We
visited Khartoum and Abyei from 6 to 8 September
as part of consultations with the Governments of the
Sudan, South Sudan and Ethiopia on the future status
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). I also discussed bilateral relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan.
While most of what I am reporting on may sound
a bit removed from the current situation in the Sudan,
which could negatively impact bilateral relations, I
sincerely hope that the recent positive trend will not
be derailed. Encouragingly, the Sudan and South Sudan
have been deepening their relations, as epitomized by
several high-level visits and initiatives in support of
each other’s peace processes. They include the start
of peace talks in Juba between the Government of the
Sudan and the Al-Hilu faction of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLM)-North on 26 May, the
launch of South Sudan’s permanent constitution-making
process, as well as efforts to help address the infighting
between rival factions of the SPLM-Army in Opposition
(SPLM/A-IO), which could unravel the peace process in
South Sudan.
Crucially, President Kiir and Prime Minister
Hamdok reached an agreement to resume export and
border trade. In that regard, they agreed to reopen
border crossing points between their two countries.
However, the launch did not materialize, having been
overtaken by the unfolding events in the Sudan.
The two countries agreed on a road map to review
and follow up on implementing all 2012 cooperation
agreements, with timelines established by their
Ministries for Foreign Affairs. In the meantime, they
undertook to remove all barriers to banking transactions
and allow banks to establish branches in both countries.
They also committed to developing a joint oil and gas
strategy at the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
(JPSM) meeting of 8 to 9 September in Juba, although no
reference was made to that in the decisions of the JPSM
meeting. The Sudan and South Sudan further agreed to
enhance cooperation on security and intelligence.
The JPSM called for progress on opening the
border crossing points; requested that the Sudan and
South Sudan ensure the immediate withdrawal of their
forces from the Abyei box, to be completed no later
than 31 December 2021, tasking UNISFA to report
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

monthly in that regard; requested that both countries
engage with the elements of the SPLM/A-IO still in
the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone; and urged the
two countries to resume meetings of the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee (AJOC).
Although both countries favour the resumption
of AJOC meetings, the last of which took place in
2017, they disagree on its agenda and have yet to set
a new meeting date. On the substance, whereas the
Sudan advocates for the joint institutions provided
for in the agreement on the temporary arrangements
for the administration and security of the Abyei Area
of 20 June 2011, South Sudan considers discussion of
joint institutions, especially the Abyei Police Service,
a non-starter, ostensibly over fears that would reinforce
Khartoum’s position on Abyei.
Those disagreements have consistently dogged
AJOC meetings, notably with South Sudan expressing
frustration at the continued presence of the Sudanese
oil police in Diffra and now hinting at the possibility of
deploying forces to Abyei unless the Sudan withdraws
its troops. The Sudan, too, maintains that South
Sudanese armed elements are still present within the
Abyei box. Hopefully, both countries will abide by the
deadline of 31 December 2021, set by the JPSM, to
withdraw all armed forces so that AJOC meetings, when
eventually reconvened, can focus on the Mechanism’s
mandate of political and administrative oversight of
the yet-to-be constituted Abyei Executive Council,
providing guidance for the timely implementation of
various agreements and facilitating the establishment
and sustainability of a secure and stable environment
in Abyei. The long-standing deadlock has hindered any
progress in Abyei and has left the Area with a poorly
defined status, which has continued to stoke instability.
On a positive note, each country has established a
high-level committee on Abyei. The two committees
are separately reviewing all past agreements on Abyei
in view of negotiations facilitated by a third party that
would lead to the settlement of the final status of Abyei,
an issue to which President Mbeki and his team have
dedicated intensive efforts.
To address the 2012 cooperation agreements
comprehensively, the two countries met in Juba on
21 October in the first joint meeting of the JPSM and
the Joint Border Commission, convened by the African
Union Border Programme and opened by South Sudan’s
First Vice-President, Riek Machar. Mr. Machar urged

S/PV. 8887

the parties to expedite the implementation of the
cooperation agreements. The next joint meeting is
planned for the second week of January 2022.
With regard to the recent concerning developments
in Gok Machar, Kir Adem/Safaha and War Abar/
Sumayah, which threaten the security and safety of
UNISFA/Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM) personnel and led to the
regrettable loss of life of one peacekeeper, I reminded
the South Sudanese authorities of their obligations
under resolutions 2518 (2020) and 2575 (2021) and the
status of forces agreement. In that regard, I welcome
the Government’s 19 October statement, in which it
reiterated its commitment to the JBVMM and expressed
its unequivocal support for UNISFA.
On 3 October, South Sudan issued a statement
to mark the first anniversary of the Juba Peace
Agreement between the Government of the Sudan and
the Sudanese armed movements. While commending
the progress made by the Sudanese parties in partially
forming national and state Governments, the South
Sudan Mediation Committee called for the redoubling
of efforts to garner political will for the agreement’s
implementation. It also expressed concern about
disagreements among Sudanese political forces within
the transitional Government and encouraged them to
resolve those differences through dialogue.
As concerns the resolution of the conflict in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states, I note with regret that
efforts by the South Sudan Mediation Committee have
not yet succeeded in bringing the Government of the
Sudan and the Al-Hilu SPLM-North faction back to the
negotiating table ever since talks between them were
suspended for two weeks, on 15 June, in order to allow
the parties time to consult their constituencies on the
outstanding issues.
The parties had agreed on most of the issues,
but they still disagreed on two key demands of the
SPLM-North: first, the adoption of a secular State in
the Sudan and, secondly, the disbanding of the Rapid
Support Forces within the framework of the security
arrangements. Nevertheless, it is heartening that
both parties reiterated their commitment to the peace
process and hoped to agree on the outstanding issues
during the next round of talks. I also note, regrettably,
that even though Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, of the Darfurbased Sudan Liberation Movement/Army, was present
in Juba on 26 May, he once again resisted President

21-308105/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

27/10/2021

Kiir’s attempts to include his Movement in the Sudan
peace process.

are mended. If I pull away, the country will
break apart”.

Despite lingering disagreements between the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan on a number
of outstanding matters, including over the final status
of Abyei, the intensification of high-level contacts
between the two countries and the complementarity
of their mediation efforts in resolving their respective
internal conflicts augur well for their long-term peaceful
co-existence. It is crucial for both countries to preserve
and build on the progress achieved so far and resolve
the conflict in the Blue Nile and South Kordofan states.
As they do so, the international community, in turn,
should redouble efforts in enabling them to achieve
their noble goals.

I hope that the Council will bear in mind that particular
statement, which is a recurring theme as to the place of
Abyei with regard to both the Sudan, in the north, and
South Sudan.

Given the increasingly tense regional environment,
I hope that the current developments in the Sudan will
not reverse the commendable achievements already
made. My Office will continue to engage with the
authorities of both countries and, as appropriate, with
key regional actors, including the African Union,
especially the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel and the leadership of President Mbeki, as well
as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
to encourage parties to defuse tensions, advance the
implementation of all cooperation agreements and
consolidate their improved bilateral relations.
The President: I thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mbeki.
Mr. Mbeki: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to address the Security Council. I have been told that
I should speak on the final status of Abyei. Let me go
into some detail concerning its history.
The Council will recall that the Sudan won its
independence in 1956 and that, even five years prior to
that, in 1951, the colonial Administration had addressed
the issue of where Abyei should be positioned with
regard to boundary between what would then have been
South Sudan and North Sudan. At that time, Paramount
Chief Deng Majok thought that it would be better that
Abyei be left as part of Kordofan province, which was
then in North Sudan.
He is quoted as having said,
“I am now the thread of the Arabs and the south.
I am a thread like the threat with which clothes
6/21

The civil war between the north and the south broke
out in 1955 and ended in 1972 with an agreement signed
in Addis Ababa. That agreement discussed the matter
of Abyei and basically stated that the people of Abyei
must be given the opportunity to decide where Abyei
belonged — in the north or the south. The agreement was
more or less a referendum among the people of Abyei to
discuss that matter, effectively meaning the inclusion of
the area covering Abyei’s nine Ngok Dinka chiefdoms.
The 1972 agreement was never implemented.
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2005
includes the Protocol on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Abyei Area, which repeats what was stated in
the 1972 agreement — that there must be a referendum
among the people of Abyei to decide where it belongs.
The Abyei Protocol echoed the sentiment, which,
as I mentioned earlier and as originally expressed
by Paramount Chief Deng Majok, Abyei is a bridge
between the north and the south, linking the people of
the Sudan. The Protocol provided the possibility of a
referendum, which did not take place. I believe that,
in that context, we must bear in mind that both the
Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya believe that they have a
historical right to claim Abyei as their territory.
As the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, we had to present a proposal to the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan as to how they might
resolve the unresolved matter of the final status of
Abyei, which was raised in 1951, 1972 and 2005. We
did indeed prepare a proposal, which we presented in
2012. Prior to that, however, in 2011, we presented the
parties with an agreement on temporary arrangements
for the administration and security of the Abyei Area,
which provided for the establishment of various
institutions to manage the Area pending its final status.
I must say that those temporary agreements have not
been implemented.
In the end, the two Governments asked whether
the Panel could assist them by making a proposal with
regard to the matter of the final status, which we did.
The result was that the Government of South Sudan
accepted the proposal, but the Government of the Sudan
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

rejected it. The African Union Peace and Security
Council accepted the proposal, while the Security
Council gave its backing. However, is has never been
implemented. The matter is now back before us: what
should be done with regard to the matter of the final
status of Abyei?
As to what we are doing, we have to go back to the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to discuss
the matter. We must say to them that they both signed
a commitment concerning the Abyei Protocol, which
is included in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
of 2005. That Agreement states that there must be a
referendum in Abyei and that the Ngok Dinka and other
Sudanese residents of Abyei will be allowed to vote.
That is the agreement. The challenge they face is how
to do it and what is to be done, in practice, to make sure
that they meet the commitment they made, as reflected
in the Abyei Protocol of 2005. That is what our proposal
therefore tries to do.
Nonetheless, the matter has not been agreed
upon. Therefore, we have to go back to those two
Governments and go through with them the draft
agreement proposal, as it is the only document on the
table. It is a comprehensive proposal on the steps that
might be taken in order to determine the final status
of Abyei. Each Government must go through the
document to determine the elements on which they
agree and disagree. In instances where they disagree,
what are the elements that can be replaced?
We decided that, before we engage the Governments,
which we will do, we should also get the opinions of
other stakeholders. For during the whole course of
interactions on the matter of Abyei, it was obvious that
there are several individuals from the two communities,
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka, who stood out as people
who are particularly interested in resolving the matter.
We thought that we should engage those people first
and then, having listened to their views, proceed to
engage the Governments, in a sense empowered by the
views of people from the communities as to what they
think should happen.
The purpose of the special status of Abyei is to
ensure peaceful coexistence and friendly cooperation
between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities
of the Area. There is also the matter of the soft borders
between Abyei and surrounding areas, such as South
Kordofan. There is also the issue of pastoralist rights.
The Misseriya are pastoralists and must graze their

S/PV. 8887

cattle. They pass through Abyei, even further into
South Sudan, in search of pasture and water. Whatever
happens to Abyei, the rights of those pastoralists need
to be guaranteed.
There are matters pertaining to revenue-sharing
and the economic development of the Abyei Area. The
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee has been mentioned.
It continues to exist but needs to convene. It will
continue to exist.
There is also the matter of the referendum, which
is a bit tricky. A difficult issue in that regard has to
do with who the voters should be — who would be
eligible to vote in the referendum? The Abyei Protocol
cites members of the Ngok Dinka community and other
Sudanese residing in the Abyei Area. The African
Union High-level Implementation Panel added that the
criterion for qualifying to vote shall be a permanent
abode within the Abyei Area — that is, other Sudanese
residing in the Abyei Area and, of course, members of
the Ngok Dinka should have a permanent residence in
the Abyei Area.
That matter is very central to the differences
between the two Governments, even with regard to
temporary arrangements. For instance, the temporary
arrangements provided for an Abyei council — a type
of legislature. How do we compose that legislature?
There will be various views on the issue. With regard
to the matter of the referendum, who are the residents
of Abyei? The issue of those eligible to vote in the
referendum is a very thorny matter. I am referring to
the various paragraphs in that proposal to indicate the
scale of the consultations that must take place between
ourselves and stakeholders, and with the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan.
We are in the process of consultations of that
kind. At some point in the past, we had thought
that we would have completed that process by
September — last month — but that proved impossible.
We have to continue that process and find a way to
forge some consensus between the two Governments.
I hope that the consensus between the Governments
will be consonant with the views of the Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya communities so that the agreement made
would guarantee the stability of Abyei. Our next step
will be to engage the two Governments in detail.
In the meantime, it is important that the Security
Council mandate the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA), or a similar force, to

21-308107/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

continue. As Mr. Lacroix said, UNISFA has played an
extremely important role in maintaining stability. As
members can see, there is a great deal of sensitivity
about the matter in both South Sudan and the Sudan.
Therefore, we would like to avoid, at all costs, a situation
where tensions surrounding the matter increase to the
extent that there is a conflict between the two countries.
Therefore, the continuation of UNISFA becomes
very important.
I would like to assure you, Mr. President, and the
Security Council that the Panel is determined to do that
detailed work so that we again produce some consensus
among the parties so that they implement what they
agreed under the Abyei Protocol.
The President: I thank Mr. Mbeki for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Horn of Africa and Chairperson of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, Mr. Mbeki,
for their comprehensive briefings today. What we heard
today from each of them will inform us as we consider
modifications to the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) before it
expires on 15 November.

27/10/2021

Let me also take a moment to express the United
States deepest condolences for the loss of life of a
UNISFA peacekeeper from Ethiopia on 14 September.
As the Council affirmed through its press statement
on 15 October (SC/14666), the safety and security of
its peacekeepers is of the highest importance. It is
unacceptable that a United Nations peacekeeper lost
his life following the denial of flight clearances for
urgent medical care. It is also, frankly, unconscionable
that individuals in Gok Machar blocked food, water
and medical supplies from reaching United Nations
peacekeepers stationed in the area.
We call on the Government of South Sudan to
urgently re-admit supplies to allow United Nations
peacekeepers to fulfil the Council’s mandated tasks
and to immediately take steps to de-escalate tensions,
prevent violent attacks against UNISFA personnel and
ensure the safety of United Nations personnel. We call
on the Governments of both the Sudan and South Sudan
to authorize all landing clearance requests that are
related to medical and casualty evacuations.
The United States is also increasingly alarmed
by attempts by the community in Gok Machar to
force UNISFA and the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) from its Sector
1 headquarters. The lack of political will from the
Government of South Sudan to intervene and engage
with those local actors resulted in UNISFA’s relocation
and the closure, as we heard, of team sites 11 and 12.

Let me begin by reaffirming the support of the
United States for UNISFA, particularly as the mission
undertakes to fulfil its mandated tasks, in spite of
many constraints. We want to thank all UNISFA
personnel, both uniformed and civilian, for their
dedicated efforts to bring peace, security and stability
to the region.

That severely undercuts the mission’s ability to
carry out its mandate, as well as the operation of the
JBVMM. We strongly urge the Government of South
Sudan to take immediate action to re-operationalize
the JBVMM, facilitate the redeployment of UNISFA
personnel to Gok Machar and take actions to facilitate
the mandates of UNSIFA and the JBVMM.

As I mentioned earlier, I cannot ignore the fact
that the renewal of UNISFA’s mandate is happening,
as we have heard, against a backdrop of alarming
developments in the Sudan, which the Security
Council discussed yesterday in consultations. The
United States has condemned the military takeover
of the transitional Government in the Sudan. That
contravenes the Constitutional Declaration and the
democratic aspirations of the Sudanese people and is
utterly unacceptable. As we have repeatedly stated,
any changes by force to the transitional Government in
Khartoum puts United States assistance at risk.

The United States is pleased to see the many security
measures that have been undertaken by UNISFA to
reduce the threats to civilians. Those have included
establishing checkpoints along the main supply route,
conducting search and seizure operations, long-range
patrols and routine aerial patrols, as well as developing
an early-warning system to respond swiftly to violence.
We certainly encourage the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan to support the mission in those efforts.

8/21

We also call for greater support in strengthening
the role of the United Nations police to address the
increase in criminality and armed elements. United
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Nations police exercises an important role through
engagement with the local communities in Abyei
through interactive patrols and community awareness
campaigns that are related to crime, safety and genderbased violence.
It is important for the authorities to address
the growing threat of crime in Abyei and prevent
increasing insecurity. They can do so by facilitating
the deployment of UNISFA’s formed police units. We
call on the Government of the Sudan to swiftly issue
visas for the remaining United Nations police and
other personnel.
I also want to commend UNISFA for its work to
improve living conditions in the communities that
are gravely impacted by a lack of access to water,
sanitation, basic public health, food and Government
services. UNISFA’s efforts to facilitate conditions
for several humanitarian organizations has helped to
provide life-saving assistance to more than 100,000
vulnerable people. Meanwhile, women’s participation
is gradually increasing in political spaces in Abyei
thanks to UNISFA’s efforts.
Let me end by saying that the United States
remains committed to cooperating closely with the
Governments and the people of the region, our fellow
Council members and all stakeholders to deepen the
prospects for peace, security and prosperity in the
Sudan and South Sudan.
Mr. Cherif (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
I thank the former President of South Africa and
Chair of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki; the UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix; and the Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for their comprehensive
briefings. I also welcome the representatives of the
Sudan and South Sudan to this meeting.
The A3+1 would like to begin by paying tribute
to the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) peacekeeper who lost his life
on 14 September in Gok Machar pending medical
evacuation. That tragic loss highlights not only the
often non-permissive environment within which
UNISFA operates, but also the continued relevance of

S/PV. 8887

its mandate, including its support for the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM),
in ensuring stability in the Abyei Area and along the
Sudan-South Sudan border.
The African Union, along with its High-level
Implementation Panel, remains engaged with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan as they
further their political and economic ties in order to
promote a lasting resolution of the final status of
Abyei and put the region and its people resolutely on a
trajectory towards comprehensive peace and sustainable
development. In that connection, we commend the
Sudan and South Sudan for their willingness to inject
fresh impetus into the Abyei peace process through
the recent appointment of their respective national
committees on the final status of Abyei.
The increasing rapprochement between the Sudan
and South Sudan, while commendable, has yet to be
matched with perennial stability in the Abyei Area
and along the border. The A3+1 reiterates its concern
at the growing communal tensions registered during
the reporting period, which culminated with the forced
relocation of UNISFA personnel and equipment from
JBVMM team site 11 in Kiir Adem and team site
12 in War Abar and, subsequently, from JBVMM
Sector 1 headquarters in Gok Machar, amid threats to
peacekeepers’ lives and United Nations property.
We stress the critical importance of UNISFA and its
component in support of the JBVMM being able to fully
perform their security and protection tasks, unimpeded
and undeterred, while safeguarding their safety, wellbeing and freedom of movement, particularly in line with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Furthermore,
we recall the outcome document of the meeting of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism held on 8 and
9 September in Juba on the issue. In that respect, we
urge for consistent efforts by the Government of South
Sudan in sensitizing and engaging local governments
and communities towards restraint, a return to calm and
respect for the mandates of UNISFA and the JBVMM
in their areas of responsibility.
We further call on the Sudan and South Sudan
to convene future meetings of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism to iron out difficulties and facilitate
the mandate of the JBVMM and its redeployment,
where appropriate, as well as to foster conditions that
enable progress on the border demarcation process.

21-308109/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I now turn to the developments in Abyei, as set
out in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/881),
alongside additional aspects regarding UNISFA’s
mandate going forward, pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Despite the persistent tensions along communal
lines, also owing to economic mobility and livelihood
motives, the A3+1 commends the encouraging
prospects for peace, peacebuilding and trust-building
processes that are especially sensitive to the Abyei
local, traditional and intercommunal realities.
In that connection, we express our appreciation for
the steady engagement of the United Nations vis-à-vis
local and traditional leaders and key communities,
which enabled a consultative process to commence this
month with a view to reaching a joint peace agreement
in the near future.
We also appreciate UNISFA’s efforts aimed at
advocating and empowering women’s participation
in the civic space, which is critical to promoting
inclusive and lasting peace, local governance and
decision-making, as well as gender issues.
On the humanitarian front, we note that significant
challenges, compounded by the coronavirus disease
pandemic and economic stress, continue to impact the
daily lives of populations in the Area, particularly the
most vulnerable, especially with respect to access to
basic needs and services.
We stress the importance of enhancing humanitarian
assistance, as well as recovery and resilience
programmes, for people and communities throughout
the Area, and tailoring interventions in accordance
with an approach based on needs, vulnerabilities and
the promotion of livelihoods.

27/10/2021

Furthermore, we stress the importance of organizing
and appropriately endowing UNISFA’s capacity,
particularly as it relates to law-and-order tasks, in the
light of the growing populations and economic activity
in the main areas. It is of equal necessity that UNISFA
can rely on a reasonably stable environment on the way
towards its redesign in the coming period.
Finally, on the way forward for the United Nations
presence in Abyei and UNISFA’s strategic review, the
A3+1 would like to endorse the recommendation of
the Secretary-General in his report on the extension of
UNISFA’s mandate and its support to the JBVMM for a
further period of six months.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, the Special Envoy
and former President Mbeki for their insightful briefings.
I would also like to welcome the representatives of the
Sudan and South Sudan here with us today.
Ireland had been encouraged by the continued
improvement in relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan. However, we are deeply concerned about the
developments in the Sudan and condemn the military
coup, which endangers the transition in the Sudan and,
indeed, the progress made in the wider Horn of Africa
region. The civilian leaders who have been detained
must be released immediately and the democratic
transitional institutions and framework fully restored.
The actions of the military represent a betrayal
of the revolution, the transition and the legitimate
requests of the Sudanese people for peace, justice and
economic development.
Sustaining the rapprochement between the Sudan
and South Sudan is crucial to sustainable peace for the
people of Abyei. We urge the Sudan and South Sudan to
find a peaceful and lasting solution to the final status of
Abyei and the demarcation of the border.

Finally, revitalizing joint implementation mechanisms
in Abyei remains a mutually agreed task that has yet
to be fully materialized. We emphasize that progress
in the establishment of joint governance institutions,
including police, and the courts would have a direct
and positive impact on the reigning of the rule of law
in the Area.

Despite the troubling reports of intercommunal
violence, we are encouraged by the commitment of
the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities to peace.
Young people in Abyei face many challenges and their
inclusion at all levels in the peace process is critical.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in that regard.

In that regard, we look forward to the re-energizing
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee meetings
and to the support of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel to that end.

We are also heartened to read of UNISFA’s
engagement with civil society organizations on gender
issues and of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief’s pledge
to further the participation of women in traditional

10/21

21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

leadership structures and to address the issues of
early marriage and gender-based violence. Yet we
know that major obstacles to women’s participation in
decision-making and political processes remain, with
just a single woman now serving as a minister in the
Juba-appointed administration in Abyei. We reaffirm
the need for all parties to recognize the invaluable and
critical contributions that women make and to ensure
their full and unfettered participation.
As we discussed just last week, we are concerned
by the deterioration of the security environment in Gok
Machar and at United Nations team sites, including
threats to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Sadly, unacceptable breaches of the status-offorces agreement resulted in the death of an Ethiopian
peacekeeper on 14 September after the refusal of medical
evacuation. We express our deepest condolences to
the family of the deceased and to the Government of
Ethiopia. In that regard, we urge the Government of
South Sudan to honour its obligations under the statusof-forces agreement with UNISFA.
We encourage the Government of South Sudan to
intensify its mediation efforts with members of the
local community in Gok Machar, engage constructively
with UNISFA and facilitate the urgent redeployment
of UNISFA personnel to team sites 11 and 12. I also
encourage UNISFA to address community concerns in
a timely and transparent manner.
We also call on the Sudan to facilitate implementation
of the mandate. As we have done before, Ireland echoes the
calls of the Secretary-General for the operationalization
of the Athony airstrip, the issuance of visas for United
Nations Police personnel and the deployment of human
rights expertise to UNISFA.

S/PV. 8887

by the stakeholders involved and actively supported by
the African Union and its High-level Implementation
Panel for the Sudan, will be crucial for sustainable
peace. We commend UNISFA for the important work
that it is doing in extremely challenging circumstances,
and we look forward to constructively engaging on the
upcoming mandate renewal.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I join others in thanking
the briefers for their insightful presentations. I also
welcome the presence of the representatives of the
Sudan and South Sudan at today’s discussion.
Hearing a description of the previous lack of
implementation of different agreements today has
been insightful. As highlighted by the Special Envoy,
the most recent disruption to implementation was only
two days ago. Estonia strongly condemns the military
coup of 25 October in the Sudan. It is a great setback
for the Sudanese people, who have worked so hard
towards democratic transition, but it also has potential
destabilizing effects on the wider region. We call on the
Sudan’s military authorities to refrain from violence
and immediately return to the road map for transition to
civilian rule, as laid out in the Constitutional Document
and the Juba Peace Agreement.
We are concerned about the serious deterioration of
the operating conditions of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and strongly
condemn the recent attacks on UNISFA in Gok Machar
and the team sites. The situation has already claimed
too high of a toll with the death of one peacekeeper.
We offer our sincere condolences to the family of the
deceased. Such incidents must not happen again.

The security situation in Abyei remains tense
and unpredictable. We sincerely thank Ethiopia for its
crucial contribution over many years to the UNISFA
peacekeeping mission. Any shift in the make-up of
the UNISFA force requires careful planning and
sequencing to ensure a smooth rotation.

We call on the Government of South Sudan to
facilitate the unimpeded implementation of UNISFA’s
mandate. At the same time, we also call on UNISFA
to address the concerns of local communities.
Simultaneously, we continue to call for the
operationalization of Anthony airstrip and the timely
issuance of visas for UNISFA personnel, including the
police component, which is crucial for the effective
implementation of UNISFA’s mandate.

Lastly, Ireland welcomes the recent strategic
review of UNISFA, which included recommendations
for the potential reconfiguration of the mission and a
viable exit strategy. We also take careful note of the
options presented in the strategic review, and we thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his additional
insights today. It is clear that a political process, led

Estonia is concerned about the continued cycle of
intercommunal violence and its negative impact on
civilians. The increase in cases of sexual violence over
recent months is alarming. We encourage authorities
to join efforts for more accountability to deter further
violations. To better address these issues, we echo
the Secretary-General’s call for the inclusion of

21-3081011/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

human rights expertise in the mission. Additionally,
in order create an environment more conducive for
the rule of law, Estonia fully supports the integrated
approach to the protection of civilians promoted by the
strategic review. On this note, we thank the SecretaryGeneral for the strategic review, and we are giving it
careful consideration.
Lastly, we call on the Sudan and South Sudan to
take steps to build a viable political process to resolve
the final status of Abyei. This political process could
be aided by strengthening the civilian component of
the UNISFA mission, including by the appointment of
a civilian deputy head of mission. We also encourage
regional actors to actively engage the parties on
the Abyei question, as their support could make a
significant contribution.
My statement today is probably the last time
that Estonia will speak on the question of Abyei as a
member of the Security Council. I would like to thank
United Nations peacekeepers for their long-standing
commitment and sacrifice in support of peace in Abyei.
I would also like to emphasize that Abyei people deserve
better than the current status quo. We therefore call on
the parties to capitalize on their improved relationship
to push for progress on the question of Abyei, and on the
Council to take decisions that are in the best interests of
the people of Abyei.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga
and President Mbeki for their briefings and welcomes
the representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan to
today’s meeting.
For some time now, the relationship between the
Sudan and South Sudan has continued to improve. The
two countries continue to maintain communication on
the Abyei issue and hold meetings on the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism, which China welcomes.
We encourage both parties to continue to adhere to
the political settlement and actively implement the
agreements reached, stay committed to resolving
outstanding issues, maintain peace and stability in the
Abyei Area, and continue to promote the settlement of
the final status of the Abyei Area. China continues to
support the African Union (AU) and the AU High-level
Implementation Panel in their mediation roles.
Communal conflicts remain the main problem
for the security of the Abyei Area. China supports
12/21

27/10/2021

the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) in effectively protecting civilians in line
with its mandate. At the same time, law enforcement
alone cannot completely resolve communal conflicts.
Only by continuously improving the relationship
between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya can the longterm stability in the Area be achieved. China welcomes
the new dialogue between the two communities and
encourages them to continue to resolve their differences
through negotiation to achieve peaceful coexistence.
China calls on UNISFA and the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan to play a constructive role in
this regard.
UNISFA performs its duties diligently despite
difficulties and has played an important role in
maintaining peace and stability in the Abyei Area.
China supports in principle the extension of UNISFA’s
mandate. A Chinese helicopter unit has been
deployed to UNISFA and will contribute to UNISFA’s
enhanced capabilities.
We are concerned about the recent death of a
UNISFA peacekeeper owing to the lack of timely
treatment. As a major troop-contributing country to
peacekeeping operations, China has always maintained
that the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) be
effectively implemented for the safety of mission
personnel, freedom of movement and unhindered access
for supplies. This unfortunate incident once again
shows the importance of gaining the understanding
and support of the local people. China hopes that the
Secretariat, the authorities of the countries concerned
and UNISFA will strengthen communication and
coordination and properly address the issues in
implementation of the SOFA.
Just now, some Council members mentioned
the recent developments in Khartoum, as China
did yesterday during Council consultations. China
sincerely hopes that all parties of the Sudan will act
in the interests of the nation and its people and carry
out dialogue and consultation to address differences
appropriately, maintain political and social stability,
and continue to promote an orderly political transition
within the framework of Constitutional Document and
the Juba Peace Agreement. I believe that the Sudanese
people have the wisdom and capability to resolve their
domestic affairs.
Mr. Asokan (India): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and the Special Envoy for the Horn
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8887

of Africa for their briefings. I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel to today’s meeting
and thank him for his briefing. I also welcome the
representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan to this
meeting.

in a commendable manner despite the operational
challenges. We also welcome the innovative
technological initiatives to improve the mission’s
performance. For the mission’s sustenance and ability
to fulfil its mandate, every effort needs to be made for
better coordination with the host Governments.

Let me begin by conveying our sincere condolences
to the family of the peacekeeper from Ethiopia who lost
his life on 14 September while serving in the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in
the Gok Machar area. The safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers needs to be accorded the highest
priority. We also express our concern over the recent
developments in Gok Machar area, including actions
that threaten the safety and security of peacekeepers.

With regard to operational issues concerning
the mission, we call on both the Sudanese and South
Sudanese authorities to facilitate early resolution of
long-standing pending issues, such as visas for police
personnel, an agreement on the appointment of a
civilian deputy head of mission and operationalization
of the Anthony airstrip. We once again underscore
the importance of adhering to the status-of-forces
agreement by the South Sudanese authorities.

We welcome the continued rapprochement in
recent months between the parties towards peace and
trust-building, including the convening of joint bodies
related to the management of the border and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. The African Union
has also continued its mediation efforts and offered
support to parties to resume the meeting of the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee, which has not taken place
since 2017. Peaceful resolution of the final status of
Abyei in conformity with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 2011 remains fundamental to lasting
peace, stability and development in the region.

We have taken note of the lack of consensus in
the report of the Secretary-General on the drawdown
of UNISFA (S/2021/881) after intensive regional
consultations with the Sudan, South Sudan and Ethiopia.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s assessment
that, in view of a pending consensus on that sensitive
issue among the three countries, a final decision should
be deferred for the time being.

However, the ongoing developments of concern in
the Sudan can have an impact on the implementation of
UNISFA’s mandate. While the overall security situation
has remained calm, the continuing violent incidents
involving the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities
are a matter of concern. In this regard, we commend
UNISFA’s efforts in holding meetings between the two
communities. We need to be cognizant of the fact that
these welcome developments have taken place amid
the prevailing challenges presented by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). We need to encourage both sides
to continue their efforts in the coming months. These
efforts need to focus on the early convening of the Abyei
Oversight Committee and on promoting intercommunal
dialogue, which are essential to the peace process in
Abyei. The humanitarian situation in the Abyei Area
also remains challenging, particularly in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. We appreciate the efforts of
UNISFA and humanitarian agencies.
UNISFA has carried out tasks related to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism

In conclusion, let me highlight that India has longstanding and friendly relations with both the Sudan and
South Sudan. We have contributed to the development
of both countries by means of bilateral assistance and
projects in various sectors, such as energy, transport
and agriculture. Our capacity-building, training and
scholarship programmes have been deeply appreciated
by both countries. India’s Minister of State for External
Affairs, Shri Muraleedharan, paid an official visit to
Khartoum and Juba last week and held meetings with
the political leadership to further strengthen India’s
relationship with both countries.
As a long-standing partner, India will continue to
support Juba and Khartoum on their journey towards
peace and development.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank UnderSecretary-General
Lacroix,
His
Excellency
Mr. Mbeki and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for
their insightful briefings.
We feel that it is appropriate to state again, as
others have done in this meeting, that we are deeply
alarmed by the current situation in the Sudan, where
the gains made in the transition are now at serious
risk. We condemn the ongoing military coup and we

21-3081013/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

call for the immediately release of all those who have
been detained.
Norway also remains deeply concerned about
the relocation of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) from Gok Machar, as well
as the violation of the status-of-forces agreement in
connection with the serious incidents in September. We
acknowledge the press statement issued by the South
Sudanese Minister for Foreign Affairs of 19 October
and encourage South Sudan to urgently engage with the
local communities in Gok Machar to address and resolve
misunderstandings about the role of UNISFA and the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
Let me add three points to today’s discussion on
UNISFA and the situation in Abyei.
First, Abyei is a contested area with a troubled past.
There is no doubt that UNISFA plays an invaluable
role in providing security and stability, including in its
ongoing efforts in building dialogue and trust between
the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities ahead of
the joint peace conference to be held later this month.
We strongly encourage the continued engagement of
UNISFA in supporting women-led peace initiatives
as they form an integral part of the grassroots
peace process.
Secondly, we welcome the continued strengthening
of relations between the Sudan and South Sudan. A
long-term and sustainable solution to the status of
Abyei cannot be found without the political will and
courage of the parties. The leaders of the Sudan and
South Sudan should seize the opportunity of their close
and friendly relations to craft an agreement on the final
status of Abyei, and any a sustainable solution must also
take into the account the views of the local populations.
Thirdly, until the parties agree on all pending
issues, UNISFA, with its strong and clear mandate, is
still needed. The implementation of joint mechanisms,
as stipulated in the June 2011 agreement, remains
important. That will strengthen cooperation and build
trust between the communities on the ground.
We welcome the recent meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism and urge the parties
to resume meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee. Another significant step would be for
South Sudan to nominate personnel to the joint police
service. The protection of civilians and the rule of
law are the bases for peaceful development. It is also
14/21

27/10/2021

critical that outstanding visas for the formed police
units of UNISFA be issued, that the Athony airstrip be
operationalized and that the deployment of a civilian
deputy head of mission be approved.
We note the Secretary-General’s proposal for a
reconfiguration of UNISFA. While we agree that lately
there has been a realistic opening for joint approaches
and a political solution, we believe that it is too early
to introduce significant changes to the current force
deployment and posture.
In conclusion, Norway strongly supports the
renewal of UNISFA’s mandate. We urge the parties
to implement the joint mechanisms and we call on
the leaders of the Sudan and South Sudan to redouble
their efforts towards an agreement on the final status
of Abyei.
Mr. Khoroshev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank today’s briefers — UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Special Envoy
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga and the Chairperson of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
Thabo Mbeki — for their comprehensive briefings.
We are pleased to note that, according to the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/881),
the situation in Abyei remains generally stable. At
the same time, it is worrisome that threats to security
persist, especially for civilians, from armed groups and
intercommunal clashes.
In order to make progress towards an inter-Sudanese
settlement that results in a determination of the final
status of Abyei, the parties must pool their efforts. In
that connection, we welcome the resumption of contact
among representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan
at various levels and the willingness demonstrated by
the parties to establish mutually beneficial cooperation.
We note the dialogue between the parties on opening
border crossings and establishing free-trade zones along
the border. The Joint Political and Security Mechanism
met for the first time in almost a year. That represents
progress, albeit modest, towards reaching the so-called
benchmarks. Efforts aimed at their implementation must
continue. We hope that the dialogue that has begun will
become more regular, which would help in reaching
agreement on defining the final status of Abyei.
Progress on the political track will help to improve the
difficult humanitarian situation of the people.
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8887

Mr. Thabo Mbeki delivered a very inspiring
briefing today. We trust that the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel will continue engaging
meaningfully with the Sudanese sides.

First, we reiterate our call for the Sudan and South
Sudan to resolve the issue through peaceful means in
a timely manner, in accordance with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.

We attach great importance to the activities of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) in establishing constructive relations among
communities on the ground and promoting national
reconciliation. We believe that the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) is
the linchpin for preventing incidents among the parties
and UNISFA support for the JBVMM is crucial to the
security architecture.

While it is encouraging that the two countries
have resumed dialogue and engagement on this matter,
practical actions and progress on the ground have
remained very limited. Further concrete progress must
be made with regard to the benchmarks of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM).

In that regard, we are concerned by information
about the situation of UNISFA peacekeepers in Gok
Machar. We trust that the Blue Helmets will soon
return to their positions. We note the importance of
respecting the status-of-forces agreement. At the same
time, we believe it important to determine the causes of
the tension and to work with the parties to avoid similar
incidents in the future.
In view of the imminent extension of the UNISFA
mandate, we note the importance of the presence of Blue
Helmets in Abyei at this stage. However, we believe that
it is important to consider the Secretariat’s proposals on
the configuration of the mission, including its national
composition, in a manner that takes into account the
views of Khartoum and Juba.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Special Envoy Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga and His Excellency Mr. Thabo
Mbeki for their insightful briefings. I welcome the
participation of the representatives of the Sudan and
South Sudan.
Since the beginning of 2021, the bilateral relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan have continued
to improve. However, such positive rapprochement
between the Sudan and South Sudan has yet to bear
fruit in Abyei. Furthermore, the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) has been facing
new challenges in the implementation of its mandate in
recent months. The current developments in the Sudan
do not inspire optimism with regard to the prospects of
the issue.
In that regard, I wish to emphasize the following
four points.

In addition, we encourage further efforts on the
part of UNISFA in promoting confidence among the
relevant parties as well as among the various tribes and
communities in Abyei.
Secondly, it is equally important to ensure stability
and security in Abyei. The continued incidents related
to intercommunal violence, crime and the presence of
armed groups remain sources of concern.
We share the concerns of fellow Council members
about the situation of UNISFA’s team sites, particularly
in Gok Machar. We express our deepest condolences
to the Government of Ethiopia and to the family of
the peacekeeper who passed away on 14 September.
In that regard, it is imperative that the status-of-forces
agreement with UNISFA be fully respected.
We urge all relevant sides, including the Sudan
and South Sudan, to effectively ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and to create
favourable conditions for UNISFA to carry out its
mandate effectively, including activities relating to
preparations for adjustment.
We also call on both the Sudan and South Sudan
to continue to support the appointment of a civilian
Deputy Head of Mission and the establishment of joint
security institutions, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Thirdly, strengthened efforts are needed to address
the increasing humanitarian challenges in Abyei due
to the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
natural disasters. We call on the two Governments to
continue ensuring unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance in the area and creating favourable conditions
for the people living in Abyei.
We also commend the efforts of UNISFA, the
United Nations Mine Action Service and partners in

21-3081015/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

facilitating mine-clearance and risk-education activities
in Abyei in the past months.
Fourthly, the presence of UNISFA will continue
to be essential in maintaining stability in Abyei and
providing support to the JBVMM. We support the
renewal of UNISFA’s mandate, as recommended by
the Secretary-General, and will engage actively with
Council members in the upcoming discussions.
Enhancing UNISFA’s ability to fulfil its mandate in
an effective, efficient, objective and impartial manner
should remain one of our top priorities.
In conclusion, we would like to commend the
efforts of the United Nations, UNISFA, the Special
Envoy for the Horn of Africa, the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
neighbouring countries and international partners for
their engagement with the relevant sides in finding a
peaceful solution to the Abyei issue and resolving the
ongoing challenges relating to UNISFA.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
our briefers, Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, the
Special Envoy and His Excellency Thabo Mbeki, for
their insightful updates and reflections as well as their
combined efforts over the past six months to support
peace and peacekeeping in the region.
First, the United Kingdom joins Council members
in condemning the actions of the Sudanese military
this week to detain civilian members of Government
and dissolve transitional institutions. We call on the
military to course-correct and release those detained,
refrain from violence and allow peaceful protest.
The United Kingdom welcomes the decision of
the African Union this morning, which sends a strong
message that the Sudanese military cannot subvert the
Sudan’s democratic transition without consequence.
The United Kingdom is further concerned at the
impact that those events may have on the situation in
Abyei and the already difficult operating circumstances
for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). The Council has repeatedly welcomed the
recent rapprochement between the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan. This welcome shift in bilateral
relations has led to the temporary reopening of border
crossings, corridors and the establishment of free-trade
zones along the border. We hope that despite the
unilateral acts by the Sudanese military in Khartoum,
this cooperation will continue.
16/21

27/10/2021

More broadly, while the United Kingdom
welcomes efforts to strengthen bilateral relations, it is
regrettable that renewed engagement has not translated
into tangible improvements in Abyei, where ordinary
citizens continue to suffer. We urge both countries to
work together to reach a resolution on the final status
of Abyei.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by
the situation in Gok Machar and repeats its condolences
on the death of a UNISFA peacekeeper last month. The
members of the Council delivered a unified message
on 15 October (SC/14666) reiterating their full support
for UNISFA and demanding that the Government of
South Sudan facilitate the unimpeded implementation
of UNISFA’s mandate.
The situation in Gok Machar is another example of
the operational challenges that UNISFA continues to
face in fulfilling its mandate. There has been limited
progress made on the Council’s repeated requests to
facilitate the operationalization of Athony airstrip,
the issuing of outstanding visa requests and the
appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of Mission. We
reiterate our call for both parties to address those longstanding limitations, particularly as we consider the
reconfiguration of the peacekeeping mission in Abyei.
In that regard, the United Kingdom takes note of the
options for reconfiguration proposed in the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic review of UNISFA. We commend
the men and women of UNISFA on their ongoing efforts
to address the evolving security challenges, including
the facilitation of community dialogue and local
peacebuilding and women’s empowerment initiatives.
The United Kingdom would also like to commend
the dedication of Ethiopian peacekeepers in their
support for peace and security in Abyei throughout
the past decade. It is our sincere hope that the
interests of the people of Abyei remain at the forefront
of decision-making on the future configuration
of UNISFA.
We also call for regional tensions to be resolved
through dialogue and encourage regional partners
as well as the United Nations to ensure that current
disputes do not damage the effectiveness of UNISFA.
Finally, the United Kingdom urges all parties to
fully respect international humanitarian law and allow
humanitarian actors to deliver aid to those in need in all
parts of Abyei without hindrance.
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too, wish
to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga and President Mbeki for their briefings. I also
welcome the presence among us of the representatives
of the Sudan and of South Sudan.
I wish to emphasize three points.
First, the attacks targeting United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) team sites in the
demilitarized border zone and in Gok Machar are
unacceptable. We take note of the commitment of South
Sudan to UNISFA, as confirmed in the 19 October
declaration as mentioned by the Special Envoy. We call
on South Sudan to translate those words into action
and to ensure security and freedom of movement for
UNISFA, in line with its obligations under the statusof-forces agreement.
Moreover, we expect that both the Sudan and South
Sudan will clarify their expectations as concerns a
component of UNISFA’s mandate — support for the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.
Secondly, with respect to the situation in Abyei,
France takes note of the conclusions of the strategic
review, which reflects the consequences of the evolving
regional context. We support a reconfiguration of the
mission that reflects the opportunities presented by
the rapprochement between Khartoum and Juba while
safeguarding the mission’s capacity to deliver on its
civilian-protection mandate. We remain troubled by
the persistent intercommunal violence, specifically the
resurgence of sexual violence.
Beyond the role of UNISFA, there is a vital need for
the Sudan and South Sudan to facilitate the resumption
of dialogue at the local level, which is necessary to deal
with security questions and to make headway towards
the establishment of joint administrations in the area.
Thirdly, France reaffirms its support for the
Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa at a time when
crises in the region are proliferating. We, too, condemn
the coup d’état in the Sudan. We voice our support for
the Sudanese transitional Government. We take note
of the return of the Prime Minister to his home, and
we reiterate our call for his release and for respect for
his physical safety as well as that of his spouse and
civilian leaders.
France welcomes and supports the decisions taken
by the African Union Peace and Security Council. This
coup d’état seriously undermines the balance of the

S/PV. 8887

transition, as defined in the Constitutional Document
of August 2019 — the only framework allowing the
international community to maintain its support for
the country. Moreover, the coup is taking place in
a region already weakened by tensions in Abyei, the
Al-Fashaqah triangle area, the Renaissance Dam and
Tigray. We call on the countries of the region to prevent
these vulnerabilities from being exploited.
Dialogue and regional cooperation are essential to
overcome these challenges. We welcome in particular
the engagement of the African members of the Security
Council and support the efforts of the Special Envoy and
the Secretary-General, together with the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
all relevant partners.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary Lacroix,
Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga and Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, for their briefings. We
also welcome the representative of the Sudan and
South Sudan.
The past few months have been characterized by
multiple outreach efforts by both the Sudan and South
Sudan, culminating in the summit in Juba in August.
Such meetings are essential for the consolidation and
formalization of cooperation and dialogue. We hope
that the recent events in the Sudan, which we condemn,
will not have a negative impact on stability and security
in the Abyei region.
However, there are two main challenges. First,
there are multiple tools and mechanisms that must be
operationalized, such as the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, whose decisions remain unimplemented,
and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, which has
not met since 2017. We hope that the Sudan and South
Sudan will make use of those spaces and tools. Secondly,
mistrust among Abyei communities constitutes one
of the main challenges for the two Governments and
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). We call on the Sudan and South Sudan
to redouble efforts in their interactions to facilitate a
dialogue with a view to reducing tensions between the
Misseriya and the Ngok Dinka.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s assessment
of recent political developments between the Sudan and
South Sudan and his recommendations on a possible
reconfiguration of the mission and the establishment

21-3081017/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of a road map for its eventual exit, we share his
view that peacekeeping tools are not enough and
that the nature of the challenges in Abyei require a
peacekeeping approach. Only rapprochement among
the Abyei communities and confidence-building can
create conditions for peace and stability in the region.
We will closely follow the discussion on the possible
establishment of benchmarks with the objective of
agreeing on a solution to the final status of the Abyei
region. The participation of women in decision-making
processes is critical to achieving stability.
Mexico recognizes the work of UNISFA, especially
in the context of the complex situation it has faced
in recent weeks. We regret that the deterioration of
security in Sector 1 of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) forced the relocation
of a significant part of its personnel to Gok Machar. That
dramatically limits the Force’s ability to support the
JBVMM. We call on South Sudan to raise awareness in
Abyei communities about the United Nations presence
and the importance of UNISFA’s work.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/881)
concludes that one of the main challenges is law and
order. In that regard, it is regrettable that rule of law
efforts have been undermined by the absence of a
police service in Abyei. The United Nations Police is
the only entity that provides that service. We call on the
authorities to authorize the deployment of police units,
as they are key to de-escalation and stabilization.
The Force’s success lies in its ability to operate.
Blocking medical evacuation services and not
permitting aircraft to land, the lack of progress in
operationalizing the Athony airstrip, the issuing of
visas to police and violations of the status of forces
agreement are unacceptable. We call on the parties to
ensure that UNISFA is able to carry out its mandate
fully, safely and effectively.
The main security threat and the greatest challenge
to the protection of civilians continues to be the presence
in the region of armed elements, who are also primarily
responsible for the proliferation of arms in Abyei. Illicit
trafficking of small arms negatively impacts peace and
security in Abyei and the region. Effective controls
are needed to prevent the diversion of such weapons. I
conclude by noting the volatile situation in the region.
We urge all parties to exercise maximum restraint
and avoid any action that could exacerbate tensions
and destabilize both Abyei and the wider region. The
18/21

27/10/2021

leadership of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, among others, are
more important than ever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohammed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. We commend the vitality of the Council’s
agenda during the presidency of your friendly country.
We also express our appreciation to Her Excellency the
Permanent Representative of Ireland for her successful
presidency of the Council last month.
We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, for his briefing
on the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
We also thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
and Mr. Thabo Mbeki for their briefings.
The Sudan notes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/881) on the situation in Abyei.
Bilateral relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan have continued to improve in recent months.
Regular visits among officials of the two countries at
various levels are but one example of that progress. At
the top of the list of visits is that undertaken to Juba in
August by the Sudanese Prime Minister. During his visit,
he reaffirmed the importance of building the strategic
relationship between the two countries. Moreover,
three memorandums of understanding — on transport,
trade and oil — were signed during the visit. The two
parties reached agreements on opening passages to
borders, discussed signing agreements on trade and
the economic free zone, traffic arrangements and the
resumption of moving goods and passengers by land,
river and railway. They also reached agreements on
eliminating all obstacles to banking transactions
between the two countries.
Abyei was the subject of important discussions
during the visit, when an agreement was reached to
closely follow the situation in Abyei through the joint
security committees. In that context, another meeting
by the Joint Political and Security Mechanism was
held in Juba on 4 and 5 September, during which the
Mechanism, under the presidency of the two Ministers
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of Defence of the Sudan and South Sudan, reviewed the
implementation of the results of the preceding meeting
held in Khartoum. They also reviewed a UNISFA
report and a report of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism in the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone.
The Joint Political and Security Mechanism, which
is the highest body responsible for the agreements on
the joint cooperation between the Republic of the Sudan
and the Republic of South Sudan, reached positive
decisions that will strengthen relations between the two
countries and support security and stability. The two
parties agreed that the next meeting of the Mechanism
would be held in January 2022.
The positive environment of rapprochement
between the two countries has cast a positive light
on negotiations on the final status of Abyei, which
the Sudan has repeatedly emphasized. The Sudan is
committed to building on the development in bilateral
relations between the two brotherly neighbours so as
to enhance peaceful and social coexistence in Abyei,
expedite discussions and reach an understanding on the
final status of Abyei.
In this regard, I would like to stress the following
five points.
First, the Sudan is counting greatly on friendly
relations with the State of South Sudan and on
benefiting from the positive momentum to resolve all
outstanding issues between the two countries, foremost
among which is the situation in Abyei. That includes the
establishment of temporary administrative and security
mechanisms called for in the 20 June 2011 agreement,
signed by both parties.
Secondly, while the Sudan reaffirms its commitment
to maintaining peace, stability and security in Abyei,
we note with concern the events that have taken place
in the region in recent weeks, leading to the withdrawal
of team members of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism from sites, which resulted in the
closing of those sites and the evacuation of personnel to
Abyei. The Sudan therefore calls for de-escalation, a
reduction in tensions in the region and refraining from
taking unilateral measures that could threaten stability
in the UNISFA area of operations. In this regard, I offer
my condolences to the family of the peacekeeper who
lost his life during these events.

S/PV. 8887

Thirdly, we welcome the holding of the consultative
meetings organized by the UNISFA community liaison
office, which included Abyei community leaders.
We hope that the various social components will
take initiatives to maintain cooperation and peaceful
coexistence so as to ensure peace and security for the
communities in Abyei region.
Fourthly, the Sudan reiterates its commitment to
fully cooperating with the Secretariat regarding the
smooth replacement of the current forces of UNISFA
with a neutral and multinational peacekeeping force
that is better qualified and meets the conditions of
the elements working in peace missions. We will
commit ourselves to cooperating with the departing
forces in accordance with our obligations under
the status-of-forces agreement and our well-known
customs and traditions, as well as in adherence to
all other obligations dictated by other contractual or
humanitarian considerations.
Fifthly, we welcome the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the mandate of UNISFA be
renewed for six months.
I reaffirm the commitment of the Sudan to
strengthening cooperation with South Sudan in order
to enhance the work of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism and the Joint Oversight Committee in
Abyei. We are also committed to establishing joint
mechanisms between the two countries, based on the
terms of the agreements signed between the two parties
leading to a solution to the final status of Abyei in
accordance with the agreed references.
In conclusion, some delegations have voiced their
concern about what is currently happening in the
Sudan. While we understand such concern, we reiterate
the need for the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, to continue supporting
the people of the Sudan during this critical and decisive
period. The Council must play a constructive role
in bringing closer together the positions of various
Sudanese civil and military parties so that the country
can pursue its democratic transition, which will be
worthy of the sacrifices made by Sudanese women and
youth and maintain the gains of the past two years,
while preserving the security and stability yearned for
by the Sudanese people and achieving freedom, peace
and justice, in line with the principles contained in the
Constitutional Declaration and Juba Peace Agreement.
The Council’s support to the Sudan is very important

21-3081019/21

S/PV.8887

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in these circumstances in order to bring together the
divergent points of view of the various Sudanese parties.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Although only a
few days remain before the end of your presidency
of the Security Council, Sir, allow us to express our
appreciation for the way you and your team have run
a very busy and relevant programme during your
presidency. It has been a successful presidency by
all accounts.
I should like to acknowledge the presence of
and thank His Excellency President Thabo Mbeki,
Chairperson of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel; Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix; and my dear friend, Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, for their briefings today.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
of 15 October (S/2021/881) on Abyei. Although the
report is generally fair and accurate, our delegation, after
careful reading, found that with better consultations on
the ground, a few inaccuracies and omissions could
have been avoided.
We would also like to acknowledge the Security
Council press statement of 15 October (SC/14666) on
the unfortunate situation in Gok Machar. Our delegation
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
deepest sympathy and condolences to the family of
the peacekeeper who, sadly, lost his life and to all the
personnel of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) for that untimely and senseless
loss of life. While we mourn the loss of life of the
peacekeeper, we must all learn a lesson here so that
such an unfortunate event does not occur again. One of
the lessons we must glean from this sad situation is that
better and early communication between the United
Nations and South Sudanese authorities, and between
the two authorities and the relevant community leaders,
is crucial.
Yes, we are committed to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism, but we must always
take time to inform the community leaders of any
20/21

27/10/2021

movements of troops in any given area. That should not
be just the responsibility of the Government in Juba; it
should be a joint responsibility.
A few weeks ago, we started holding meetings
with departments concerned within the Secretariat
on the replacement of the Ethiopian peacekeepers in
UNISFA, to which Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
alluded to in his briefing. Sadly, with the unfortunate
political events in the Sudan that have taken place since
Monday, 25 October, we think that a reconsideration of
those plans is in order.
I know that we are in diplomacy, but I think that
we know how these things work these days. The
rapprochement between the Sudan and South Sudan
happened because of the system that was in Khartoum
after the revolution. Since Monday, that system no
longer exists. Although we hope things will continue,
sadly, it will take time. That is why the African Union
(AU) suspended the regime in Khartoum today.
While we hope the Sudanese political leaders
will resolve their political differences amicably and
peacefully, we would like to request the United Nations
and the AU to seriously and positively consider the
following proposals.
First, we propose the immediate suspension of the
planned replacement of the Ethiopian peacekeepers and
engagement with the Ethiopian Government on how
best to rotate existing troops in Abyei.
Secondly, we propose that the Government of
South Sudan, the AU and the United Nations embark on
legal negotiations that would lead to the development
of a new interim legal framework that would allow and
regulate the movements and operations of international
organizations in the Abyei area. For example,
the issuance of visas ought not be the monopoly
of Khartoum.
Thirdly, the Government of South Sudan and the
international community should engage and agree
on a programme to be implemented that will return
and resettle the Ngok Dinka, who have been living
as refugees and internally displaced persons, to
their original homes and villages, and provide those
communities with social and economic services and
opportunities for livelihood in their area, under the
protection of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA).
21-30810

27/10/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Those few proposals can be added to and/or
improved upon. However, the purpose is to make
sure that the people of Abyei are not held hostage to
unforeseen political events all the time. Here, we
welcome the re-engagement of President Thabo Mbeki’s
Panel and look forward to receiving and welcoming his
proposal on the final status of Abyei.
In conclusion, the replacement of Ethiopian
peacekeepers in UNISFA was reluctantly accepted
by some in Juba because they do not want to create
a security vacuum in Abyei with the departure of the
Ethiopian troops. With the current unfortunate political
situation in the Sudan, we urge the international
community, with the guidance of the United Nations
and the African Union, to engage the Government of
South Sudan in order to prevent the people of Abyei

S/PV. 8887

from being victimized by events that are beyond their
control or not of their own doing.
Juba is ready to work with the international
community to see to it that the people of Abyei are
not forgotten, while we try to resolve other situations
around the region. We look forward to receiving His
Excellency President Mbeki and his team so that the
international community can engage in how to ease the
suffering of the Ngok Dinka in the area.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21-3081021/21
