United Nations

S/PV.6066

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6066th meeting
Wednesday, 14 January 2009, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ripert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Butagira
Ms. Pierce
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-20780 (E)

*0920780*

S/PV.6066

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those countries
inscribed on the list of speakers to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the following countries took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh,
Belgium,
Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Czech Republic, Egypt,
Finland, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel,
Italy,
Jordan,
Kenya,
Kuwait,
Liechtenstein, Morocco, Myanmar, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Qatar, Sudan, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay and
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President (spoke in French): I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Archbishop Celestino Migliore, Apostolic Nuncio,
Permanent Observer of the Holy See to the United
Nations.
There being no objections, it is so decided.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting, as
requested in a letter dated 13 January 2009, the text of
which is contained in document S/2009/31, and in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objections, it is so decided.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,

2

Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.
The Council will now begin its consideration of
the item before it.
At this meeting, we will hear a briefing by
Mr. John
Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator.
I now give the floor to Mr. Holmes.
Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council this morning. I will
cover a number of urgent issues, but the main focus
today must be the conduct of hostilities and the need
for strict compliance with international humanitarian
law.
The current situation in southern Israel and Gaza
is pressing and desperate. Civilians in southern Israel
have long had to live under constant threat of rocket
and mortar attacks by Palestinian militants.
Considering the number of rockets and mortars fired,
civilian casualties have been limited, but the frequent
and indiscriminate nature of these attacks inflicts
severe psychological suffering. Four Israeli civilians
have been killed and dozens injured since the current
hostilities began.
These attacks are contrary to international
humanitarian law and must cease. Yet any Israeli
response must itself comply with international
humanitarian law. Here too, there is considerable and
grave cause for concern. The population of Gaza was
already suffering severely after more than 18 months of
closures. Since the current hostilities started, the
Palestinian Ministry of Health reports, as of yesterday,
13 January, that the number of Palestinian casualties
stands at 971 killed, of whom 311 are children and 76
women, and 4,418 wounded, of whom 1,549 are
children and 652 are women. Many of the male
casualties are no doubt also civilians. The number of
child casualties has reportedly tripled since the
beginning of ground operations on 3 January. The
Israel Defense Forces are no doubt trying, as they say
they are, to take steps to minimize civilian casualties,
but they are clearly not succeeding.
Israeli operations are also causing extensive
damage to homes and public infrastructure and

09-20780

S/PV.6066

seriously jeopardizing water, sanitation and medical
services. United Nations schools sheltering displaced
persons have been hit; humanitarian workers have been
killed and ambulances hit; the sick and wounded have
been left trapped and unassisted; and up to 100,000
people have been displaced from their homes.
The situation for the civilian population of Gaza
is terrifying, and its psychological impact is felt
particularly by children and their parents, who feel
helpless and unable to protect them. It is a situation
from which civilians have only minimal respite: three
hours a day, with no escape, as borders and crossings
remain closed. Only a full and fully respected ceasefire
will spare the civilian population from these horrors,
and even then, their need for assistance will remain
both urgent and overwhelming.
In the conduct of military operations, constant
care must be taken to spare the civilian population
from the effects of hostilities. This requires strict
compliance with the principles of distinction and
proportionality and the requirement to take all feasible
precautions in attack and against the effects of attack.
For those launching attacks, this includes doing
everything feasible to verify that the objectives to be
attacked are neither civilians nor civilian objects and
refraining from any indiscriminate attacks, including
those that may be expected to cause incidental civilian
casualties that would be excessive in relation to the
concrete and direct military advantage anticipated from
that specific attack.
For those in defence, it means removing civilians
and civilian objects from the vicinity of military
objectives and avoiding locating military objectives
within or near densely populated areas. It also means
not ordering or using the presence or movement of
civilians to render certain points or areas immune from
military operations or to shield military objectives
from attack.
Can we look at what has been happening in Gaza
in the past three weeks and say that either Israel or
Hamas has come close to respecting fully these rules? I
think not. I repeat that violations of international
humanitarian law by one party to a conflict offer no
justification for non-compliance by other parties.
Allegations of violations must be fully investigated and
those responsible held to account.

09-20780

As much as the world’s attention is focused on
Gaza, that is, sadly, by no means the only situation to
raise profound concerns over the degree of respect for
these rules and for international humanitarian law.
From the end of August, the eyes of the
international community were focused on the
catastrophic situation that began to unfold around
Goma, in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Congolese civilians found themselves in the
worst of all worlds, subject to attacks, displacement,
sexual violence and forced recruitment perpetrated by
advancing rebel forces, and to acts of violence, rape
and looting carried out by members of the official
Congolese armed forces and Mai-Mai and other
militias.
In one particularly horrific incident in early
November, an estimated 150 people were killed during
two days of violence in the town of Kiwanja. Reports
indicate that most of those killed were summarily
executed by the forces of Laurent Nkunda. Others died
when caught in combat between Nkunda’s forces and
Mai-Mai militia.
Though the situation in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is now somewhat
more stable, sporadic violence continues and
humanitarian needs are great, while access remains
extremely limited.
Meanwhile, we have had to face up to fresh
atrocities committed by the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) in the north-east of the country and in parts of
southern Sudan. According to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, LRA attacks on villages
in Orientale province in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have left more than 500 people dead. Over
400 have been abducted and some 100,000 displaced.
For any who hoped the threat of LRA brutality had
gone, it has been a rude awakening indeed.
In Somalia, 2008 was, for an increasingly high
proportion of the population, another year trapped in a
vicious cycle of attack and counter-attack between
armed groups and Ethiopian and Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) forces. Throughout 2008, armed
groups in Mogadishu used residential areas to launch
indiscriminate mortar attacks against Ethiopian and
TFG forces, provoking equally indiscriminate and
disproportionate counter-attacks, often involving the
use of heavy weapons. Reports suggest that all sides
launched their attacks with such lack of precision that

3

S/PV.6066

there was little, if any, expectation of striking a
military objective or avoiding civilian casualties.
Armed groups also used homes and crowds of civilians
as cover from which to ambush TFG and Ethiopian
forces, resulting in wild firefights and further civilian
casualties.
In Afghanistan, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) reports that more
than 2000 civilians were killed during hostilities in
2008, an increase of over 40 per cent compared to
2007. Over half died as a result of attacks by antiGovernment elements, in particular through suicide
bombings and the use of improvised explosive devices.
The calculated and callous nature of suicide
attacks remains particularly horrifying in Afghanistan
and elsewhere. They promote a climate of extreme
insecurity for civilians, disrupt any degree of normality
in public life, and destroy the lives of ordinary people
with neither warning nor compunction.
Some 250 civilians were also executed by antiGovernment elements in Afghanistan. These were
mostly individuals considered to be linked in some way
to the Government or the international community.
Alarmingly, killings of this sort appear to be spreading
to areas of the country that were previously immune.
Civilian deaths were also attributed to air strikes,
search and raid operations and force protection
incidents involving international and national armed
forces. More than 550 civilians died as a result of air
strikes in 2008. In one incident alone, in August,
UNAMA reported that 92 civilians, including 62
children, were killed in the Shindand district of Herat.
This prompted the International Security Assistance
Force to amend its standard operating procedures with
a view to preventing such incidents in the future.
However, the killing of 37 civilians in an air strike in
Kandahar in November 2008 indicates that still more
needs to be done.
Prompt investigations by international forces in
the aftermath of such incidents and the provision of
adequate public information and payments to those
affected are also essential.
In Sri Lanka, strict compliance with international
humanitarian law is all the more critical with the
intensification of fighting in the Vanni region and with
reports of intermittent artillery fire into populated
civilian areas in recent weeks. The scale of

4

humanitarian needs is difficult to gauge, given the
restricted humanitarian access due to the intensified
fighting and the relocation of United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations from rebel-held
territory in mid-September.
I am, however, particularly concerned that some
350,000 civilians are trapped in an increasingly
confined space and effectively prevented from leaving
by Tamil Tiger rebels. This raises deep concerns over
the possible use of civilians to render areas immune
from military operations. Regarding those who are able
to leave Vanni, while the Government has the right to
screen for fighters among them, it must not unduly
continue to restrict their freedom of movement.
In environments such as Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia, it is
particularly worrying that humanitarian organizations
and their staff continue to be subject to threats,
intimidation and deadly attacks.
In Afghanistan, 112 humanitarian workers were
kidnapped in 2008, five of whom were killed by their
captors. A total of 33 humanitarian workers were killed
in 2008, the majority of whom were national staff.
In North Kivu province in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, 104 security incidents
involving humanitarian workers were reported during
September of last year alone.
In Somalia, 32 humanitarian workers were killed
in 2008 and 19 were abducted, of whom 10 are still
captive. In a particularly chilling turn of events, many
Somali United Nations staff and their families had to
be relocated from their duty stations following the
circulation of an apparent death list of individuals
targeted for assassination by armed groups.
Such actions inevitably result in increased
security measures, further restrictions on access and a
scaling down of humanitarian operations. The main
losers from that are, of course, the most vulnerable.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) is continuing to monitor and analyse
trends of violence against humanitarian workers, and
access constraints more generally, and will provide a
comprehensive overview of those issues in the
Secretary-General’s next report on the protection of
civilians.
Meanwhile, we must urgently find better ways to
prevent and reduce that pattern of behaviour. It is

09-20780

S/PV.6066

relatively straightforward, if not always easy or
productive, for the United Nations to engage with the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan,
or with national armed forces, and to raise our
concerns. But whether in Afghanistan, the occupied
Palestinian territories, Somalia or elsewhere, we cannot
talk only to one side. If we are serious about sparing
civilians from the effects of hostilities and about
obtaining access to those in need and seeking to ensure
that humanitarian workers can operate safely,
humanitarian actors must have consistent and sustained
dialogue with all parties to conflict, be it the Taliban,
Hamas or Al-Shabaab.
It is simply not sufficient to oppose such
engagement for fear that it will confer a degree of
recognition on those groups. We need those groups to
understand what international humanitarian law says
and why. We need to be able to speak out for their
victims and for the communities they endanger through
their mere presence and by storing weapons in homes,
schools and places of worship. We need to speak to
them to gain safe and sustained access to populations
in need and to point out consistently the extent of their
misperceptions of humanitarian motives, the lack of a
political agenda on the part of United Nations or other
humanitarian actors and our firm attachment to the
humanitarian principles of impartiality, neutrality and
independence. And we need to be able to call them to
account when they violate international humanitarian
law.
I recognize that for some militia, guerrilla and
rebel groups, civilian casualties and constraints on
access are in many cases intended consequences of
their actions. But the simple truth remains that unless
we can consistently raise protection and access
concerns with those groups, and unless we can bring
home to them the deep irresponsibility of some of their
actions, we will continue to see such groups kill, maim
and threaten the lives of more civilians.
Amid all that darkness there are some bright
spots too, not least among them the opening for
signature and ratification last month of the Convention
on Cluster Munitions. The Convention has the
protection of civilians at its core. For those States that
sign and ratify the Convention, it bans the use,
production, transfer and stockpiling of cluster
munitions. For those that do not, it deepens the stigma
associated with cluster munitions, making it politically
and morally more difficult to continue to use those

09-20780

weapons. Ultimately, the Convention will lead to the
destruction of billions of lethal submunitions and, in so
doing, will save a huge number of civilians, their
families and communities from the terrible
humanitarian consequences of that weapon.
I applaud the Oslo core group and the civil
society organizations that contributed to making the
Convention a reality, as well as the 95 States that have
signed it. I urge all States that have not yet done so to
sign and ratify the Convention to ensure its entry into
force without delay.
However familiar the challenges to the protection
of civilians are — and I have not, on this occasion,
focused on the massive and increasing problem of
internal displacement due to conflict — the ability to
ensure that we respond to them in a comprehensive and
consistent way continues to elude us. For example, the
potential vested in peacekeeping missions with
protection mandates is still not being realized. One
reason is that those missions are not being provided on
a consistent basis with the capacity required to fulfil
those mandates.
In Darfur, for instance, despite the grave and
well-documented situation confronting the people
there, 12 months since it became operational, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) has only some 15,200 of the 26,000
uniformed personnel authorized by the Council. That is
one peacekeeper for every 170 of the staggering
2.7 million internally displaced persons who live in
perpetual fear of violence, hunger, disease and death.
Consider also the vastness of Darfur, combined with
UNAMID’s lack of sufficient aviation capacity, and it
is all too apparent that the Operation’s efforts to protect
civilians will inevitably fall short until it has the troops
and tools needed to do the job properly.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
upsurge of violence in the east of the country at the end
of August severely tested the ability of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to protect civilians.
It raised important questions again about MONUC’s
capacity and whether it had the mandate necessary for
the task. It also raised the need to look again at
concepts of operations, standard operating procedures
and rules of engagement as they relate to the protection
of civilians.

5

S/PV.6066

The joint study by OCHA and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the implementation of
protection mandates by peacekeeping missions will
examine those and related issues. The study is under
way and due for completion later this year. Its findings
will be shared with Member States and will provide
recommendations for us all on how to tackle some of
those weaknesses.
The lack of a comprehensive and consistent
approach is apparent also in our efforts to combat
sexual violence. As I said during the last open debate,
in May 2008, those require the same degree of
concerted action wherever they occur. Eight months
on, I am pleased that United Nations actors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and their national
and international partners have made significant
progress in developing a draft comprehensive strategy
to combat the horrific sexual violence there, in support
of the efforts of the Government. It focuses on four
critical areas: addressing impunity, supporting
activities to prevent and provide protection from sexual
violence, incorporating prevention efforts into security
sector reform, and improving access to medical, mental
health and legal support for survivors.
The strategy is a crucial and welcome initiative
and warrants full support from all concerned. We will
certainly pursue it vigorously. But it also still begs the
question of consistency I raised in May. Where are the
strategies for Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan and other
contexts where rape and other forms of sexual violence
are widespread? They need to follow soon, and I hope
the Council will also insist on that.
Helping to facilitate a comprehensive and
consistent approach to the protection of civilians in all
circumstances was the intention behind the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the establishment of a Security
Council expert group in his sixth report on the
protection of civilians (S/2007/643). I am therefore
greatly encouraged by the convening later this week of
the first meeting of the expert group. That is an
informal forum that brings together Council Member
States for transparent and timely consultation with
OCHA on protection concerns, particularly in the
context of the establishment or renewal of
peacekeeping mandates. A particularly useful tool for
the expert group — but also, I believe, for the Council
itself — is the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians (S/PRST/2003/27, annex). The aide-memoire
was first developed in March 2002, at the Council’s

6

request, to facilitate its consideration of protection
issues. In close consultation with the Council, OCHA
has produced a revised and updated version, which I
trust will be adopted by the Council at the end of this
debate.
The aide-memoire identifies the key concerns
regarding the protection of civilians in contemporary
conflicts and, based on the Council’s past practice,
specific actions that the Council could take to respond
to those concerns. It maintains a focus on the role of
peacekeeping missions, but it also includes a range of
additional measures that could be taken by the Council,
such as imposing targeted sanctions against the
perpetrators of serious violations against civilians and
the referral of situations to the International Criminal
Court.
From the perspective of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, 2009 has had a dreadful
beginning. We need urgently to redouble our efforts to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights law in time of armed conflict. The
convening of the expert group and the revision of the
aide-memoire are important steps in this direction.
Additional proposals will be outlined in the seventh
report of the Secretary-General, due in May of this
year.
Meanwhile, let this, the tenth anniversary of the
first Security Council resolution on the protection of
civilians, be the year in which a sustained effort to
approach the issues in a comprehensive and consistent
manner begins to produce results.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Holmes for his briefing and express

09-20780

S/PV.6066

its appreciation to the various United Nations agencies
for their work over the years in the humanitarian field.
The Security Council has been seized with the
question of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
for nearly a decade and has adopted many resolutions
and presidential statements on that topic. However,
because of the changing character of conflicts and the
interlinkage among various complex factors, many
civilians the world over still suffer from the harm and
damage inflicted upon them by armed conflicts. The
recent resurgence of conflict between Israel and a
Palestinian armed faction has caused numerous deaths
and injuries among innocent civilians and given rise to
a severe humanitarian crisis, which has become a
matter of serious concern for the international
community. The grim reality tells us that the
international community has a long way to go towards
fulfilling its duty to protect civilians.
In order to improve the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, I wish to emphasize the following three
points.
First, the Security Council should fulfil its
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. As the core of the world’s
collective security system, the Security Council should
take prompt action within its spheres of competence to
reduce and address the root causes of conflicts and
mitigate the harm brought by armed conflicts to
civilians. As a result of the joint efforts of the Arab
countries and other countries concerned, the Council
adopted resolution 1860 (2009) 13 days after the
outbreak of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, calling for a
ceasefire between the two parties. We urge the parties
concerned to implement the ceasefire immediately, as
requested by the resolution, so as to avoid more
civilian casualties and ease the humanitarian crisis.
Secondly, the Security Council must not view the
protection of civilians in isolation; instead, it should
look at the context of a particular conflict in terms of
the peace process and the political situation, taking an
integrated approach. We have seen in recent years that
deteriorating security situations in places such as the
Middle East and Afghanistan have made victims of
countless civilians in armed conflicts, whereas positive
progress in peace processes in countries like Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire have brought hope for a better future
to local civilian populations. This shows once again
that the Security Council should focus more on how to

09-20780

deal with and address conflicts. In this connection, we
are not in favour of establishing a Security Council
working group on the question of civilians.
Lastly, the role of Governments in the protection
of civilians should be respected and supported.
Governments bear the primary responsibility for
protecting their civilians. While the international
community and external forces can provide
constructive support, they must follow the provisions
of the Charter, fully respecting the wishes and
refraining from undermining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned, and
even more so from forceful intervention.
The efforts of the Security Council alone are far
from adequate to address the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We expect the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council to play bigger roles,
and encourage international institutions, such as the
United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank, and regional organizations, such as the
African Union, to do their part to help the countries
concerned with their economic development,
settlement of conflicts and civilian protection. We also
welcome a positive role for non-governmental
organizations in this respect.
China is willing to work together with other
members of the international community to make
pragmatic and effective efforts to achieve more
constructive results in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for having convened this important
debate. I would also like to thank Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his briefing today.
The protection of civilians encompasses a set of
principles, standards and policies aimed at diminishing
the impact of conflicts on people who do not
participate directly in them. Unfortunately, however,
those people are their main victims. When we talk
about the protection of civilians, we generally speak
about an attachment to legality and respect for
international
law,
in
particular
international
humanitarian law and human rights.
That is why we vehemently reject the conduct of
those who use situations of armed conflict as an excuse

7

S/PV.6066

to ignore standards such as the principle of distinction
between civilian and military targets or the principle of
proportionality in the use of force. We condemn
indiscriminate attacks and the unlimited use of arms
that cause excessive damage, retaliation against
defenceless populations and belligerent actions that
bypass the necessary precautions to minimize the
impact of conflicts on civilian populations.
In recent years, we have been concerned by the
growing number of civilian casualties, which become
the “collateral damage” of military operations. This
euphemism is not a moral or legal excuse to justify the
harm caused to civilian populations. That is why we
believe that any incident in which civilian populations
are primarily affected must be investigated with a view
to holding to account those who have violated the
standards that prevail in conflict situations.
When the Security Council debates the protection
of civilians, it does so in a very specific context and
language. This is neither an academic forum, nor a
body geared exclusively towards political deliberation
or debate. This debate, as with all held by the Security
Council, must be an instrument to guide and to
facilitate specific decision-making. That is why the
challenges facing us are primarily of a practical nature,
requiring more international cooperation and greater
coordination between the Security Council and other
bodies and agencies of the Organization.
In order to overcome those challenges, we also
believe that the Security Council must invest greater
efforts in three key areas: the prevention of conflicts
and of their recurrence, early warning systems, and
rapid and effective responses to situations specifically
threatening civilian populations.
Human security is multidimensional and
comprehensive. In this understanding, insecurity in any
of its dimensions has an affect on a situation in its
entirety. That is why we must continue to address the
deep-rooted causes that lead to conflicts, and above all
to prevent their recurrence.
In this respect, we believe it necessary to
continue strengthening initiatives such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, a useful instrument of
great potential, in order to prevent the recurrence of
conflict. Likewise, the building and strengthening of
national capacities in judicial matters, security sector
reform and rule of law reform are all major pillars of
conflict prevention strategies.

8

In the area of early warning, the Council must
continuously have timely, comprehensive and updated
information on matters relating to the protection of
civilians, particularly on the identification of situations
that involve imminent risks for civilian populations.
That is why we emphasize the importance of this item
being included systematically in the reports and
recommendations of the Secretary-General in
consideration of specific situations, most importantly
when it comes to the establishment, revision and
renewal of peacekeeping mission mandates. Moreover,
we believe that the expert group on the protection of
civilians is a valuable opportunity to lend continuity to
the analysis and discussion of this issue.
The Council must respond swiftly and decisively
to crises. Civilian protection must be provided at the
outset in efforts to achieve a cessation of hostilities and
to negotiate peace. At all times, we must urge the
cooperation of all parties to a conflict in order to create
areas of security, neutral zones or humanitarian
corridors that will make it possible to evacuate or
provide assistance to the affected populations. We also
highlight the vital importance of safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian assistance, which is a
fundamental prerequisite for its effective provision.
We stress the importance of clear civilian
protection mandates as a key aspect in the design and
composition of peacekeeping missions, as well as the
need for clear guides and standards for military
intervention in order to permit effective protection of
the civilian population. In that regard, my delegation
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation, set
out in his 20 October 2008 report on the Sudan
(S/2008/662), that the Security Council consider
holding a thorough debate on provisions related to the
protection of civilians in imminent danger.
We have listened to and share the concerns
repeatedly expressed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the troop-contributing
countries and the humanitarian community regarding
the lack of clarity in civilian protection mandates. We
believe it is time that the Council, together with the
Secretariat and the General Assembly — in particular
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations —
develop clear civilian protection guidelines that could
be translated into realistic standards applicable to
peacekeeping troops in combat situations. The need for
that was clearly indicated by the Council in resolution
1674 (2006).

09-20780

S/PV.6066

Furthermore, it is absolutely essential that
peacekeeping missions be appropriately structured and,
as Mr. Holmes pointed out, provided with the
equipment and technology they need to duly carry out
their civilian protection mandates, particularly in cases
in which greater resources are urgently needed to
expand
monitoring,
information-gathering
and
patrolling activities in conflict zones where there is an
imminent danger of attacks against civilians.
Another major challenge to civilian protection is
the fragmentation of the United Nations presence on
the ground. We believe it is necessary to strengthen
coordination among the humanitarian, military and
political segments to guarantee the security of relief
personnel and create the humanitarian space needed to
provide assistance and an appropriate transition
towards a phase of recovery and the restoration of
order and the rule of law that would ensure full respect
for and the promotion of human rights.
Finally, my delegation welcomes the timely
updating of the aide-memoire to be adopted in the
presidential statement today, and we thank the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the
work done. We appreciate the usefulness and value of
that instrument in analyzing the key issues that we
must consider in attaining the objectives related to
civilian protection. The list of precedents considered
by the Council on that subject is an important historical
memory that will serve as a swift, easy and practical
guide to assist the Council and ensure that the concerns
and issues related to civilian protection will be
appropriately reflected in the relevant resolutions and
in the establishment, review and renewal of the
mandates of peacekeeping missions.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): As usual, my delegation prepared a statement
that was a bit long, and that statement is now before
me. However, I find it extremely difficult and am
extremely embarrassed to speak before the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
when it has become clear to everyone that there is a
huge gap between what the Council says and what it
actually does.
The continuing events in Gaza attest to that fact.
The civilian population of Gaza has suffered long
months of siege and starvation, trapped in a collective
prison unprecedented in human history in terms of its
scope and nature. Mercilessly deprived of food,

09-20780

medicine, fuel and all of life’s necessities, they have, in
legal terms, been subjected to an attempt at genocide
by an occupying force that has, regrettably, flouted all
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and mocked and disregarded all moral and ethical
standards.
The tragedy of Gaza has raised serious doubts as
to the credibility of the Security Council. The Council
has remained unable or unwilling to shoulder its
responsibilities during the siege. The position that the
Council took regarding the siege sent a clear message
to the aggressor that it could escalate its aggression,
because that aggression continues. However, could any
aggression be more serious than aggression that
deprives the people of all of life’s necessities? Thus,
Israel has attacked a civilian population that has been
deprived of water, starved and weakened by a blind
war machine that indiscriminately bombs residential
areas, refugee camps, houses of worship, schools and
universities, United Nations facilities, humanitarian
assistance convoys, ambulances and rescue personnel.
Council members have heard that the numbers of
dead and wounded are increasing by the minute; they
have seen the magnitude of the destruction, which is
increasing every minute; they have seen the child
victims of phosphorus bombs; and they have heard that
the aggressor has even prevented the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) from gaining
access to affected areas and reaching victims. The
Council has heard statements by eyewitnesses who
cannot be doubted, including Mr. Jakob Kellenberger,
President of the ICRC, and officials from the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), describing
Israel’s brutal practices against the civilian population
in Gaza.
However, the Security Council continues to be
unable or unwilling to do anything. After much
procrastination and hesitation, it adopted resolution
1860 (2009). The resolution had absolutely no effect,
and the reason for that is clear. Thus, the Israelis have
continued to pursue this brutal massacre, unfortunately
with the active financial and technical support of some
who have also provided the aggressor with munitions
to perpetrate its crimes. Those abettors do not hesitate
to offer flimsy excuses for their actions, while at the
same time setting conditions for an end to the fighting.
Those who do so are in no way embarrassed to speak
today of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

9

S/PV.6066

Developments in Gaza over the past three weeks
have surpassed in brutality anything we have seen
before. As described by Mr. Ging, Director of UNRWA
Operations at the Gaza Field Office, they are a test of
our humanity.
I believe that the failure of the Security Council
to assume its moral and legal responsibilities for the
events in Gaza and its complicity with certain actors in
those events have made it extremely difficult for
people to hear us speak of legitimacy, ethics and
values. This has become an extremely embarrassing
exercise for a person like myself, at least, who was
raised on Islamic teachings that prohibit attacks on
civilians and condemn duplicity and selectivity.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I join other
speakers in thanking you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral John Holmes for his informative briefing and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for its efforts in preparing the updated aidememoire on the protection of civilians to be adopted by
the Council later today. I am convinced that the
updated aide-memoire, with its new format and
structure, will provide a useful tool kit for Member
States and United Nations bodies in protecting civilians
in armed conflict.
With armed conflicts spreading and escalating in
many parts of the world, enhancing the protection of
civilians has become more urgent and important than
ever. While recognizing the considerable efforts made
and initial progress achieved in the recent years by the
Council and related United Nations bodies in
protecting civilians in armed conflict, my delegation
remains deeply concerned about the fact that civilians
in many places continue to be the main victims of acts
of violence and the indiscriminate and excessive use of
force, especially those in which civilians are
deliberately targeted in violation of international law,
including international human rights and humanitarian
law.
As we have emphasized at every Council and
other meeting on this subject, Viet Nam is firm in its
position that all indiscriminate attacks against civilians
are unjustifiable under any pretext and that civilians
must be assured of access to humanitarian assistance,
particularly to food, fuel and medical treatment. We
call upon all parties to armed conflicts to minimize
military activities in and around civil locations and to

10

take effective measures to protect civilians, especially
the most vulnerable groups, such as children and
women.
As this meeting of the Council is taking place,
more and perhaps many more innocent civilians may
be being killed or plunged into desperate conditions by
unjustified military operations and acts of violence in
and from Gaza. We urge the parties concerned to heed
the call of the international community and of this very
Council for an immediate ceasefire, put an end to acts
of violence and implement the measures stipulated in
resolution 1860 (2009), adopted by the Council six
days ago, including the opening of border crossings to
allow and facilitate humanitarian assistance.
As a gesture of solidarity with Palestinian
civilians affected by the ongoing crisis, the Vietnamese
Government has decided to extend $200,000 in
assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
My delegation is deeply disturbed by the
displacement resulting from many conflict situations.
We recall the alarming figures for refugees and
internally displaced persons, mostly due to conflict
situations, as stated by High Commissioner António
Guterres in his briefing to the Council last week. We
share the view that displacement as a result of conflict
may become another source of conflict, since it is
likely to cause social tension and all kinds of
difficulties for the host location.
While the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with States, the United Nations system
can and should play its critical role by providing
political mediation and peacekeeping operations, as
well as by coordinating humanitarian and development
assistance. To this end, coordination among United
Nations bodies in the area of protection of civilians
should be further enhanced, particularly between the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and all United Nations field missions. We
support an expanded and strengthened mandate of
protection of civilians for United Nations peacekeeping
missions on the ground, and hence intensive training in
this connection for them before their deployment.

09-20780

S/PV.6066

With regard to humanitarian access, which is one
of the key issues in protecting civilians, we wish to
emphasize again the imperative need to uphold the
principle of neutrality, impartiality and independence
with a view to ensuring effectiveness and efficiency.
Finally, while recognizing the need for further
efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict, we hold
the view that the establishment of any new mechanism
within the Security Council should be carefully
considered and studied in depth before a decision is
made in order to avoid operational and institutional
overlapping, as well as negative financial implications.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me thank you, Sir, for organizing this very important
debate and Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
important and impressive presentation. It was
impressive, if I may say so, in its general thrust and
important in particular in what you said about ongoing
conflict situations, such as that in Gaza and southern
Israel.
Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union later in this meeting. I
should like to make a number of specific points.
First of all, we have seen an increasing focus on
efforts to integrate protection concerns into
peacekeeping mandates, increased efforts to fight
impunity at the national and international levels, as
well as the acceptance of the responsibility to protect.
Those are developments in our debate that we
welcome.
The Secretary-General has rightly stated that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict must remain
an absolute priority. He called for more systematic
attention to protection concerns in the daily
deliberations of the Council. Austria therefore
welcomes the revised aide-memoire on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and would like to
commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for its excellent work, which
represents a comprehensive tool of real practical
relevance to the work of the Council.
We further welcome the establishment of a
Security Council expert group on the protection of
civilians, which should permit the Council to receive
detailed information from humanitarian, human rights
and other experts. In a lessons-learned process, it

09-20780

should also enable the Council to address specific
protection concerns in the establishment or renewal of
peacekeeping mandates.
The Security Council should further contribute to
strengthening the rule of law and international law by
supporting criminal justice mechanisms. Where
necessary, the Council should consider appropriate
measures to encourage or compel prosecution of those
responsible for international crimes, including referrals
to the International Criminal Court or other appropriate
accountability mechanisms. This is particularly true for
sexual and gender-based violence or serious violations
of child rights. In this area an accountability
mechanism similar to the one on recruitment and use of
child soldiers under resolution 1612 (2005) should be
considered. The Council has to send a clear message to
all parties to armed conflicts reminding them of their
obligations and condemning violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
With regard to the ongoing conflict in and around
Gaza, Austria calls upon all parties to fully abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
This includes the obligation by parties to an armed
conflict to refrain from targeting civilians, to facilitate
humanitarian operations and to allow rapid and
unimpeded passage of relief consignments, equipment
and personnel. One point that should be underlined
particularly these days is that the protection of
organizations and institutions providing humanitarian
assistance, as well as humanitarian workers, must be
ensured at all times. We agree with the UnderSecretary-General that the incidents that have occurred
should be investigated, and we are happy that the
Secretary-General has made this one of the messages
of his current trip to the region.
We are also deeply concerned about conflict
situations such as those in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Darfur, in
particular the deliberate targeting of civilians,
including through the use of sexual and gender-based
violence as a tactic of war aimed at destroying and
dehumanizing entire communities.
Austria strongly supports the strengthening of
protection mandates in peacekeeping operations. We
are aware of the challenges of peacekeeping operations
in implementing ambitious mandates on the ground.
We thank the Under-Secretary-General for his analysis
as to the challenges in this regard.

11

S/PV.6066

Important progress has already been made, as
demonstrated, for example, by the new mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
resolution 1856 (2008), which makes the protection of
civilians the key priority for the Mission. The United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT) and the European Union military
operation in Chad and the Central African Republic
(EUFOR) may serve as a good example of peace
operations in support of humanitarian activities. In that
context, Austria attaches great importance to the
Secretary-General’s upcoming report on protection of
civilians. Austria is also pleased to support the study
commissioned by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and OCHA, which will serve as a basis for
that review. At next week’s Security Council debate on
peacekeeping operations we will have a chance to
discuss this issue in a broader context.
We also strongly agree with the Under-SecretaryGeneral’s positive assessment of the Convention on
Cluster Munitions, signed by 95 States in December
2008. We join in his appeal to all States to sign and
ratify that Convention as soon as possible.
In closing, let me once again stress that the
Council needs to continue and further intensify its
work on the protection of those who are most
vulnerable in conflict situations: civilians, particularly
women and children. Austria will do everything it can
to move this matter forward during its tenure on the
Council.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I first wish to thank UnderSecretary-General John Holmes for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the entire team of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for their valuable
assistance in updating the aide-memoire that we expect
to adopt today on issues pertaining the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
It has been more than five years since we last
revised the aide-memoire, in 2003 (S/PRST/2003/27,
annex). Since then, the substance of the matter has not
changed much, except that it has become more
compelling for the international community to act in
unison with a view to protecting civilians in an
increasingly volatile security environment. Indeed, it is
extremely unfortunate — and, in fact, unacceptable —
that the majority of casualties in armed conflicts

12

continue to be civilians. Therefore we condemn in the
strongest possible terms all deliberate attacks on
civilians and the deaths resulting from the
indiscriminate and excessive use of force.
Actually, what is happening in Gaza today is a
living example of the tragedy that the civilians suffer in
such armed conflicts. Indeed, the crisis, which has
entered its nineteenth day with more than 900 dead and
over 4,000 injured — one third of whom are children —
comprises all the elements set out in the aide-memoire,
ranging from misconduct of hostilities and the plight of
the displaced people to lack of humanitarian access.
I am aware that this is not a specific debate on the
tragic situation in Gaza, but it is absolutely relevant to
what we are discussing today. So allow me to express
our strong appeal to all the parties involved to cease
the hostilities without further delay and comply with
the terms of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).
In view of the time constraints and the long list of
speakers, I shall be brief.
First of all, I wish to underline that protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is a common concern for us
all and constitutes an issue of top priority for the entire
international community. Of course, the best protection
that can be offered to civilians is to prevent armed
conflicts in the first place. However, we do not live in a
perfect world. Therefore, in cases when prevention of
armed conflict is not possible, protection of civilians is
of utmost importance.
There is no doubt that the primary obligation for
protecting civilians lies with States. However, the
international community also has a shared
responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States fail to do so. Therefore, we need to build
a collective awareness of the importance of this
responsibility and must be able to agree on the
fundamental guidelines.
The new aide-memoire that we expect to adopt
today thus provides us with a convenient guide. We
now need to make best use of these guidelines in
addressing the actual problems on the ground,
including in our decisions on peacekeeping mandates,
because these problems lie with implementation rather
than norm-setting. For instance, we are pleased to see
that the legal framework for the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts is largely in place. Nevertheless, the
implementation of international instruments continues

09-20780

S/PV.6066

to face serious challenges, for manifold reasons. We
must thus be able to translate our legal commitments
into practical deeds and action.
A case in point is related to the fight against
terrorism. Indeed, terrorist organizations, whose
primary aim is to inflict random violence on civilian
and military targets alike, do not feel bound by any
international legal framework. However, a number of
members of the international community still fail to
implement their commitments in the face of terrorist
threats and acts.
Therefore, we must look into ways and means to
further improve and coordinate our joint fight against
this scourge, which is an integral part of our
responsibility to protect. This is another area where
individual endeavours of countries can achieve only
limited objectives. It should thus be a collective effort
in which all Members of the United Nations unite
around common principles and goals. It is with this
understanding that we join the presidential statement’s
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.
There are still many aspects of the responsibility
to protect civilians in armed conflicts that require
further and careful elaboration, including the dire
circumstances faced by displaced people, including
children and women, as well as the issues of small
arms and land mines. But even more importantly, we
should approach the question of protecting civilians
from a much wider angle, ensuring continued stability
and peace in conflict-ridden States, in particular
through strengthening the rule of law, human rights,
democracy and good governance, which is crucial for
long-term and lasting protection of civilians.
Likewise, we should ensure that the perpetrators
of violence against civilians are held fully accountable
for their actions. They should be fully aware that they
will face justice in all cases, for sustainable prevention
and protection would be impossible if there is
impunity. The international community has a duty to do
more in this direction through capacity-building and
technical assistance.
In closing, I should like to underline once again
that the issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a cause that the international community must
pursue with total determination. Two further reports of
the Secretary-General, on protection of civilians and on
sexual violence, are expected to be published in late

09-20780

May and June 2009 respectively, and Turkey will
assume the presidency of the Security Council in June.
Thus, protection issues are likely to be prominent on
the Council’s agenda during that period, and we will do
our best to contribute to the work of the Security
Council on this topic.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the convening of this debate,
which is taking place at a time when the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is taking on very special
proportions and demanding the urgent attention of the
international community. Mexico attaches great
importance to this issue and fully supports the holding
of Security Council debates on the subject.
We welcome the presence of Under-SecretaryGeneral John Holmes and thank him for his briefing,
which focused our attention on the seriousness of the
situations of which he spoke.
The challenges that our Organization faces
regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict
are very diverse and have become increasingly
complex.
Recently
we have
witnessed the
consequences of violence in the Gaza Strip, where the
large number of deaths and injuries among the civilian
population has resulted in a humanitarian crisis of
major proportions, as Under-Secretary-General Holmes
reported today.
In this regard, as it has done before in the
Council, Mexico reiterates its deep concern about the
violence unleashed over the past 19 days and
condemns the Israeli army’s excessive use of force in
Gaza, as well as the launching of rockets into Israeli
territory from the Gaza Strip by Hamas, which has also
resulted in deaths and injuries among the civilian
population.
It is of particular concern to Mexico that in any
conflict situation the parties should recognize that it is
imperative to respect the provisions of international
humanitarian law, in particular those set out in the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. In particular, my
delegation reiterates its call for the parties concerned to
respect and fully implement resolution 1860 (2009),
which will lays the foundations for the immediate
attainment of a durable ceasefire that will permit the
humanitarian needs of the civilian population to be
addressed and put an end to the pointless loss of
innocent lives in the region. We consider that this

13

S/PV.6066

objective can be reached only through the
establishment of an international ceasefire monitoring
mechanism that, among other provisions of the
resolution, will allow unrestricted access for
humanitarian assistance, ensure the protection of the
civilian population and address the human rights
situation.
Some of the challenges that demand concrete
action are: including the protection of civilians in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations; sexual and
gender-based violence; and the use of cluster
munitions.
Access of humanitarian assistance to civilians
during armed conflict is an issue to which Mexico
devotes particular attention and which it considers to
be a sine non qua for the protection of civilians. My
delegation underscores its disagreement with
interpretations that can restrict or exclude human
dignity in complex situations and that favour positions
that set this humanitarian principle against the
principle of sovereignty.
Member States have an obligation to implement
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations with a timely, proportionate and preferably
preventive focus, in order to limit or minimize the
effects of armed conflict on civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian law.
Gender-based
violence,
including
sexual
violence, whose main victims are women and children,
constitutes another major challenge. In that regard,
Mexico recognizes the Organization’s efforts to combat
this problem, such as the adoption of resolutions on
peacekeeping operations in all of their aspects and on
assistance to and support of victims of exploitation and
sexual abuse committed by United Nations personnel.
Such actions contribute to strengthening the image,
credibility and effectiveness of the Organization.
Mexico calls upon all States to avoid the use of
cluster munitions during armed conflict, because of
their harmful nature and their indiscriminate effects,
which affect entire civilian populations and constitute
an obstacle to sustainable development. On
3 December 2008, in Oslo, Mexico signed the
Convention on Cluster Munitions.
Mexico also advocates that the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council regarding the
protection of civilians in armed conflict should be duly

14

based on and inspired by the norms and principles of
international humanitarian law. That would foster the
further consolidation and development of that body of
norms and would provide additional legitimacy for the
actions and decisions of the Council.
In addition, States, as parties to the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949, have the obligation to respect
and enforce the norms of international humanitarian
law at all times and under all circumstance. That
obligation is binding in particular on all parties to a
conflict, whose duties and responsibilities are based
not only on international humanitarian law, but on
international law in general and customary
international law.
Mexico stresses the importance of cooperation
between States and the United Nations and, in
particular, between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court, with a view to
strengthening the Court and enabling it to fully achieve
the goals it was created to accomplish. The existence
of the International Criminal Court should not only be
an incentive to strengthen national judicial systems, but
should also provide effective mechanism to address
crimes defined in the Rome Statute when national
judicial structures have disappeared as a consequence
of conflict. For that reason, Mexico recently ratified
the Rome Statute, which is a legal instrument of
enormous importance.
The update of the aide-memoire for the
consideration of issues pertaining to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, whose main objective is to
facilitate the evaluation that the Council conducts on
that topic, will be a practical tool that will provide a
base on which to improve analysis and diagnosis of the
key aspects of civilian protection, in particular during
deliberations on the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, and for the strengthening of action in this
sphere, taking into consideration the specific
circumstances of each conflict situation.
Based on what I have outlined, my Government
reiterates its call for all Member States to support the
United Nations and other actors involved in efforts to
create a culture of protection, in which Governments
shoulder their responsibilities; armed groups respect
the norms of international law; the private sector
recognizes the impact of its engagement in countries in
conflict in the context of international humanitarian
law and human rights; and finally, Member States, as

09-20780

S/PV.6066

well as regional and international organizations, act in
a swift and decisive manner when facing humanitarian
crises.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes for his briefing and commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for its advocacy for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Japan places emphasis on the
protection and empowerment of civilians in armed
conflict from the human security perspective, and we
hope that the Security Council will continue to receive
periodic briefings on this issue from the Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
We welcome the adoption of the text of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions at the conference
held in Dublin in May last year as well as the
participation of 94 countries, including Japan, at the
Signing Conference of the Convention held last month
in Oslo. The Convention on Cluster Munitions is a
significant means for advancing a normative
framework conducive to the protection of civilians.
Japan has been actively contributing to the clearance of
unexploded ordnance in countries affected by cluster
munitions remnants, landmines and other ordnance, in
addition to providing assistance to victims of
unexploded ordnance. My Government will continue to
work cooperatively and generously to further
strengthen the international community’s ability to
address cluster munitions.
Japan anticipates that 2009 may well become a
landmark year for the United Nations in realizing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We expect
that the revision of the aide-memoire and an
independent study by OCHA and the Department of
Peacekeeping
Operations
(DPKO)
on
the
implementation of Security Council mandates on the
protection of civilians will help the Council further
deepen its consideration of this issue.
We welcome the completion of the revised aidememoire and are pleased to see the draft presidential
statement by which the Council will adopt it today. We
repeatedly requested the revision of the aide-memoire
in order to increase its practical applicability as a
checklist for the Council’s consideration of
establishing
or
extending
the
mandates
of
peacekeeping operations.
Regarding the independent study, we believe that
it is extremely useful to clarify how mandates on the

09-20780

protection of civilians granted by the Council are
implemented in reality and what problems must be
solved for the activities on the ground to be enhanced.
We hope that the outcome of the study will include
concrete recommendations for those responsible for
implementing the mandates of the Security Council in
the field.
In addition, in order to improve the Council’s
working methods, we wish to express our support for
the Secretariat’s delivery of a timely, appropriate and
informal briefing to the Council’s group of experts on
the situation of the protection of civilians in specific
conflict and post-conflict situations. There is no
question that it would be beneficial for the Council to
receive such a briefing, if it is to make wise decisions
regarding the establishment or extension of mission
mandates.
We are gravely concerned about the dire situation
of vulnerable civilians in armed conflict worldwide,
including in Afghanistan, Iraq, Darfur, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Sri Lanka, as
Under-Secretary-General Holmes pointed out in detail.
We cannot accept deliberate attacks against civilians,
journalists and humanitarian workers; recruitment of
child soldiers in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons; restriction of humanitarian access;
sexual violence; or any other violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law.
In this context, Japan continues to be seriously
concerned about the situation in and around Gaza.
Japan fully supports Security Council resolution 1860
(2009), which was adopted with the broadest possible
political support. We would like to emphasize the
importance of the safety and well-being of all civilians,
and we emphasize that the Palestinian and Israeli
civilian population must be protected. Japan condemns
all violence and hostilities directed against civilians as
well as all acts of terrorism.
The people in Gaza require immediate
humanitarian assistance, and Japan will provide
$10 million in aid, of which $3 million will be
immediately provided through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. Japan also renews the call for an immediate,
durable and fully respected ceasefire, leading to the
full withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza. We fully
support and appreciate the diplomatic efforts made by

15

S/PV.6066

various countries to bring about a ceasefire, especially
those of Egypt.
As we mentioned last week on the occasion of the
briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (see S/PV.6062), humanitarian assistance and
the deployment of peacekeeping missions cannot
provide lasting peace and durable protection: conflict
prevention is the most effective and efficient means to
protect civilians. We must address the root causes of
conflict and invest more in addressing those causes. We
therefore believe that, from the perspective of
translating the concept of human security into practical
solutions, reconstruction, job creation and the
reintegration of displaced persons must be given a
higher priority in peacebuilding strategies and must be
implemented in all post-conflict situations, realizing a
seamless transition from relief to development.
Lastly, we commend humanitarian personnel for
carrying out their heavy responsibilities under
conditions that are often extremely dangerous and
difficult. We are deeply concerned about the
deterioration in ensuring their safety and security. It is
vital that a humanitarian space be provided in which
humanitarian workers can safely perform their essential
duties. We welcome the recent adoption by the General
Assembly of its resolution 63/139, designating
19 August as World Humanitarian Day in order to raise
public awareness about humanitarian activities
worldwide. For our part, Japan calls upon all relevant
parties concerned to take appropriate action to secure
humanitarian space, fully respecting the neutrality and
impartiality of humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Let me take this
opportunity to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes
for his statement and for the good work that he and his
team are doing.
Uganda’s commitment to the protection of
civilians is and will remain a priority. Our experiences
with regard to the reception and protection of refugees,
for example, date back as far as 1959 and have
continued as recently as December 2008, when over
40,000 refugees crossed into Uganda due to instability
in the region. Today, Uganda is host to approximately
145,000 refugees from various parts of the region.
Uganda is a country that has had to endure the
hardship of having a large segment of our population
become internally displaced persons and is a troopcontributing country within the region and beyond

16

Africa, and the level of commitment that it attaches to
the implementation of all the relevant resolutions on
the protection of civilians cannot be overstated.
In countless forums, Uganda has decried the
actions of the so-called Lord’s Resistance Army, led by
Joseph Kony. The activities of the Lord’s Resistance
Army have been characterized by crimes under
international
law,
violations
of
international
humanitarian law and countless human rights abuses.
In this regard, Uganda condemns the renewed activities
of the Lord’s Resistance Army in Orientale Province of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the
continuous forced recruitment of women and children,
massacres of civilians and wilful acts of rape and
torture, looting and destruction of civilian property.
Not only do these acts constitute a permanent threat to
security in the region but they are also in direct
contravention of relevant Security Council resolutions.
Long before the international community got
involved in northern Uganda, our Government made
several attempts to put an end to the senseless activities
of the Lord’s Resistance Army; those attempts ranged
from combat operations and cross-border agreements
to offers of amnesty. At the same time, the Government
created protected areas in which the population in
northern Uganda could assemble for easier protection
as well as for the distribution of humanitarian
assistance, leading to the hitherto unrecognized
phenomenon of internal displacement. All this
notwithstanding, the Government of Uganda continues
to welcome an influx of refugees from within the
region, which has put an undeniable strain on our
limited resources.
Something should be done about non-State actors.
These rebel groups who have terrorized civilians have
no legitimate reason to be protected. These marauding
groups of gangs must be dealt with. They have no
respect for international humanitarian law. Uganda at
one time was being threatened with being placed on the
agenda of the Security Council simply because we
were fighting these gangs. They said we should talk
peace. We pointed out these rebels were not interested
in peace. Eventually, we agreed to talks. But what has
happened? We have been vindicated. The Lord’s
Resistance Army has refused to sign the final peace
agreement. The rest now is history. As I have said, they
are now terrorizing the region, killing civilians. The
international community has now realized that these
gangs must be fought.

09-20780

S/PV.6066

What lessons can we draw from this history?
These rebel groups must not be appeased. Sometimes
we give them encouragement by expressions to the
effect that there is no military solution, and this has
given them a pretext to continue their heinous crimes.
As far back as 2004, Uganda developed a
national policy on internally displaced persons in order
to guide all actors in the protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons. With this policy in place,
there was improvement in the standing of the rights of
internally displaced persons and in the Government’s
meeting its responsibilities with regard to protection
and assistance, as well as living conditions.
It is against that background that Uganda
reiterates its commitment to the protection of the most
vulnerable groups of civilians, especially women,
children and persons with disabilities. The Government
of Uganda has always ensured that it provides
unhindered access to humanitarian personnel to
provide assistance to civilians in armed conflict. The
Uganda People’s Defence Force has always provided
protection to humanitarian workers.
As part of Government efforts to implement
resolution 1612 (2005) and to instil respect for the
rights of civilians among armed groups, Uganda has
spared no effort in setting up educational programmes
to curb the incidence of rights abuses. The Government
of Uganda has periodically carried out human rights
education programmes for the Uganda People’s
Defence Force and has participated in joint activities
with UNICEF and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
development of a national action plan against the
recruitment of children in armed conflict.
Uganda welcomes the presidential statement and
the aide-memoire to be adopted by the Security
Council
today,
particularly
because
regional
organizations like the African Union have recently
taken up peacekeeping mandates in certain areas of
conflict in the region. The actions of the Council are of
great importance to Uganda as country whose troops
make up a large percentage of the current deployment
of the African Union Mission in Somalia. These
documents serve as a reliable blueprint for us,
especially as we venture into situations of uncertainty
that are characterized by quickly evolving
circumstances.

09-20780

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
various United Nations agencies and international nongovernmental organizations, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, that have
protection mandates and have worked closely with our
Government in times of instability and hardship.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which is a subject of great importance
and whose consideration by the Council is all the more
important in light of the tragedy currently unfolding in
Gaza, unfortunately demonstrating once again that
civilians are always the first victims of armed
confrontation. I should also like to thank Mr. John
Holmes for his briefing.
The protection of civilians has several times been
the subject of appeals and recommendations by the
Security Council. Unfortunately, we must note that
they have remained a dead letter. We still have
occasion to regret the many violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law in conflict zones,
notwithstanding all of the legal instruments in force, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention and the 1977
Additional Protocols.
We are particularly alarmed that civilians are
often deliberately targeted by combatants, who often
subject them to the worst abuse, including intentional
massacres, cruel and degrading treatment, rape, the
blocking of humanitarian access and, not least, the
enlistment of children in armed forces. These acts are
intolerable and deeply reprehensible, since they imperil
the most precious human asset — human dignity, the
fact of being human.
In this regard, the situation of refugees and
displaced persons deserves the ongoing attention of the
international community. As the briefing of 8 January
gave us occasion to recall, these groups are easy
combat targets, in particular those who are most
vulnerable, living in camps and in very precarious
conditions.
Ensuring the protection of civilian populations is
primarily the responsibility of States and of parties to
conflicts. They must fully shoulder their obligations
under relevant national and international legal
instruments. They must not only cease their

17

S/PV.6066

reprehensible actions but also enable unconditional
access to victims by humanitarian personnel.
The international community must also shoulder
its responsibilities by providing resources to assist
civilian populations. That is why thinking about the
responsibility to protect should become more profound
in order to avoid repetition of tragedies that we have
witnessed in the recent past. We must reconcile the
rights conferred on States by their sovereignty with the
duty of the international community to react in an
urgent and appropriate manner in cases of humanitarian
disaster due to the inability of or refusal by a State to
end that disaster.
For its part, and because it is the primary
guarantor of international peace and security, the
Security Council must be at the core of this common
action. With regard to peacekeeping operations, the
Council must provide adequately defined mandates.
Furthermore, in cooperation with the Secretariat, it
must provide for appropriate training for the personnel
of peacekeeping operations in the areas of human
rights, humanitarian law and the rights of refugees,
with the aim of zero tolerance for any kind of abuse of
which they may be guilty.
The best guarantees that we can offer to civilians
for their protection are peace, stability and security. In
other words, we must work to prevent conflicts, in
particular by eliminating their underlying causes and
settling conflicts swiftly when they break out.
Accordingly, we need to direct our efforts to the
establishment of the rule of law, to strengthening
democracy, good governance and respect for human
rights and to safeguarding the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. States must deal squarely
with combating impunity by ensuring, in particular, the
independence and effectiveness of their legal systems.
Furthermore, and in keeping with resolution 1325
(2000), there is an urgent and crucial need to
strengthen the role of women in the prevention and
peaceful settlement of conflicts as well as in postconflict reconstruction efforts. Accordingly, we fully
support the updating of the aide-memoire, which is a
practical analytical and diagnostic instrument for
addressing issues relating to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.
The most fundamental right of every human
being is the right to live in dignity and security. No

18

situation, not even war, can be used as an extenuating
circumstance to call this right into question. States,
parties to conflicts, the Security Council and the entire
international community have an obligation to make
the protection of civilians an absolute priority.
We therefore pay tribute to all those who, on all
of the various battlefields around the world, have made
this their vocation, sometimes at the cost of their lives.
Without humanitarian personnel, many of the chaotic
situations that we witness would be even more chaotic.
Humanitarian staff must therefore be urgently provided
with the most effective protection possible. This too is
our collective responsibility.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, I wish to
express our gratitude to the French presidency for the
opportunity to discuss in the Security Council the
important issue of the protection of civilians during
armed conflict. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. John Holmes,
for his very comprehensive briefing.
Croatia associates itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later by the
representative of the Czech Republic.
In the light of the forthcoming sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions, which lie at the core of international
humanitarian law, this debate comes at a timely
juncture. Yet, 60 years on, civilians continue to account
for the majority of victims of actions by parties to
armed conflicts and are often deliberately targeted and
subjected to appalling human rights violations in
contemporary conflicts worldwide.
In this regard, Croatia shares the deep concern for
the suffering of civilians in many areas around the
world, from the conflict areas of the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the current
situation in and around Gaza to the ongoing
humanitarian crises in Myanmar and Zimbabwe. In the
case of Gaza, we continue to appeal to all parties to
exercise maximum restraint in avoiding civilian
casualties and to put the interests of civilian
populations
first,
especially
by
guaranteeing
unhindered access to humanitarian assistance and
supplies and full respect of resolution 1860 (2009).
Situations of particular concern are those that
continue to be characterized by indiscriminate violence
and attacks against women and children. The increased

09-20780

S/PV.6066

use of sexual and gender-based violence in armed
conflict, including as a tactic of war, demand more
effective implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). The struggle against impunity is an
integral element of the protection of civilians, and we
must ensure that the policy of zero tolerance towards
sexual violence and abuse becomes a reality in all
aspects of the Council’s work. This calls for robust
efforts on the part of United Nations country-specific
mandates to overturn the pervading sense of impunity
in countries like Côte d’Ivoire and the Sudan.
As we recently learned from the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, conflicts remain the
major cause of the increasing number of refugees and
internally displaced persons in the world. Their
conditions are often exacerbated by serious security
problems and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law by combatants in the conduct of
hostilities, which are often characterized by sexual
violence and impeded humanitarian access. Croatia
places great importance on the security situation in and
around refugee camps. Given that, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, such places
remain the primary recruiting ground for child soldiers,
more efforts are needed to mainstream child protection
advisers in both Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and Department of Political Affairs
missions.
Although this Council has established a broad
framework of thematic resolutions on this issue,
greater systematic follow-up by the Council is
required. In particular, Croatia advocates the need for a
more consistent approach at the country-specific level.
Even in cases where mandates include measures for
civilian protection and respect for international
humanitarian law, such as, most notably, in the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the results have
been very mixed to date. This failure to effectively
implement these measures is often attributed to the
absence of a systemic understanding of what types of
activities fall under the umbrella of protection within
peacekeeping mandates. Only when the Council’s
intent is translated into clear and actionable guidelines
can protection-oriented initiatives on the ground be
fully achieved by adequately trained personnel armed
with the requisite resources.

09-20780

While the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with the State, world leaders at the 2005
World Summit recognized the responsibility we all
share to protect vulnerable communities from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. The international community has
already demonstrated its preparedness to take
collective action when national authorities manifestly
fail to investigate, prosecute and adequately punish
violations of international humanitarian law. We should
not be seen wanting in translating these words into
action. For its part, Croatia believes that the
International Criminal Court has a key part to play
when States fail to uphold these inherent
responsibilities. It is our conviction that the obligation
to cooperate with the Court, arising both from the
Rome Statute and from decisions of the Security
Council, must be strictly adhered to.
Furthermore, the full implementation of smart
sanctions and other targeted measures by the Security
Council with respect to individuals or parties to
conflict carrying out widespread or systematic
violations of international humanitarian or human
rights law, including sexual violence, should not be
overlooked.
We learned from the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement
of Women, in an earlier debate this past October, that
some important progress has been achieved in
mainstreaming a gender perspective into the overall
peace and security architecture. Indeed, the Council’s
thematic debates and discussions of country-specific
conflict situations on its agenda that have addressed the
protection of women and children have produced
positive results. The watershed recognition in
resolution 1820 (2008) of all sexual violence against
civilians as a security threat and the need for a
systematic response has created important momentum
towards the protection of civilians, which we must be
careful not to lose in the ensuing work of the Council.
As part of this systematic response, Croatia further
believes that, in line with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation, the Council should dispatch more
missions to assess situations in which sexual violence
is being used as a tactic of war.
Alongside the protection of civilians, another
critical humanitarian challenge continues to be that of
access of humanitarian assistance. The interests of
civilian populations must be placed first, especially by

19

S/PV.6066

guaranteeing unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance and supplies. Croatia is also deeply
concerned by the continued dangers and security risks
faced by humanitarian personnel at the field level as
they operate in increasingly complex situations.
Croatia commends the courage and commitment of
those who work under great personal risk, especially
locally recruited staff. We urge all humanitarian
personnel on the ground to adhere to the principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence.
As a strong supporter of the Oslo process from its
inception, Croatia joined other signatories in signing
the Convention on Cluster Munitions in December. The
conclusion of a legally binding international instrument
that prohibits the use, production, transfer and
stockpiling of cluster munitions represents an
important step towards enhancing the security of
civilians in conflicts in many regions worldwide.
In conclusion, Croatia views the latest updated
version of the aide-memoire to be annexed to the draft
presidential statement as a welcome step. We would
like to express our gratitude to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for all its efforts
in compiling the latest text in consultation with the
Council. It represents an important catalogue of
Council precedents on key issues, which will allow the
Council to be more systematic in its approach to
integrating the protection of civilians into all relevant
aspects of its work. Given the current trends in
contemporary conflicts, Croatia would like to see the
aide-memoire updated on a more regular basis.
Finally, in line with the EU’s position, Croatia
supports the establishment of an informal expert group
on the protection of civilians. Croatia reiterates its
continued commitment to the protection of civilians
and looks forward to working with Council members
and the international community to greatly improve
their situation worldwide.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We believe the initiative to hold this meeting
to be a very timely one, especially in the light of events
in Gaza and the rising number of innocent civilian
deaths in other regions of the world. We are grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for the relevant
information he has provided on this issue.
Despite the existence of a host of international
legal instruments and normative mechanisms, entirely
innocent civilians continue to suffer in conflict

20

situations, including women, children and older
persons and humanitarian personnel providing
assistance to them. We are convinced that, in order to
address the situation, we must abandon selective
approaches to violations of international humanitarian
law. There must also be strict adherence to human
rights standards.
The relevance of that need was underscored by
the tragic events of August 2008 in the southern
Caucasus, when Russia’s intervention alone prevented
ethnic cleansing in South Ossetia. I recall that, on the
night of 7 August, Georgian troops ruthlessly attacked
the town of Tskhinvali. Innocent civilians were
subjected to a barrage of heavy artillery and the
launching of numerous Katyusha rockets. The Zar
road, along which refugees were attempting to flee the
town to safety, was singled out for attack. Homes,
schools, kindergartens, hospitals and even ambulances
were fired at. In the first hours, many hundreds of
people were injured or killed. In recent months, those
facts have been convincingly corroborated by
documents as well as the media. However, certain
influential members of the international community are
in no hurry to provide a political assessment of the
situation, without which it is impossible to seriously
consider the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Of course, prosecuting those
responsible for those crimes continues to be an urgent
matter.
We strongly condemn deliberate attacks on and
the killing of civilians through the indiscriminate or
disproportionate use of force, which is a gross
violation of international humanitarian law. In that
regard, we are deeply concerned about the escalation of
the crisis in Gaza as a result of Israel’s military
operation. The situation in Gaza is on the very brink of
a humanitarian catastrophe. The Russian Federation
has provided urgent humanitarian assistance to Gaza’s
population through Egypt.
As a result of full-scale military operations, there
has been a sharp increase in casualties among the
Palestinian civilian population, more than a third of
which have been women and children. We are deeply
concerned about reports of Israel’s use of cluster
bombs, whose use is prohibited in populated areas, the
destruction of infrastructure, including United Nations
schools, and the deaths of humanitarian personnel from
Israeli fire. Those actions are absolutely inappropriate
and are flagrant violations of international law. We call

09-20780

S/PV.6066

upon all parties to comply with resolution 1860 (2009)
and to immediately cease fire.
Civilian populations continue to suffer in Iraq and
Afghanistan. That matter should receive greater
attention from the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies. There is no justification for armed
groups that attack innocent civilians, commit terrorist
acts or seize hostages. Unfortunately, civilians continue
to die in Iraq and Afghanistan with tragic regularity,
and not just as a result of their actions. Once again, just
a few days ago, 17 Afghan civilians, including women
and children, were killed during a coalition operation
in eastern Afghanistan. We underscore the
responsibility of all parties, including the multinational
forces, to ensure the security of civilians and comply
strictly with the norms of international humanitarian
law. We support a careful investigation into such
incidents, including punishment for the guilty. That
also applies to the activities of private security
companies. The holding of hundreds of children in
military jails in those countries on the basis of arbitrary
accusations and without access to civilian justice is
unacceptable.
We are also very concerned about the situations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia,
where civilian lives are under serious threat from the
criminal actions of armed groups.

The United States shares the concerns of the
international community with regard to the
vulnerability of civilians who find themselves in the
midst of conflict through no choice or fault of their
own. Women and children are particularly vulnerable
in those situations. While the need for the protection of
civilians is clear, how to achieve that goal is one of our
most pressing collective challenges.
The primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with all the parties to an armed conflict.
The United Nations also has an important role. The
protection of civilians is now specifically included in
half of the mandates of current peacekeeping
operations, and is the core mandate of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
The United States shares the view that we must
stand ready to help to promote the safety and security
of the dedicated humanitarian workers who attempt to
provide relief for civilian populations throughout the
world. As we all know, there is a lack of humanitarian
access in many areas of conflict, which should be
urgently addressed.

The situation of Darfur’s civilians is also
difficult. There is hope for improvement as a result of
the political process of negotiations, including the full
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

The situation in Gaza gives us all pause, as we
contemplate how the conduct of hostilities and
violence in both Gaza and southern Israel impacts the
civilian population. As suggested by resolution 1860
(2009), intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the
implementation of the two-State solution will provide
the ultimate guarantee of the protection of civilians in
both Gaza and southern Israel.

The protection of civilians is a top priority for the
Governments of States involved in conflict, but the
responsibility to provide for the safety and security of
civilians is borne by all parties to an armed conflict. In
order to resolve such situations, the international
community must effectively seek scrupulous
compliance by all parties with the norms of
international humanitarian law and the relevant
decisions of the Security Council.

For the immediate term, the United States
reiterates the call, recently made in resolution 1860
(2009), that all violence against civilians, including
acts of terror, be halted, with an eye towards a durable
and fully respected ceasefire. We must not forget,
however, that this outburst of violence was instigated
by Hamas, a terrorist organization that called for the
destruction of Israel, by its barrage of rockets and
mortars that deliberately targeted Israeli civilians.

Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I too
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes
for his briefing. I would also like to thank him and his
staff for their work to update the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Ongoing hostilities in Gaza have exacerbated the
plight of the Palestinian people by making it more
difficult for the international community to deliver
much-needed humanitarian assistance and goods to the
people in Gaza. The United States echoes the call for
the unimpeded provision and distribution of adequate
humanitarian assistance to meet the growing

09-20780

21

S/PV.6066

humanitarian needs of Palestinians in Gaza, including
provision of food, fuel, shelter and medical treatment,
as well as protection for the displaced. We further note
an additional obligation of all parties to refrain from
deliberately using the civilian population and religious,
educational and civic institutions to shield active
combatants, command and control facilities and
munitions stockpiles. The United States calls on Hamas
to immediately cease this reprehensible and cowardly
practice that places innocent civilians at grave and
unacceptable risk.

We call on Member States to renew their
commitment to uphold the right to asylum, to protect
civilians from forcible return to situations where they
fear persecution and to provide durable solutions for
refugees and stateless persons. The United States for its
part provides a significant portion of the funds needed
by United Nations agencies to do their good work, as
evidenced in part by our recent pledge of $85 million
to assist the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in its work to
care for Palestinian refugees.

While Israel has an unquestionable right to
defend itself against terrorist attacks, we urge the
Government of Israel to take all appropriate steps to
ease access and movement for humanitarian goods and
workers, to avoid civilian casualties and to minimize
the impact on innocent civilians.

The United States is working in other ways to
actively promote the protection of civilians. A primary
example is our work in training peacekeepers through
the Africa Contingency Operations Training and
Assistance (ACOTA) programme. Through ACOTA we
provide training for African peacekeepers preparing to
deploy to regional or international missions on their
continent. In 2008, the United States trained over
26,000 African peacekeepers through this programme.
Ninety-two per cent of these ACOTA-trained
peacekeepers are deployed to the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire,
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, with the additional
8 per cent standing by for planned deployment.

My Government also remains gravely concerned
about the ongoing and widespread use of sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations throughout
the world. This is one of the most significant protection
challenges, and one that is too often ignored. Sexual
and gender-based violence must be more effectively
addressed, and United Nations peacekeeping missions
have a clear role to play in preventing this violence and
addressing its impact. The United States condemns
sexual violence as an instrument of policy and calls for
an end to this gross injustice. We urge States to take
concrete steps to end both the use of rape as an
instrument of war and impunity for perpetrators.
We are also deeply concerned about the
recruitment of child soldiers by Governments and rebel
movements in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in the Sudan, by the Lord’s Resistance Army, by the
Burmese regime, by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam in Sri Lanka, by the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia and by other groups and
Governments too numerous to name here.
The
United
States
continues
to
seek
comprehensive approaches to resolve protracted
refugee situations in all parts of the world through
support for durable solutions. We also seek innovative
approaches to develop livelihood strategies and to
maximize opportunities for the self-reliance and
empowerment of refugees. Where conflict is causing
civilians to flee and seek asylum, we are working
actively with other Governments to provide protection
to those in need.

22

The United States remains committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, both in
connection with the work of the Council and in our
activities throughout the world. We applaud efforts by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other United Nations offices to assist the civilian
victims of armed conflict. We fully endorse the work of
the United Nations in this realm and pledge continued
United States support to prevent and mitigate the
effects of conflict on civilian populaces throughout the
world.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing today. We share many of the concerns that he
has raised, and the aide-memoire that we have gathered
to adopt today shows the weight of consideration that
the Security Council has given to this issue over the
years.

09-20780

S/PV.6066

But I think we need to apply some perspective:
Have we really come far enough? Given the perilous
situation in which many civilian populations find
themselves today, it is imperative that the Security
Council proactively ensure that this issue remains at
the forefront of our work.
We are very grateful to the peacekeepers who
take on the vital protection function. But we should not
forget that it is the parties to an armed conflict who
bear the primary obligation under law to protect
civilians.
I want to say at the outset that I have listened
very carefully to the debate today, and I have also
listened to the national experiences that Council
colleagues have described. I must say that I do not
agree with all the characterizations of situations that
we have heard today. But I do not want to turn this of
all meetings into a political debate, so I will not go into
detail. I would simply like to place on record that we
do not share all those characterizations.
The Under-Secretary-General rightly led off with
Gaza, and this is very much at the forefront of
everyone’s minds, as we have heard today. We
discussed it also in last week’s meeting with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (see
S/PV.6062). The civilian population now is all the
more vulnerable because it cannot flee. I would like to
join other Council members in reiterating the call for
an immediate and durable ceasefire, condemning all
acts of violence directed against civilians and
condemning all acts of terrorism. What we and others
need to see is the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009).
I would also like to pay tribute to the United
Nations and other workers who are trying to bring
stability, peace and help to Gaza in what are obviously
extremely difficult circumstances.
We have heard a number of speakers raise various
conflicts which are on our minds at the moment. In
addition to Gaza, I would like to bring up the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Events there
have emphasized the scale of the task we face.
Obligations are not being met. The Council has been
very clear that the primary task for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) is the protection of civilians. We
would like to see its unambiguous mandate in this
respect translated into action on the ground. We would

09-20780

like to see the concept of operations adjusted to reflect
the priority that the Council attaches to the protection
of civilians. In turn, that requires an understanding of
the specific activities that peacekeepers can conduct to
turn Council language into reality.
A while ago, it was incumbent on NATO and
other nations to go into Bosnia to uphold the Dayton
Peace Agreement. I think that was one of the first
mandates in recent times to have had protection of
civilians as one of its core tasks. I would like to take
this opportunity to invite all Council members who, for
one reason or another, opposed robust language in
peacekeeping mandates on the protection of civilians
and who opposed chapter VII authority to back up
forces who undertake tasks for the protection of
civilians to reflect on whether their actions, whatever
the political justification may be, are actually, overall,
aiding the Council’s work on protection of civilians.
The protection of civilians is not a role for which
many militaries have traditionally trained. The
implementation of Council directives on protection
have been met with adaptation and flexibility by
United Nations peacekeepers. We now have good
practice on which we can build, but we need a more
systematic approach on this to ensure that protection
issues are properly understood and that there is
comprehensive United Nations guidance on how
exactly to go about engaging in protection: what it
means to take given decisions on a given day on the
ground. We feel that practice here is somewhat
incomplete and that more training for troop
contributors in the field could be useful in that respect.
Afghanistan was mentioned by the UnderSecretary-General and a number of other speakers. We
very much regret the civilian non-combatant deaths
and casualties there, and we send our condolences to
the victims. I want to make it clear that we do not
target civilians. We keep our procedures on targeting
under rigorous review, and we will continue to do so.
Other things that we have been discussing include
the informal Council expert group. We hope that we
can create such a group to help the Security Council,
under resolution 1674 (2006), to systematically address
protection issues. The aide-memoire can be an
important instrument underpinning the expert group’s
considerations. Likewise, we support the United
Nations system’s ongoing work to produce guidance
for peacekeepers, as I said earlier.

23

S/PV.6066

If we engaged in more systematic consideration
of protection issues, such as through an expert group,
that might also provide an opportunity for some
creative thinking about how to deal with uniquely
difficult situations. We heard about the Lord’s
Resistance Army today; we too are very disturbed by
the recent reports of the high number of civilian
casualties that they have inflicted. I think that the
Permanent Representative of Uganda captured the
problem well when he talked about the need for the
Council to find some way to address non-State actors. I
hope that that could be a theme of ours in 2009.
I should like to conclude by mentioning the
responsibility to protect. The 2005 World Summit
Outcome is clear about the responsibility that falls to
the Council under the responsibility to protect. There is
not yet a unified view within the Council or within the
membership at large about what the responsibility to
protect means in practice, but I hope that the recent
work done in that area, including by representatives of
the Secretary-General, can shortly bring us to a
common understanding of what needs to be done as
part of our work to address the question of enhancing
the protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
I should like at the outset to welcome the UnderSecretary-General and commend his continued
commitment, as well as that of his teams on the
ground, to the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. I should also like to thank him for his
introductory statement today.
France, of course, aligns itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.
Our debate is taking place in a particular context,
which everyone has stressed. We are, of course, deeply
concerned by the situation in Gaza. Once again, the
civilian population is paying a terrible price. We urge
the parties to the conflict to spare civilians.
International
law,
in
particular
international
humanitarian law, must be respected. We condemn
violence against civilians, whether they be Palestinians
or Israelis. We also condemn terrorism in all its forms.
In our view, the absolute priority should be the
implementation of a ceasefire, as requested in
resolution 1860 (2009). In that regard, we hope that the

24

diplomatic efforts under way, in particular the FrancoEgyptian plan, will very soon succeed. The news
reaching us from Cairo appears promising in that
regard.
Generally speaking, the international community
must ensure effective compliance with the rules of
international law concerning the protection of civilians.
The United Nations is sparing no effort in that respect,
particularly in the context of peacekeeping operations.
It is preparing to take over from the military missions
carried out by the European Union in eastern Chad and
north-eastern Central African Republic, in addition to
that carried out with the African Union in Darfur,
through the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.
The renewed mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo at the end of last year is centred on the
protection of civilians, and we welcome that. However,
the civilian protection mandates entrusted to
peacekeeping operations in cooperation with the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
must be concretely reflected on the ground. That
dimension must be systematically incorporated into
operation planning documents. This point will be
among those to be discussed at the peacekeeping
seminar and debate to be held in the Council by France
and the United Kingdom on 22 and 23 January.
France welcomes the establishment of the
Security Council’s informal expert group on the
protection of civilians. The group is necessary. It must
enable the Council to respond more systematically to
the need to protect civilians in cases in which a
peacekeeping operation is being considered or
renewed. France thanks OCHA and supports the
updated aide-memoire that we will adopt shortly. It
should serve as a reference. We must also develop
language to address the challenges facing us.
However, France regrets the fact that the aidememoire did not devote a separate section to sexual
violence, as initially planned. Indeed, sexual violence
is used in many conflicts as a weapon of war against
civilians, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the Sudan. Women are particularly
affected. France calls for strict compliance with
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and
encourages the Council to give this issue all the
importance it deserves.

09-20780

S/PV.6066

Finally, we must give particular attention and
particular protection to children. The activities of the
Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict, which France has had the honour
to chair since its establishment, has made it possible to
document the demobilization of thousands of child
soldiers. We must strengthen their reintegration into
civil society and muster the necessary resources to that
end.
France supports the idea that reports of the
Secretary-General on the situations in various countries
should specifically address civilian protection. States
have the primary responsibility for protecting their
populations from the most serious humanitarian
crimes, but the international community must be ready
to mobilize in the event of inability or lack of will on
the part of States.
As members are aware, France is particularly
committed to the concrete implementation of the
concept of the responsibility to protect. It is an
ambitious concept. It does not mean merely intervening
in the midst of a crisis to stop the most horrendous
crimes; it means acting in advance to prevent them. It
is time to strengthen the warning and surveillance
mechanisms in areas and situations at risk. Let us work
together in the months ahead to achieve a consensus on
that point.

can be considered an alternative solution to voluntary
return.
Finally, the number of humanitarian workers
killed this year is the highest ever recorded. We must
protest and combat that situation, which is not
acceptable. All attacks against humanitarian personnel
must cease. Host States must ensure their security, thus
helping to protect civilians.
France appeals — everywhere, strongly and
systematically — for compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law. This battle is
essential. It must be fought in unity and with resolve.
France is committed to it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of the Czech
Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate country Croatia and the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia, as well as Armenia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine, align themselves with this
statement.

What would the protection of civilians be without
the fight against impunity? Those responsible for the
most serious crimes must be pursued and punished. In
particular, France reaffirms its support for the activities
of the International Criminal Court and calls upon all
States to accede to the Rome Statute.

I should like to thank the presidency of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for this
thematic debate and to commend Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his informative briefing.

France welcomes the adoption, at the Dublin
Conference, of a binding text banning all cluster
munitions causing unacceptable damage to civilian
populations, as well as the fact that 94 States have
signed the Convention on Cluster Munitions.

The European Union particularly welcomes this
debate, as it is taking place 60 years after the adoption
of the Geneva Conventions, which contain the core
norms and principles of international humanitarian law
concerning the protection of civilians in situations of
aimed conflict.

Forced displacements concern us. France
commends the activities of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and of all
those involved in providing assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons. The civilian nature of
camps for refugees and displaced persons must be
guaranteed. The voluntary return of such persons, as
long as the conditions for security are fulfilled, and the
rights of returnees must be guaranteed. Resettlement

09-20780

In this respect, the EU urges States that have not
yet done so to accede to both Additional Protocols of
1977 to the Geneva Conventions and to consider
accepting the competence of the International FactFinding Commission, pursuant to Article 90 of the
Additional Protocol I.
On numerous occasions, the Security Council has
demanded that all parties to armed conflicts comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian

25

S/PV.6066

law to protect civilians in armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, as we speak, civilians continue to bear
the brunt of the conflicts.
The EU emphasizes the need to develop in
parallel additional concepts based on the aim to protect
civilian populations, human security and the
responsibility to protect. The EU welcomes the
endorsement by heads of State and Government of the
principle of the responsibility of protection; therefore,
we call for the full implementation of this principle by
the Security Council as well as by the General
Assembly. The EU is ready to contribute and
commends other organizations or groups for taking
initiatives to make this principle a norm in
international relations.
The EU is firmly committed to the full and
effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). The EU is
concerned by the continued high prevalence of sexual
and gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict, including as a tactic of war. Resolution 1820
(2008) also calls for dealing with these crimes as a
security problem, requiring a systematic security
response that is proportional in scale and magnitude.
The EU has been strengthening its policy on
sexual and gender-based violence by pursuing three
objectives: preventing violence, protecting and
supporting victims, and combating the impunity of
perpetrators of violence. The EU member States
demonstrated their deep commitment to these
objectives by co-sponsoring resolution 1820 (2008)
and by adopting long-term EU guidelines on violence
against women and girls and combating all forms of
discrimination against them in 2008, as well as
adopting a European Security and Defence Policy
document on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) as reinforced by resolution 1820 (2008) in the
context of the European Security and Defense Policy.
Similarly, the EU continues to strongly support
the valuable work done by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The EU member States
continue to implement long-term EU guidelines on the
protection of children affected by armed conflict and is
interested in cooperating with other States on this issue
on the basis of resolution 1612 (2005), which sets an

26

enhanced framework for the protection of children in
armed conflict.
The EU remains deeply concerned by the
continuing practice of recruitment and use of child
soldiers, in clear violation of international legal
obligations and other relevant principles. In this
context, I would like to invite all countries to ratify and
implement the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, and to adhere to and follow
the Paris Commitments and Principles adopted in 2007.
We should also bear in mind the basic needs of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The EU is
continuously concerned by the growing number of
internally displaced persons and calls for ensuring their
protection.
Regrettably, in many conflicts, impunity prevails
due to the lack of political will and action. Therefore,
the Security Council should make clear once again that
any action against civilian populations, including
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, are
unacceptable. The International Criminal Court (ICC),
the International Criminal Tribunals and the special
courts are working hard to promote peace and justice.
The EU encourages all States to provide their full
support to the ICC by acceding to the Rome Statute
and cooperating with the Court. All appropriate
measures should be used to prevent violence and to
bring to justice perpetrators of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. The
EU would also like to express its full support for the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide.
Let me reaffirm our gratitude to and solidarity
with humanitarian actors whose safe, unhindered and
timely access to the civilian population, in particular in
times of armed conflict, is a fundamental condition for
the fulfilment of their mandates and mission.
We encourage humanitarian personnel on the
ground to follow the principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence, and we call
on the recipient countries to ensure their safety and
security. We urge all countries that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel and its
Optional Protocol, and we invite the Secretary-General
to further include their provisions in host country and
other agreements.

09-20780

S/PV.6066

A landmark development has recently taken place
on the containment of the risks posed by cluster
munitions. The EU wishes to commend the increasing
support of States for the Convention on Cluster
Munitions, which prohibits the use, production,
transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions. The EU
remains determined to negotiate within the Convention
on Certain Conventional Weapons, a legally binding
instrument that addresses the humanitarian concerns of
cluster munitions in all their aspects. In the view of the
EU, such results would reinforce the importance of this
convention as part of the corpus of international
humanitarian law.
The EU welcomes the progress achieved in the
implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the review of the Geneva Declaration on Armed
Violence and Development during the year 2008.
Mainstreaming coherent policies on small arms and
light weapons within United Nations agencies and
among its Member States remains a challenge that
needs to be addressed in depth.
Finally, the EU maintains the view that the
protection of civilians is a key aspect of the United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and
must be comprehensively, systematically and
consistently incorporated in all Security Council
mandates.
The EU wants to underline that the Security
Council has recently made important decisions that
enforce the protection of civilians component and the
respect of international humanitarian law in the
mandates of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. The EU looks forward to the
Secretary-General’s report on the implementation of
the protection mandates in the peacekeeping missions.
In this context, the EU also emphasizes the need
for close coordination and meaningful positive
synergies of policies regarding the protection of
civilians within the United Nations framework
activities in other key areas, such as human rights,
gender equality, children in armed conflict, the rule of
law, small arms and light weapons, disarmament,

09-20780

demobilization and reintegration, and security sector
reform.
We believe that the updated aide-memoire to be
annexed to the statement by the President of the
Security Council will prove to be an inclusive
instrument in integrating various aspects of the
protection of civilians. I want to express the EU’s firm
support for the establishment of an informal experts
group on the protection of civilians and encourage the
use of the aide-memoire as a reliable reference for
future reviews of peacekeeping and other mandates.
With this, let me reassure the Council of the EU’s
continued commitment on this important issue.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the permanent representative of Italy.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I wish to thank
you, Sir, for taking the initiative to convene this
debate. I also wish to express my sincere appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his thorough
and passionate briefing, which gives us a picture of the
progress achieved and of the ongoing concerns about
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. This
briefing confirms his focused and action-oriented
approach.
Italy fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union. I will touch on points
of particular interest to my country.
Today we have heard once again from UnderSecretary-General
Holmes
a
very
disturbing
description of the negative effects of conflicts around
the world, especially in Gaza and southern Israel:
denials of humanitarian access and the appalling
consequences of hostilities, including the scourge of
sexual violence. When sexual violence targets or is part
of a widespread attack against a civilian population, it
becomes a method of warfare. This is inadmissible. In
such cases, sexual violence constitutes a threat to
international peace and security and the Security
Council, in our view, should be able to intervene.
In operational terms, allow me to take advantage
of my country’s recent experience as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council to recall the following.
When it comes to peacekeeping, United Nations
operations should be clearly mandated to ensure the
protection of civilians, as was the case during the

27

S/PV.6066

negotiations for the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and
to subsequently report on it. Once again, we welcome
the joint study being conducted by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).
We also welcome the positive developments in
the Secretary-General’s proposals for an informal
consultation forum on protection among Council
members at the expert level. We firmly believe that this
would enable all Council members to systematically
consider the protection of civilians in the Council’s
deliberations, specifically on the establishment,
assessment and renewal of peacekeeping mandates. In
this regard, we should encourage DPKO’s development
of policies and guidance to ensure the consistent and
harmonized implementation of the mandates.
With regard to access, we need to enhance the
Emergency Relief Coordinator’s monitoring of and
reporting on serious access constraints.
On a more general note, I would like to recall the
reaffirmation in resolution 1674 (2006) of the principle
of the responsibility to protect, a cardinal achievement
of the United Nations. This principle implies that
sovereignty
brings
special
responsibilities.
Governments must protect their own populations, and
the best way for them to do so is to promote human
rights, the rule of law and democratic governance.
Only when a Government is unable or unwilling to do
so should the international community intervene. The
responsibility to protect should not be perceived in a
confrontational manner; it should be seen instead as an
instrument available to the international community to
overcome crises, provided that the conditions referred
to in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) are met.
In this framework, the debate on the upcoming report
of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ed
Luck, will be a timely opportunity to build on the
consensus achieved at the 2005 World Summit and to
concretely implement the responsibility to protect.
Italy intends to actively participate in that debate.
I would also like to recall my country’s
commitment to combating impunity for international
crimes. In situations in which any civilian population is
the target of attacks, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court provides the legal basis
for holding accountable those responsible for the

28

attacks if a State is unwilling or unable to do so. In this
regard, we must reiterate our commitment to ending
impunity.
In closing, we welcome the Council’s
endorsement of the aide-memoire and stress the need to
implement the approaches it sets out on a more regular
and consistent basis.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I would like to extend my
thanks to France for convening this important debate
today, and to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing this morning and for all his very dedicated
efforts for the protection of civilians.
This year’s debate looks forward to the upcoming
tenth anniversary of landmark achievements in
advancing the protection of civilians in the Council
stemming from resolution 1265 (1999) — a resolution
that was groundbreaking in proposing actions to
address both legal and physical protection concerns.
Since this issue was first brought onto the Council’s
agenda, important progress has been made. Canada
applauds efforts to ensure that the protection of
civilians becomes part of our collective consciousness.
Nonetheless, critical gaps remain between key
principles and the daily actions taken to respond to
protection challenges — gaps keenly felt by civilians
in conflict situations around the world.
Civilian populations caught in armed conflict
often account for the majority of casualties as indirect
victims and, more sobering still, as deliberate targets.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the recent
escalation of fighting has led to the displacement of
hundreds of thousands of people, as well as to a serious
increase of sexual and gender-based violence. In Sri
Lanka, civilian populations continue to face unending
displacement as they move ahead of shifting front lines
to avoid crossfires.
In Afghanistan, over a quarter of a century of
conflict has taken a heavy toll on the population and
serves as a potent reminder of why our support for the
Afghan Government is so important. Needs-based
humanitarian action remains a key priority for Canada.
Working with international partners, we remain
focused on saving lives, alleviating suffering and

09-20780

S/PV.6066

building self-reliance among the most vulnerable of the
Afghan populace.

protection responsibilities must have the knowledge
and training required to effectively fulfil this role.

Looking ahead, there is much that the Security
Council and all Member States can do. We have at our
disposal a sophisticated normative legal framework
based on international law and Security Council
resolutions that lay out a set of mutually reinforcing
commitments on the protection of civilians and
responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security. But we must move from
commitments by the Council to practical action. This
can be done by bolstering the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms which will assist in responding to given
situations with the right tools in a timely and effective
manner. Canada is particularly interested in progress
on efforts to report rapidly to the Council when
humanitarian access is denied or deliberately hindered.
We applaud efforts to bring such instances to the
Council’s attention more systematically.

The aide-memoire on the protection of civilians
serves as an important framework for defining threats
that arise to civilian populations. Practical tools of this
type facilitate effective responses to protection
challenges. We support efforts to revise this important
document.

Humanitarian workers are also increasingly
targeted, as we have seen in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and Afghanistan;
those are acts that we strongly condemn. Ensuring the
safety of humanitarian workers is vital. We call on all
parties to conflicts to respect the neutrality, impartiality
and independence of humanitarian workers who
undertake critical life-saving work, often at great
personal risk.
It is important to strengthen the capacity of the
international humanitarian system to address protection
issues through mechanisms such as the protection
cluster. Humanitarian and resident coordinators, as
well as United Nations staff, must be confident and
steadfast in raising protection concerns with relevant
parties to conflict. The deployment of protection
experts through the United Nations Protection Standby
Capacity Project has become an important and
successful element in filling capacity gaps in the field.
(spoke in French)
The Council and the broader United Nations
membership have a role to play in ensuring that those
who commit serious violations of international law be
brought to justice. Here, the work of the International
Criminal Court is critical in fostering accountability. It
is also vital that protection issues be translated into
clear and achievable operational guidance for military
and civilian actors. Those upon whom we entrust

09-20780

For those affected and displaced by conflict, our
actions matter far more than our words. Protection of
civilians must be a priority. It is no easy task to resolve
these issues or translate international legal norms into
practical and realistic commitments. Nothing that is
valuable in life is ever easy. But it is our collective
duty to ensure that civilians everywhere will be
afforded the basic human dignity that each individual
deserves.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): The twentieth century
lingers when it comes to the number of civilians killed
in armed conflicts. Well into the first decade of this
present century, a grim trend continues unabated in its
path of destruction: civilian casualties still far
outnumber combatants killed in action. In parts of the
world, blatant disregard for international humanitarian
law has led to atrocities, including genocide and crimes
against humanity, which we had hoped would belong to
the history books. Therefore, my delegation can only
welcome the Council’s growing attention to this issue
and today’s debate called for by France.
Among several aspects related to the protection
of civilian casualties, I will touch upon the two that I
believe lie at the core of the problem.
The first aspect is the failure of parties to
conflicts to abide by their international obligations.
Here, there can be no confusion or complacency. All —
State and non-State actors — are bound by
international humanitarian law and must fully respect
it. Just as importantly, if and when observance is faulty
or non-existent, it is up to the international community
to ensure accountability. The tragic evidence of the
importance of protecting civilians in conflicts and a
test to our resolve in doing so is the current situation in
Gaza. I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his briefing and to express our deep
appreciation to him for the outstanding work that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) is doing under the most trying of
circumstances.

29

S/PV.6066

The disproportionate response by Israel has taken
a dramatic toll on civilians in Gaza. The numbers of
people killed and injured grow by the hour. As we have
just heard, the number of dead is now over 900 people
and the number of injured is fast approaching 5,000,
and an unacceptably high proportion of the victims are
civilians, in many cases women and children. Hospitals
are near breaking point. Several thousand people have
left their homes. Around 35,000 people have sought
refuge at United Nations facilities. Food, water, sewage
treatment, fuel, electricity and other basic items are
lacking or are gravely insufficient for the
overwhelming majority of the population. According to
information from the United Nations, civilians are
terrorized, traumatized and feeling trapped and helpless
in a deadly rage of violence and destruction.
The firing on humanitarian convoys last week
and the shelling in the vicinity of United Nations
schools being used as safe havens for displaced people
are intolerable and cannot be justified under any
circumstances whatsoever. We join the United Nations
in asking for an independent investigation of the
incidents, which must not be repeated. Full
accountability is indispensable. We are encouraged by
the fact that United Nations humanitarian aid, which
was briefly interrupted, could be resumed after
reassurances given by Israel were considered credible.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil,
Mr. Celso Amorim, has just concluded a visit to the
region, during which he spoke to the leaders and his
counterparts in Syria, Israel, Jordan, Egypt and the
Palestinian National Authority. He left the region even
more convinced that a ceasefire is imperative.
The call made by resolution 1860 (2009) must be
heeded immediately. That is so because innocent
civilians are being killed in large numbers, and that
must stop. It is also so because the lack of
implementation of the resolution will erode the
credibility of the Security Council, with consequences
that go far beyond the present crisis. We therefore call
for a mobilization of the international community to
ensure full and immediate compliance with resolution
1860 (2009).
The second aspect I wish to comment upon is
related to the first: the role of the United Nations when
parties fail to abide by their obligations and
peacekeeping forces are confronted or expect to be
confronted with violence directed against civilians.

30

This aspect is a growing concern of the international
community, and of the Security Council in particular.
The need for United Nations forces to protect
civilians in their areas of operation is a key moral and
political component of peacekeeping missions. Our
collective conscience could not and would not accept a
situation where the United Nations would stand idly by
as civilians are injured or killed on its watch. Public
support for the Organization would suffer if it were
seen as unable or unwilling to protect civilians in the
midst of armed conflicts witnessed by its peacekeeping
personnel.
For that situation to be avoided, it is essential that
the Council continue to take steps to craft mandates
and secure military resources consistent with such
moral and political imperatives. The recent
strengthening of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its authorized reinforcement testify to
the importance that the Council and the United Nations
give to this crucial task.
The adequate protection of civilians with refugee
status must also be ensured. It is indispensable that the
principle of non-refoulement is respected, as well as
the right to seek asylum.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s
conclusion in his report to the Council dated
28 October 2007 (S/2007/643) that special attention
must be paid to the issue of sexual violence in armed
conflict. In the case of such violations of international
humanitarian law, as well other practices tantamount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, the
Council must seriously consider referring appropriate
situations to the International Criminal Court.
The increasing incidence of deliberate attacks
against humanitarian workers is also an area in which
the Council must continue to focus its efforts. Such
attacks are wholly unacceptable and must not be
tolerated. It is absolutely essential that the
humanitarian space be fully preserved and that safe and
unhindered access to populations in need be assured.
We hope that the adoption by the Council today
of the updated aide-memoire prepared by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
addresses these and other important issues, will
contribute to the concrete implementation of the
Council’s resolutions on protection of civilians in

09-20780

S/PV.6066

armed conflict, especially resolutions 1674 (2006) and
1820 (2008). More importantly, we hope that the
Council will remain engaged in efforts to effectively
address the need to protect civilians in armed conflicts
when the parties fail to fulfil their obligations.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this deliberation on the critical issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his
important briefing.
The issue before us is one that has certainly
received heightened attention. However, more needs to
be done to match decisions and declarations with
reality, as we are still witnessing a large number of
civilians falling victim to armed conflicts around the
world.
Indonesia is committed to addressing the impact
of armed conflict on civilians. We are both deeply
concerned and saddened that civilians continue to be
the victims of acts of violence committed by parties to
armed conflicts, including as the result of deliberate
targeting, the indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
and sexual and gender-based violence, as well as other
acts that are in violation of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law.
We wish to underscore at least three basic
conditions as prerequisites to providing protection for
civilians in armed conflicts.
First, safe and unhindered access should be given
for humanitarian personnel to provide assistance to
civilians in armed conflict. The deliberate targeting of
humanitarian convoys and personnel is a deplorable
and unacceptable situation and one that is patently
illegal.
Secondly, humanitarian personnel need to
continue to uphold and respect the broad principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in
carrying out their role in a zone of conflict. The
implementation of those principles will remove any
justification for the sides in a conflict to hamper the
provision of aid and assistance to populations in need.
And thirdly, the parties to armed conflict should
take all precautions and measures necessary to spare
civilians and humanitarian workers and facilities from
the effects of hostilities.

09-20780

While the Council’s work in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is critically important, it
cannot succeed on its own in the absence of
cooperation on the ground, and without other relevant
regional and international organizations taking part.
Building a culture of protection, through the
engagement of United Nations agencies, regional and
international humanitarian organizations and other
relevant actors, is essential in order to raise awareness
of civilian suffering and develop action plans to
prevent further loss of life.
The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has become even more prominent in view of
the deep suffering being inflicted by Israel in the Gaza
Strip. Israel continues to stubbornly defy the call by the
international community, principally through Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009), to end its military
operation. Far from heeding that call, Israel has
persisted in breaking international human rights and
humanitarian law. It is especially galling that Israel has
claimed that its actions are intended to protect
civilians. Far from it: Israel’s policy of collective
punishment and its utter disregard of well-established
humanitarian principles are deeply repugnant.
In the past few days, Israel has not only
continued to intensify its air and ground operations, but
has also moved into densely populated Gaza City,
causing a spiralling death toll among Palestinian
civilians. With the escalation of military attacks, it is
even more difficult, if not impossible, for humanitarian
workers to operate and deliver aid to those civilians in
dire need. The consequences are absolutely clear: the
suffering of the Palestinians in Gaza Strip will only get
worse.
If we commit ourselves to protecting civilians in
armed conflict — a commitment that underpins our
deliberations today — this is clearly the moment to act
to protect civilians and to ensure that the fighting
comes to an immediate end.
Finally, we welcome and appreciate the efforts of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in preparing the updated aide-memoire that will be
adopted by the Council.
In this context, we wish to reiterate our belief that
the protection of civilians should and must be based on
the three pillars of the United Nations: human rights,
security and development, which are closely
interlinked. Efforts to protect civilians in armed

31

S/PV.6066

conflict situations will be rendered futile should we
lose sight of that paramount perspective.
The tragic situation in the Gaza Strip clearly
shows not only that civilians need their rights and
security to be protected, but also that they require the
basic necessities for survival and for weathering the
conflict until a resolution is achieved. Clean water,
food and shelter are some of the basic needs that have

32

to be provided by all parties to all civilians in armed
conflict as a matter of necessity, not least in the Gaza
Strip.
The President (spoke in French): Some 30
speakers remain on my list for this meeting. I intend,
with the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

09-20780
