s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/25493
31 March 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council,
at its 3190th meeting, on 31 March 1993, in connection with the Council's
consideration of the item entitled "An agenda for peace: preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking and peace-keeping":
"The Security Council has continued its examination of the
Secretary-General's report entitled 'An Agenda for Peace' (S/24111),
including the problem identified in paragraphs 66-68 - the safety of United
Nations forces and personnel deployed in conditions of strife. The Council
has considered this question with regard to persons deployed in connection
with a Security Council mandate.
"The Security Council commends the Secretary-General for drawing
attention to this problem, including the unconscionable increase in the
number of fatalities and incidents of violence involving United Nations
forces and personnel. The council shares fully the Secretary-General's
concerns.
"The Security Council recognizes that increasingly it has found it
necessary, in discharging its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to deploy United Nations forces and
personnel in situations of real danger. The Council greatly appreciates
the courage and commitment of these dedicated people who accept
considerable personal risk in order to implement the mandates of this
Organization.
"The Security Council recalls that it has been necessary on a number
of occasions to condemn incidents directed against United Nations forces
and personnel.
It deplores the fact that, despite its repeated calls,
incidents of violence continue.
"The Council considers that attacks and other acts of violence,
whether actual or threatened, including obstruction or detention of
persons, against United Nations forces and personnel are wholly
unacceptable and may require the Council to take further measures to ensure
the safety and security of such forces and personnel.

93-18723 (E)

310393

31.0393

I • ••

S/25493
English
Page 2

"The security council reiterates its demand that States and other
parties to various conflicts take all possible steps to ensure the safety
and security of United Nations forces and personnel.
It further demands
that States act promptly and effectively to deter, prosecute and punish all
those responsible for attacks and other acts of violence against such
forces and personnel.
"The Security Council notes the particular difficulties and dangers
that can arise where United Nations forces and personnel are deployed in
situations where the State or States concerned are unable to exercise
jurisdiction in order to ensure the safety and security of such forces and
personnel, or where a State is unwilling to discharge its responsibilities
in this regard.
In such an eventuality, the Council may consider measures
appropriate to the particular circumstances to ensure that persons
responsible for attacks and other acts of violence against United Nations
forces and personnel are held to account for their actions.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report as soon
as possible on the existing arrangements for the protection of United
Nations forces and personnel, and the adequacy thereof, taking into
account, inter alia, relevant multilateral instruments and status of forces
agreements concluded between the United Nations and host countries, as well
as comments he may receive from member States, and to make such
recommendations as he considers appropriate for enhancing the safety and
security of United Nations forces and personnel.
"The Security Council will consider the matter further in the light of
the Secretary-General's report and of work done in the General Assembly and
its subsidiary bodies, including, in particular, the Special Committee on
Peace-keeping Operations established pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 2006 (XIX).
In that regard, the Council recognizes the need for
all relevant bodies of the Organization to take concerted action to enhance
the safety and security of United Nations forces and personnel.
"The Security Council intends to continue its consideration of the
Secretary-General's report entitled 'An Agenda for Peace•, as indicated in
the President's statement of 29 October 1992 (S/24728)."
