164

General Assembly-'lblrty-fourth Session

May 1977, and of the brochure 8 on the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
prepared by the Committee as its contribution to the World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
11. Regional seminars should be organized on an annual
basis, at • the level of the regional commissions, on specific
subjects.
12. The United Nations should adopt other measures aimed
at improving the situation and ensuring the human rights and
dignity of all migrant workers, including the drawing up of a
convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant
workers.
13. Activities should be undertaken to encourage the effective contribution of youth to the struggle against racism,
racial discrimination and apartheid.
14. A week of solidarity with the peoples struggling against
racism and racial discrimination, beginning on 21 March, should
be organized annually in all States.
15. All States should adopt, as a matter of high priority,
measures to declare punishable by law any dissemination of
ideas based on racial superiority or hatred and to prohibit organizations based on racial prejudice and hatred, including
neo-Nazi and Fascist organizations and private clubs and institutions established on the basis of racial criteria or propagating
ideas of racial discrimination and apartheid.
16. All States should eliminate, through legislation and
administrative measures, all discriminatory practices against
members of immigrant communities. They should ensure that
immigrants and their families are gi-ven treatment which is no
less favourable than that accorded their own nationals in matters such as education, employment, acquisition of property,
health and housing facilities and travel within and outside the
country.
17. The main activities to be undertaken for the achievement of these objectives are set forth below. This implies that:
(a) The United Nations should provide adequate financial
and human resources according to the priorities established by
the General Assembly to combat racism, racial discrimination
and apartheid;
(b) The specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations concerned must, within their
respective fields of competence, make an essential contribution
to the attainment of these ends. In addition to the preparation
of the report of the Secretary-General requested in paragraph
18 (j) of the Programme for the Decade, a certain number of
activities should be undertaken during the second half of the
Decade in particular.
18. In the light of paragraph 13 (b) of the Programme for
the Decade, a seminar should be organized in 1981 by the
Commission on Human Rights, in co-operation with the Special
Committee against Apartheid, in order to study the formulation
of effective measures to prevent transnational corporations and
other established interests from collaborating with the racist
regimes in southern Africa. The Commission on Transnational
Corporations and the Commission on Human Rights should
make a study in co-operation with the Special Committee against
Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the United
Nations Council for Namibia with a view to enumerating specific measures whose application by all States, intergovernmental organizations, private institutions and non-governmental
organizations will make it possible to end all collaboration with
the racist regimes and prevent the supply of capital, loans,
credits, foreign currency and any other form of commercial,
financial and technological assistance to the economies of South
Africa, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia by private banks, Governments and international agencies, such as the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International
Finance Corporation, the International Monetary Fund and
similar institutions.
19. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 3377
(XXX) of 10 November 1975, the Commission on Human
Rights, in co-operation with the Sub-Commission on Prevention
8

''Towards a World without Racism" (OPl/613).

of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, should undertake a study on ways and means of ensuring the implementation
of the United Nations resolutions on apartheid, racism and racial discrimination and submit its conclusions to the Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session through the Economic and Social
Council.
20. A study should be undertaken in 1980 by the Ad Hoe
Working Group of Experts on Southern Africa on ways and
means of implementing international instruments, such as the
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid, including the establishment of the
international jurisdiction envisaged by the Convention.
21. The United Nations Institute for Training and Research
should organize an international colloquium in 1980 on the
elimination of apartheid, racism and racial discrimination and
the achievement of self-determination in international law, with
special attention to the principles of non-discrimination and selfdetermination as peremptory norms of international law.
22. A study should be prepared by the Secretary-General in
1981 on the links between the struggle against racism and the
struggle for self-determination in southern Africa.
23. A study should be prepared in 1981 by the Commission
on the Status of Women on the situation of women and children
living under the racist minority regimes in southern Africa,
especially under the apartheid regime, and of women and children living in the occupied Arab territories and other occupied
territories.
24. A study should be undertaken in 1981 by the SecretaryGeneral, in co-operation with the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization, on the links between racial discrimination and inequalities in the fields of education, nutrition, health, housing
and cultural development.
25. Under the auspices of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, a round-table of editors
of newspapers concerned in informing public opinion about the
evils of racism and racial discrimination, with wide circulation
and from the various geographical regions, should be convened
in the second half of 1980, on the basis of equitable distribution, to study the role of the mass communication media in
combating racism, racial discrimination and apartheid. A report
on the work of the round-table should be submitted to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of 198 I.
26. An important feature of the second half of the Decade
should be the holding of a second World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, preferably at the end of the
Decade, in order to review and appraise the activities undertaken during the Decade and to chart new measures where
necessary. In accordance with the mandate given it, defined in
paragraph 18 of the Programme for the Decade, the Economic
and Social Council would act, as it did in the case of the first
Conference, as a preparatory committee for this Conference.
27. The Economic and Social Council should plan to begin
considering the preparations for the Conference at its first regular session of 1980.

34 / 25.

Review and co-ordination of human rights
programmes of organizations in the United Na•
tions system and co-operation with other international programmes in the field of human
rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/54 of 14 December 1978
on review and co-ordination of human rights programmes of organizations in the United Nations system
and co-operation with other international programmes
in the field of human rights,
Noting that, pursuant to that resolution, the General
Assembly will resume discussion of the subject of review and co-ordination of human rights programmes

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the repor1s of the Third Committee

upon receipt of the study requested of the Commission
on Human Rights in paragraph 2 of the resolution,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 22 (XXXV) of 14 March 1979,0 by which the
Commission decided to carry out the study asked for by
the General Assembly in resolution 33/54, on the basis
of preparatory material to be submitted to the Commission at its thirty-seventh session, and of Economic
and Social Council resolution 1979/36 of 10 May 1979
in which the Council requested it to do so,
Recognizing the importance of full and timely cooperation by concerned specialized agencies and other
organs and bodies within and related to the United
Nations system to permit the Commission on Human
Rights to carry out its work as scheduled,
Noting further that, by its resolution 1979/36, the
Economic and Social Council decided to add to the
terms of reference of the Commission on Human Rights
the mandate to assist the Council in the co-ordination
of activities concerning human rights in the United
Nations system,
1. Welcomes the action decided upon by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social
Council in response to General Assembly resolution
33/54;
2. Urges those specialized agencies and other organs
and bodies within and related to the United Nations
system which are, according to their explicit mandates,
concerned with the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms to offer their full cooperation to the Secretary-General in his preparation of
the preparatory material which will be the basis for the
study to be carried out by the Commission on Human
Rights at its thirty-seventh session;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
give priority to the completion of that study at its thirtyseventh session in 1981;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Review and coordination of human rights programmes of organizations
in the United Nations system and co-operation with
other international programmes in the field of human
rights" and to give high priority to the consideration of
the item at that session.
69th plenary meeting
15 November 1979
34 / 26.

Status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3225
(XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of
10 November 1975, 31/79 of 13 December 1976, 32/11
of 7 November 1977 and 33/ 101 of 16 December 1978,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General10 on the status of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;11
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States which have ratified the Convention or
acceded thereto;
9
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
1 0 A/34/441.
11 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

165

3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal
basis and implementation of its provisions are necessary
for the realization of the objectives of the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Requests States which have not yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of making the declaration provided
for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance with
Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December
1965.
69th plenary meeting
15 November 1979
34/27.

Status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and ratification the International Convention on
the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its resolutions 3380 (XXX) of 10 November
1975, 31/80 of 13 December 1976, 32/12 of 7 November 1977 and 33/103 of 16 December 1978,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolutions 13 (XXXIII) of 11 March 1977, 12 7 (XXXIV)
of 22 February 1978 1 ' and 10 (XXXV) of 5 March
1979, 14
Welcoming the part of the Political Declaration and
the resolutions concerning the situation in southern Africa adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, 15
Convinced that the Declaration and the Programme
of Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination10 constitute an important and constructive contribution to the struggle
against apartheid, racism and all forms of racial discrimination,
Noting that the conduct of the International AntiApartheid Year contributed to the achievements of the
goals of the Convention,
Reaffirming its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and is a gross
violation of human rights and a crime against humanity
seriously disturbing and threatening international peace
and security,
Noting that the racist regime of South Africa is stepping up its policy of apartheid, repression, "bantustan12
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXI,
sect. A.
13
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
14
lbid., 1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV,
sect. A.
15
See A/34/542, annex I, paras. 42-50, and annex VI.
16 Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.
