A/63/PV.29

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

29

th plenary meeting
Monday, 20 October 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda items 57 and 43 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/206)
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/212)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/219)
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): My delegation
associates itself with the statements made by Antigua
and Barbuda at the 27th meeting and Kenya at the
26th meeting on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
and the Group of African States, respectively.
I would like to extend my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his reports on progress in
implementation of and international support for the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
(A/63/206), and the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (A/63/212), and for his note

entitled “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa” (A/63/219).
Regarding progress in implementation of and
international support for NEPAD, Rwanda welcomes
the adoption of the political declaration (resolution
63/1) at the conclusion of the high-level meeting on
Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008, as
well as the recommendations of the Millennium
Development Goals Africa Steering Group. We firmly
believe that, if implemented, they offer Africa a way
forward in addressing the many challenges we face.
Rwanda is committed to addressing her peculiar
development challenges under the umbrella of NEPAD
and through the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and other internationally
agreed development goals, and we have undertaken a
number of initiatives to realize those commitments.
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Rwanda places information and communication
technology (ICT) at the heart of its development
strategy. The Kigali protocol, signed in Kigali on
29 August 2006, is the protocol on the policy and
regulatory framework for the NEPAD ICT broadband
infrastructure network. The protocol came into force on
13 February 2008 and will guide the implementation of
the NEPAD ICT broadband infrastructure network,
comprised of Uhurunet — the submarine segment —
and Umojanet — the terrestrial segment — in order to
provide quality and affordable telecommunications
connectivity to Eastern and Southern Africa and to the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-55671 (E)

*0855671*

A/63/PV.29

rest of the African continent. This network will be a
major step towards interconnecting the African
continent and helping to bridge the digital divide. We
therefore urge those countries that have yet to ratify the
Kigali protocol to do so to ensure its implementation.
The NEPAD e-Schools Demonstration Project —
the Demo — aims to equip African schools with
appropriate ICT, equipment and apparatus to ensure
that African youth graduate from primary and
secondary schools with the relevant skills and to
contribute towards improving education on the
continent by introducing appropriate ICT through
training and by providing appropriate digital content to
all African schools to enable them to function
effectively in the information society and knowledge
economy. The e-Schools Demo is being implemented
through the Information Society Partnership for
Africa’s Development (INSPAD), and under INSPAD
leadership, two companies — Cisco and Microsoft —
have formed a consortium in support of Rwanda.
Rwanda’s African Peer Review Mechanism
(APRM) country review report was published in
November 2005. Since then we have registered
tremendous progress in all the focus areas of the
APRM.
On democracy and good political governance,
Rwanda has conducted successful elections at the local
and national levels, and after our recently concluded
parliamentary elections women, for the first time in
history, hold 56 per cent of the parliamentary seats,
leading not only Africa but the world. We have also
registered significant progress in decentralization and
in reform of the judicial sector.
On economic governance and management,
Rwanda is now fully compliant with the best practices
for budget transparency. We remain committed to a
zero-tolerance policy on corruption and have
established institutions to enforce that policy. There
has been significant progress in corporate governance
through enacting corporate legislation and in
socio-economic development through our Vision 2020
and second-generation Economic Development and
Poverty Reduction Strategy.
The progress Rwanda and Africa have made in
implementing their commitments under NEPAD is
there for all to see. However, that progress risks being
eroded by the food, energy and economic crises, all of
which impact on Africa far more than they do on any

2

other continent. It is therefore imperative that the
international community respond to those crises
promptly
and
decisively
through
the
full
implementation of the political declaration on Africa’s
development needs (resolution 63/1) and of the
recommendations of the MDG Africa Steering Group.
However, trade and investment are Africa’s true
guarantors for economic and social development, and it
is critical that the Doha Development Round resume to
ensure that Africa plays its rightful role in the global
trading system.
Concerning causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa, Rwanda welcomes the various initiatives that
have been undertaken by the international community
to prevent conflict in Africa. We particularly welcome
the partnerships between the United Nations and the
African Union to prevent and respond to conflict in
Africa. I wish to emphasize that Rwanda strongly
believes that prevention remains the best and preferred
method to promote peace and sustainable development
in Africa.
The Secretary-General’s report (A/63/212) paints
an optimistic picture of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we would very much wish
to share his optimism. However, as recent events have
shown, the situation remains far from optimistic. The
failure comprehensively to address the threat posed by
the genocidal forces of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda and the ex-Forces armées
rwandaises/Interahamwe to the people of Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as set out in the
Nairobi communiqué and in Security Council
resolution 1804 (2008), has led to the perpetuation of
conflict. We therefore call upon the international
community to ensure that the United Nations Observer
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo implement their commitments, as set out in the
Nairobi communiqué and Security Council resolution
1804 (2008).
Rwanda welcomes the partnerships that regional
organizations have forged with the United Nations on
peacekeeping operations, in particular the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Rwanda remains firmly committed to its role as a
major troop contributor to that force.

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

(spoke in French)
With regard to the 2001-2010 Decade to Roll
Back Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in
Africa, the report transmitted by the SecretaryGeneral’s note (A/63/219) shows the progress made,
especially in Africa, in the struggle to eliminate
malaria.
The World Malaria Report indicates that Rwanda
has managed to reduce the cases of malaria by 66 per cent
over a six-year period. By 2012, we aim to reach the
preliminary phase of eradicating that disease, which
means that we will then have less than one case of
confirmed malaria per 1,000 inhabitants. Our progress
has been possible particularly as a result of the
following actions: the promotion of massive
distribution of moderately priced long-lasting
insecticide-treated mosquito nets, prompt and specific
treatment through appropriate artemisinin combination
therapy — ACT — medicines, the implementation of
home-based management of fever by community health
workers, control of the disease through campaigns of
indoor spraying of homes, an increase in the use of
health services, and an increase in the number of
individuals with health insurance.
Rwanda remains fully committed to the fight to
eradicate the disease in Rwanda and Africa.
Mr. Terzi de Sant’Agata (Italy): First of all, I
should like to thank the representative of France for his
statement on behalf of the European Union, with which
I fully agree. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) (A/63/206).
In its capacity as incoming President of the
Group of Eight (G8), Italy has taken note of the call
made by the President of the General Assembly —
which was reiterated by Kenya on behalf of the African
Union and by many other colleagues, including the
representative of Rwanda, who just spoke — to prevent
the current turbulence in world markets from pushing
Africa’s needs off the radar screen of the international
community. Let me reassure the Assembly that we will
do everything in our power to that end. Indeed, this is
the time for the G8 to relaunch its partnership with
Africa and to act as a catalyst for renewed efforts at all
levels in support of NEPAD.
The United Nations is the natural and necessary
place where our efforts should be coordinated and our

08-55671

strategies defined, in full accordance with the vision of
the African membership. The High-Level Meeting on
Africa’s development needs was a very significant
opportunity. I would like to recall that, at the
G8 Summit held in Genoa seven years ago, Italy
proposed an Africa Action Plan that was later approved
at the G8 Summit held in Kananaskis, Canada. The
plan is focused on the very same objectives that
NEPAD is pursuing: an Africa free of conflicts, hunger
and violations of human rights.
A collective commitment to targeted action in the
areas of aid and trade was widely requested by African
leaders during the High-Level Meeting. Italy intends to
convey that sense of urgency at the 2009 G8 Summit.
The elements emerging from this debate will therefore
be equally and duly reflected in our proposals for the
Summit.
We have taken careful note of the expectation in
Africa for enhanced resource flows. Indeed, improving
the quality of assistance is a key priority. Governance
in Africa is improving at both the national and the local
levels. At the same time, assistance should become
better coordinated and more predictable; it should be
less bound to conditions. We should seek greater
harmonization among donors, avoiding useless
duplication. The High-Level Forum held in Accra
underscored the depth of those concerns. After the
Rome, Paris and Accra declarations, we see next
November’s Doha Conference as a key opportunity for
further progress in those areas.
The goal of a conflict-free Africa, set by the
heads of State and Government of the African Union, is
equally strategic. Our common denominator should
remain the promotion of African ownership in the
maintenance of peace and security on the continent.
My Government is committed to supporting
strengthened African institutions in the areas of early
warning,
preventive
diplomacy,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction. The
10-year capacity-building programme for the African
Union should be seen as a keystone of the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
such as the European Union, that are active in Africa. To
that end, my Government has contributed €40 million to
the African Peace Facility.
Action in the field should be supported by a clear
political vision. That is why the decision-making
process at the United Nations should respect and act on

3

A/63/PV.29

the principle of African ownership, which we recognize
for regional and subregional organizations in Africa.
As an elected member of the Security Council, my
country is committed to abiding by that principle. We
believe that further improvement in the cooperation
between the Council and the main regional
stakeholders would constitute a strong asset in ensuring
concrete results in the area of crisis management. The
joint meeting held on 16 April 2008 between the
United Nations Security Council and members of the
African Union Peace and Security Council was a
significant step in that process.
Nevertheless, the sustainability of our policies
will depend on our success in tackling the root causes
of instability. Combating extreme poverty, youth
unemployment, and environmental degradation, as well
as pandemics such as malaria, which undermine
Africa’s human resources, is a truly collective interest.
It is therefore essential that each member of the
international community be fully committed to facing
those challenges.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its support for the
political declaration (resolution 63/1) adopted on
22 September 2008 on the occasion of the High-Level
Meeting on the theme “Africa’s development needs:
state of implementation of various commitments,
challenges and the way forward”. The Declaration
reaffirms the belief of Member States in a prosperous
future for Africa in which the core human values of
dignity and peace are fully enshrined.
Kazakhstan supports the efforts of the United
Nations and of the international community as a whole
to mobilize resources for the implementation of
programmes and projects within the framework of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD),
which is considered a central agenda in the field of
development for the continent. We also thank the
Secretary-General for establishing the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa to leverage international
support for NEPAD.
Substantial progress has been made globally in
achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
and other internationally agreed goals. However,
Kazakhstan notes with regret that, as we approach the
midpoint for achieving the Millennium Development
Goals, specified in 2000, Africa remains the only
continent that is lagging behind on every Goal, despite

4

a very encouraging recent rise in the rate of economic
growth and overall improvement in the policy
environment on the continent.
Acknowledging the leading role of the United
Nations in the implementation of NEPAD, we believe
that the Organization and its structural divisions should
reconsider their approach to the distribution of funds in
order to strengthen their support for African countries
in their efforts to achieve the MDGs by the specified
deadline. The recent rise in food prices is putting great
pressure on African economies and threatening to
unravel hard-won progress in fighting hunger and
malnutrition. However, the crisis also offers a window
of opportunity for increasing needed expenditures in
the area of agriculture and to remove the obstacles to
an open trading system for agricultural commodities to
benefit African countries.
As a landlocked country facing trade problems,
we understand Africa’s difficulties in overcoming trade
barriers that hinder the export of produce to the
international markets and raw production-related
export. As reflected in the recent outcome document of
the High-Level Meeting on the midterm review of the
Almaty Programme of Action (resolution 63/2),
Africa’s infrastructure needs must be addressed in a
regional manner if countries are to reap the benefits of
economies of scale, to develop intra-African trade and
to enhance competition in the global economy. In that
regard, the Doha Round of negotiations should
determine the trade preferences to be granted to Africa
in order to accelerate its development.
As a country with an economy in transition and
large deposits of natural resources, Kazakhstan is very
well aware of the problems faced by African countries
seeking to enter the system of international economic
relations. In that regard, Kazakhstan fully supports the
efforts of the Group of Eight and other donor countries
to ease the debt burden through both multilateral and
bilateral means, and to promote foreign direct
investment that would enable the expansion of
capacities, the diversification and development of
regional markets and the creation of a highly qualified
human resources pool.
We believe that the primary responsibility for
achieving development goals remains with African
Governments, which have shown tremendous
leadership in recent years. However, in order to

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

achieve the MDGs, external public financing for
development must be raised to $72 billion per year.
In that regard, my delegation is concerned about
the decrease in official development assistance (ODA)
to Africa in recent years and believes that the United
Nations should be playing a critical role in achieving
the Goal that addresses partnership development and in
ensuring that donor countries fulfil their commitments
on the attainment of the MDGs, especially in Africa. At
the same time, it is important not only to increase the
volume of external resources but also to improve aid
quality in alignment with countries’ priorities.
It is with great satisfaction that we acknowledge
the active cooperation that has been taking place in the
context
of
South-South
cooperation
between
developing countries and middle-income countries. We
believe that such cooperation will enable Africa’s
development to make progress. For our part, as a
country that could overcome its crisis stemming from
its economy in transition, we are ready to cooperate
with countries from the African continent within the
South-South cooperation framework and provide
technical assistance in the financial and agricultural
sectors, the training of experts and the diversification
of the economy.
Taking into consideration the unstable situation
on the continent that hinders well-rounded human
development, we support the proposals to expand the
Security Council to provide the maximum number of
seats to African States in order to encourage greater
involvement by those countries in the resolution of
peace and security issues.
In conclusion, we hope that, in fulfilling its
commitment to the continent that is appropriately
named the cradle of humankind, the international
community will join efforts to help the peoples of
Africa in their quest for a decent life.
Mr. Gioia (United States of America): The
United States congratulates the members of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) on
their
continued
solid
performance
in
the
implementation of programmes that are enhancing
good governance and economic growth across Africa.
We remain a staunch supporter of NEPAD and believe
that its activities are central to fulfilling the vision that
each generation should do better than the one before it,
in freedom, prosperity and security.

08-55671

Along with good governance, infrastructure
development and creating the conditions for sustained
private investment, support for Africa’s farmers
remains central to achieving poverty eradication and
the fulfilment of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). As the Assembly knows, the African Union
and President Bush hosted a meeting of global leaders
from business, foundations and non-governmental
organizations to help contribute to promoting food
security by identifying commitments to partnerships
along the agricultural value chain.
In response to the Africa Union’s commitment to
fast track the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme (CAADP), the United States
has pledged to work to tackle the key barriers to the
implementation of the Programme. In addition to
President Bush’s $5.5 billion commitment to combat
hunger and promote agricultural development, United
States private-sector leaders have also responded.
Monsanto has announced that it is investing
around $3 million per day, or over $1 billion a year,
mainly in the areas of plant breeding and
biotechnology, to develop better corn, cotton, soybeans
and vegetable seeds. John Deere is focused on the
expansion of appropriate farm equipment and
technologies to significantly improve productivity with
reduced tillage. Land O’Lakes partners with farmer
groups and cooperatives in Africa to improve the
incomes of poor small farmers and produce higher
quality and more affordable dairy products for
consumers. The Gates Foundation is working with a
wide range of partners, seeking to enhance the
complete agricultural value chain — from planting the
highest quality seeds and improving farm management
practices to bringing crops to market — and has
committed more than $900 million to help small
farmers in Africa and South Asia boost their
productivity and incomes.
Already, the Millennium Challenge Corporation
(MCC), founded in 2004, has made more than half its
total grants of $5.5 billion in agricultural and rural
development, with $1.7 billion going to African
agriculture alone. The Millennium Challenge
Corporation has also announced a collaborative venture
between it and the Alliance for a Green Revolution in
Africa.
The United States remains committed to
supporting the NEPAD Comprehensive Africa

5

A/63/PV.29

Agriculture Development Programme. We support the
CAADP in six countries that are meeting their pledges
and through the Initiative to End Hunger in Africa,
which provides assistance in three areas: science and
technology, linking producers to markets and reaching
out to the vulnerable. Our support for the CAADP over
a five-year period is approximately $200 million per
year.
I would like to update the General Assembly on
progress made under President Bush’s Malaria Initiative
(PMI). In 2005, we pledged more than $1.2 billion
through 2010 for 15 of the hardest hit African countries.
The PMI is partnering with host Governments,
non-governmental organizations and faith-based and
community groups to create access for the poorest of
the poor to indoor residual spraying to keep deadly
mosquitoes at bay, distribute insecticide-treated
bednets and provide preventive malaria treatment for
expectant mothers during their pregnancies.
The PMI also provides capacity-building for
national implementation strategies. After two years of
implementation, I can say that the PMI is making a
significant impact. For example, in Zanzibar, the
percentage of children who tested positive for malaria
dropped from 20 per cent in 2005 to less than 1 per cent
today. The United States has also become the largest
contributor — $2.5 billion so far — to the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
Finally, we thank the Secretary-General and the
members of the Secretariat who have provided us with
the report (A/63/206) on the progress on
implementation and international support for the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development. In that regard,
we urge the United Nations Development Programme
to continue and enhance their support in the field for
African States and the implementation of NEPAD
programmes.
In sum, as shown by our commitment to the
African people in the areas of agriculture and the
treatment and prevention of malaria, as well as in our
many other initiatives to assist sub-Saharan Africa, the
United States continues to stand with our African
partners in achieving lasting poverty eradication and
the promise of a better life for all.
Mr. Matenje (Malawi): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation’s gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the progress achieved in the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s

6

Development (NEPAD) (A/63/206); his report on
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(A/63/212); and his note transmitting the report on the
Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries,
Particularly in Africa (A/63/219).
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Kenya on behalf of
the African Group and by the representative of Antigua
and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The reports before us indicate that there are many
positive developments taking place in Africa. The
launch of the African Union and its socio-economic
development programme NEPAD; increased African
leadership in resolving conflicts on the continent; a
growing commitment to people-centred development
and regional integration; and an increased willingness
to discuss and tackle difficult political and
socio-economic questions through the African Peer
Review Mechanism, and to make the necessary
reforms: these are all positive trends.
Despite those positive trends, Africa still faces
challenges, including rising food and energy costs,
climate change, the failure of the Doha Development
Round and the collapse of international financial
markets. Furthermore, due to deepening poverty,
current economic gains being achieved on the
continent and in individual African countries have yet
to be translated into the visible wealth necessary to
eradicate poverty, particularly among the poorest, who
live on less than 1 dollar a day. Unless the
commitments for achieving the NEPAD’s objectives
are fulfilled urgently and in full, Africa in general is
unlikely to meet the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), within the agreed time
frames.
It is therefore no wonder that at the high-level
meeting on Africa’s development held on 22 September
2008, many African leaders issued a call to address the
urgent need to promote international trade, foreign
direct investment and infrastructure development in
Africa, including in the agriculture, health and
transport fields and in combating climate change.
Malawi supports that call.
For its part, Malawi is currently implementing
various
agricultural
initiatives,
including
an

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

agricultural subsidy programme targeted at poor
smallholder farmers, with a view to achieving food and
nutrition security and fighting poverty and hunger at
the national level. Malawi is also developing green
belts along its rivers and lakes in order to increase
agricultural production to support its predominantly
agro-based economy. Malawi hopes that such
initiatives will enable us to achieve MDG 1.
In an effort to reduce transport costs and promote
access to international trade, Malawi, Mozambique and
Zambia have submitted a project to NEPAD and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) to
open a water channel along the Shire river in Malawi
and Mozambique and the Zambezi river in
Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe to the Indian
Ocean port of Chinde in Mozambique. We believe that
the Shire-Zambezi Waterway Project constitutes an
urgent solution to the transport challenges faced by
Malawi, Zambia and the hinterland of Mozambique in
accessing international trade. This is an example of the
urgent solutions to Africa’s development challenges
envisaged in paragraph 39 of the Political Declaration
on Africa’s development adopted at the conclusion of
the high-level meeting on Africa’s development held
on 22 September 2008 (resolution 63/1). Malawi
welcomes the adoption of that Declaration.
Accordingly, we look forward to receiving the support
of the international community in implementing the
Shire-Zambezi Waterway Project.
In this regard, we join those who have called on
the industrialized countries to fulfil their NEPAD
commitments to increase official development
assistance and make it available as soon as possible to
developing countries. We also call for an early
resumption and conclusion of the Doha Development
Round in order to give developing countries equitable
access to international trade and enable them to create
the wealth that is so badly needed to reduce poverty.
We hope that the Follow-up International Conference
on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus will
present an opportunity for the international community
to resolve the deadlock over the trade talks.
Malawi recognizes that economic development in
Africa cannot be achieved without genuine peace and
security. Accordingly, we welcome the progress
achieved so far under the auspices of the United
Nations to prevent new conflicts and resolve existing
ones in Africa. We also commend the efforts of the

08-55671

Peacebuilding Commission to foster sustainable peace
and security in conflict-afflicted areas in Africa.
Malawi will continue to play its part in the
maintenance of peace and security as evidenced by its
participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions
on the continent and beyond.
Malaria continues to be one of the greatest threats
to Africa’s development. Its devastating effects are
compounded by tuberculosis and HIV and AIDS, which
affect millions of people. It is a major public health
problem in Malawi and remains the most common
cause of illness and death among children under
5 years of age and expectant women. Malaria alone
accounts for 40 per cent of outpatient consultations at
most health facilities in the country. To address the
problem, the Malawi Government is implementing a
Malaria Strategic Plan, which it formulated in line with
the Roll Back Malaria Initiative. Under that plan, the
Government has intensified the fight against malaria
through measures including the distribution of
insecticide-treated bednets, particularly to mothers and
children under 5, and the prompt and effective
treatment of malaria within 24 hours of the onset of
illness. It is expected that 97 per cent of all households
in our country will have at least one bednet by 2015.
While preventive measures such as the
distribution of insecticide-treated bednets are most
welcome, we believe that fundamental reforms must be
made to the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights with a view to making
malaria, tuberculosis and HIV drugs readily available
and affordable in Africa. In addition, cross-border
initiatives should be intensified in order to make Africa
a malaria-free continent.
In conclusion, Malawi appreciates the support it
receives in the fight against malaria from its
development partners, including the United Nations
and its institutions, the Global Fund and President
Bush’s Malaria Initiative. We also welcome the Global
Malaria Action Plan announced by Mr. Ray Chambers,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Malaria.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/2 of
19 October 1994, I now call on the observer for the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.

7

A/63/PV.29

Ms. Ritola (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): The International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC) is honoured to take the floor in this important
annual debate.

In Mali, as an effort to combat food insecurity in
the Goundam Circle area, the Mali Red Cross has
helped to improve the prospects of 43,000 people in
the area and has given communities a new sense of
purpose and hope.

The IFRC’s approach to African development
starts from communities. We believe that sustainable
development efforts should be based on enabling the
poor and the vulnerable to better handle current and
future risks. Empowering communities and making
them the centre of action is at the heart of the IFRC.

In Burundi, as part of a three-year organizational
development project, 30,000 volunteers have been
trained in order to ensure that, by the end of the
project, elected village committees will be supporting
the provision of community services in more than
2,700 villages. The project has the generous support of
the President of the Republic and others in
Government, who see it as a crucial step in Burundi’s
development.

Today, Africa is facing a development emergency,
accumulated by the ongoing food and energy crises,
climate change and the growing intensity of natural
disasters.
Those
multidimensional
challenges
contribute to the increasing risk potentials and make
more
and
more
people
vulnerable.
The
non-achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) would further aggravate those
vulnerabilities.
Therefore,
political
will
and
commitment are as essential for human development as
a successful pro-poor outcome in Doha.
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, as
auxiliaries to their public authorities and with a
presence virtually everywhere in the African continent,
have a unique capacity to work with Governments to
strengthen communities and drive development.
The role of National Societies is crucial,
particularly in mobilizing millions of trained and
respected volunteers to raise awareness on health and
disaster risks, to promote good community practices
and to support improved access to water and food
resources. Our approach is consistent with the view of
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD) of the importance of partnership-building.
No Government or organization alone can make a
significant difference to the challenges confronting
Africa. The value of partnerships cannot be
overestimated, and they must also involve communities
in order to be truly effective.
The IFRC has responded to the food crisis by
launching a five-year strategic food security framework
with 15 National Societies in southern Africa. The
purpose is to scale up our efforts in the area of national
food security programming and to provide at least 20
per cent of the most vulnerable populations with
longer-term food security support to enhance their
resilience.

8

The IFRC’s malaria programmes, with long-life
insecticide-treated nets — more than 12 million of
which have been distributed in malaria-endemic
countries since 2002 — have been instituted with a
wide range of partners, and their results have been
truly remarkable in terms of reducing mortality and
restoring community confidence. Our Global Alliance
on HIV is a paradigm for returning Africa to the good
health and prosperity that its people so richly deserve.
These are not just programmes for public health, but
essential ingredients in development programming.
Those examples are partnerships at work for
Africa’s
development,
reflecting
the
IFRC’s
commitment to the Millennium Development Goals.
We are taking this debate further ourselves. The
seventh Pan-African Conference of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies is convening in Johannesburg as we
speak, bringing together 53 African National Societies
and observers from around the world, including
Governments and the United Nations itself. It is our
hope to dedicate ourselves to a new partnership stage
under the slogan “Together for action in Africa”. We
look forward to presenting the outcomes of that
important meeting and today express our sincere
appreciation to the Government and the Permanent
Mission of South Africa for their consistent support for
our objectives.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
call on the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See.
Mr. Bené (Holy See): Unfortunately, the Permanent
Observer of the Holy See Mission is not able to be
here, and I am making this statement on his behalf.

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

My delegation is grateful for the extensive report
of the World Health Organization (see A/63/219) on the
implementation of General Assembly resolution
62/180, entitled “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in
Africa”, and notes both the challenges in combating
that disease and the progress made thus far.
The General Assembly’s recent decision to give
greater attention to developing countries, especially in
Africa, is a positive step in the right direction,
particularly because it recognizes that malaria can be
substantially reduced through public awareness,
education and the committing of resources to research
and treatment. Given that, over the past 15 years, there
has been an increased prevalence of the disease —
which could well double the death rate over the next
20 years — it is imperative that the international
community work together to fight this pandemic.
Each year, between 300 million and 500 million
people contract malaria, which kills more than
1 million people, with at least one death occurring
every 30 seconds. According to the World Health
Organization, 90 per cent of such deaths occur in
sub-Saharan Africa, and the majority of victims are
children under 5 years of age, with nearly 3,000
children dying every day in that region. Furthermore,
the next-largest group of victims is composed of
pregnant mothers. Malaria remains a major threat to
human security. Because of the cost of prevention and
treatment, those who live in poverty are those most
susceptible to this serious disease.
A great number of committed individuals,
especially skilled health personnel, are working in
primary health centres and through various faith-based
organizations in many of the most affected areas to
care for and properly treat those who have been
infected. These providers, who often go unnoticed,
perform heroic acts of service by caring for those in
need.
Our focus in addressing this disease must remain
on research, prevention and treatment. We know that a
reduction in malaria transmission is achieved through
prevention of mosquito bites and control of the
mosquito population. From that perspective, it seems
opportune to recall the Abuja Declaration, which calls
for, among other things, the development of
mechanisms to facilitate the provision of reliable
information
to
decision-makers
at
various

08-55671

epidemiological levels in order to enable health
authorities to devise appropriate control and
surveillance strategies.
Individuals must be able to receive affordable,
safe and, where necessary, free diagnostic testing and
drugs. Proper diagnosis is available, and infected
individuals can make a full recovery if provided with
adequate means. Efforts should be made so that
appropriate treatment is accessible to those who are
suffering.
Resources must continue to be allocated to
ongoing research into the development of new, safe and
cost-efficient vaccines, as well as medicines to treat
those infected. Success in such endeavours will not fail
to translate into a gradual reduction in the overall
number of infections.
In particular, my delegation calls attention to
positive efforts to assist those in need. One is reminded
of the importance of educating families and helping
them to care for their loved ones who have contracted
malaria. Many Catholic organizations are deeply
involved in that field, with wide and directed
campaigns. Furthermore, they train community groups
to educate parents and caregivers of young children
infected with malaria.
Notwithstanding other serious infectious diseases
such as HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis, which demand
equal attention, our efforts on malaria cannot be
sidelined. Clearly, the global community must remain
committed to fighting all diseases that threaten human
lives and security.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on these
items.
The President returned to the Chair.
The President: Our debate has been wideranging and informative and has served to sustain the
momentum within the Assembly to build understanding
and support for Africa’s development.
I was particularly reassured by the emphasis that
speakers gave to the deteriorating international
financial environment in which we are working and
within which Africa is struggling to find its rightful
place in the world. Speakers cautioned that the global
financial crisis that is unfolding must not undermine

9

A/63/PV.29

the funding, the technical cooperation and the opening
of markets in the North that Africans are counting on.
The solidarity expressed by industrialized
countries, particularly by representatives of Europe,
and the developing countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean and Asia and the Pacific regions,
underscores the strong commitment that has been
reinforced by the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) framework. South-South
cooperation is stronger than ever. The representatives
from Africa have been clear about taking the leading
role in the complex process of bringing good
governance, peace and security and development to all
Africans through regional and national initiatives
inspired in no small part by NEPAD.
NEPAD, it is pointed out, has created an effective
leadership process for engaging development partners
on issues such as international trade arrangements, debt
relief and official development assistance (ODA).
Speakers have noted that progress will accelerate
significantly if G8 countries reverse the decline in
ODA and keep their promise to double ODA to Africa
by 2010.
Additionally, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral’s report, African countries should allocate
more resources towards NEPAD priorities and
encourage private-sector participation in partnership
projects, particularly those public-private projects for
infrastructure. There were also recommendations to
launch an African green revolution and improve both
economic and political governance through the
increasingly
effective
African
Peer
Review
Mechanism, an innovation that is recognized for
creating an enabling environment in matters of
governance and accountability.
The Secretary-General’s report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa points out that
Africa has made sustained efforts to promote peace,
deepen its commitment to democratic processes and
good governance over the past 10 years.
The African Union’s Peace and Security Council
and other structures at the regional level are playing an
increasing role in mediating disputes between and
within African countries. These mechanisms have also
enabled Africans to address the terrible problems
relating to the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.

10

Still, our debate reminds us of the enormous
complexity of the problems facing Africa. Today we
have given special attention to the report on the
campaign against malaria, which is of direct concern to
half of the world’s people. The stark fact is that 91 per
cent of the deaths from that disease are in Africa. It is
imperative that donors sustain the funding required to
cut this mortality rate in half by 2010 and meet the
related objectives within the Millennium Development
Goal (MDG) framework.
Our debate must be seen in the broader and
ongoing context of the General Assembly’s special
concern for Africa. It closely follows the high-level
meeting on Africa’s development needs held on
22 September and the High-level Event on the MDGs
held on 25 September, which focused again on Africa.
We will deepen the process at the Doha Review
Conference on Financing for Development at the end
of November.
Clearly the deteriorating international financial
environment highlights the urgent need for the
international community to develop a comprehensive
strategic plan that addresses both the unresolved causes
of continuing violent conflict on the continent and the
need for a proactive approach to new issues as they
emerge. As President, I am committed to work with
Member States to promote such an effort.
With each opportunity, we stand witness to the
emergence of new African leaders who are working to
ensure that Africa’s development benefits Africans
first. We clearly support this new paradigm. I think the
Deputy Permanent Representative of China put it very
clearly when he stated that we must listen to African
voices, respect African views, accommodate African
concerns and support Africa’s efforts to implement its
own programmes. This is our collective responsibility
and it is gratifying to know how seriously it is being
taken.
(spoke in Spanish)
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 57 and its sub-items (a)
and (b) and agenda item 43.

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

Agenda item 106
Follow-up to the commemoration of the twohundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/213)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.5)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
make some remarks regarding our consideration of this
agenda item. The abolition of the transatlantic slave
trade in 1808 seems to have happened long ago, but I
believe most of us appreciate the importance of
bringing this historic event to the attention of the
General Assembly and the world.
The abolition of the slave trade, which crisscrossed the Atlantic from Africa to Europe, Latin
America and North America for hundreds of years, did
not actually end slavery. However, it was an important
step towards this ban, marking one of the early
decisions by the international community to join forces
to combat the brutal and enormously lucrative slave
trade.
It is a tragedy that the slave trade and slavery
itself continue to have deep, though largely invisible,
effects on our world today.
This year, on 25 March, the International Day of
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade was commemorated for the
first time. I have always been an advocate of
forgiveness and reconciliation. But the slave trade
constitutes one of those horrendous crimes against
humanity that many Africans have been generous
enough to forgive but that none of us, anywhere in the
world, should forget.
The slave trade, it is widely recognized, was an
institution that not only devastated a continent but
poisoned the roots of societies, young and old, by its
corrosive presence. We all continue to suffer the
consequences of that exploitation — obviously, some
of us much more than others.
In virtually all societies around the world, slavery
remains with us, often invisible and tolerated on an
international scale.
Slavery was a socio-economic model that treated
people like goods, a system of social relations based on
domination and the denigrating treatment of people,

08-55671

one of the worst forms of discrimination and social
exclusion. Transatlantic slavery was for centuries a
scourge in the world. Millions lost their lives in the
long march through Africa and the subsequent
transatlantic crossing. Millions were exploited under
brutal conditions, and on their shoulders and lives an
alien society was built that excluded them and denied
them their status as human beings.
Sixty years ago, in 1948, the General Assembly
proclaimed in article 1 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights that “All human beings are born free
and equal in dignity and rights” and in article 2 that:
“Everyone is entitled to all the rights and
freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex,
language, religion, political or other opinion ... or
other status.”
Afterwards, in 1955, the Convention on Slavery
entered into force.
Years later, in 2001, we adopted the Durban
Declaration, which stated that
“slavery and the slave trade, including the
transatlantic slave trade, were appalling tragedies
in the history of humanity not only because of
their abhorrent barbarism but also in terms of
their magnitude, organized nature and especially
their negation of the essence of the victims, and
[we] further acknowledge that slavery and the
slave trade are a crime against humanity and
should always have been so, especially the
transatlantic slave trade and are among the major
sources and manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination,
xenophobia
and
related
intolerance, and that Africans and people of
African descent, Asians and people of Asian
descent and indigenous peoples were victims of
these acts and continue to be victims of their
consequences”.
The adoption of all these instruments was the
fruit of titanic struggles to eradicate imperial
domination from peoples’ minds and from legal
systems and to finally recognize that human rights are
for everyone.
On this commemoration of the abolition of
slavery, we must recognize that the rich countries
established the foundations of their economies in the
sweat and lives of millions of African slaves. States

11

A/63/PV.29

must not be content with removing slavery from their
legal systems; we must identify new forms of slavery
and combat them and eradicate them from the planet.
We must do the same with regard to their
consequences:
neocolonialism,
systems
of
discrimination, economic inequalities and the demands
of multilateral organizations to hand over reserves and
natural resources as interest payments on an immoral
external debt.
In the nineteenth century and even in the
twentieth century, many laws on the abolition of
slavery provided compensation for slave owners.
Today, States must think of different ways to
compensate for the cultural, economic and social
outrages committed against African countries. Plans
and coherent strategies are needed for material, moral
and ethical compensation. We cannot limit ourselves to
monetary reparation, because it is not a question of
paying and forgetting. We must never forget and return
to that infamy. We must ask forgiveness and
consciously acknowledge the damage done by one part
of humanity. Accepting it by the other part should not
be a passive acceptance, but active and transformative.
As the people of Africa say today, they would like to
be the creators and protagonists of their own political
models and of their human and liberating development.
I now call on the representative of Guyana to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.5.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
group of countries at the United Nations, along with
the African Group and other Member States sponsoring
this text, to introduce for adoption today draft
resolution A/63/L.5, entitled “Permanent memorial to
and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”.
The draft resolution before us today, which is
essentially procedural in nature, seeks to address
developments that have taken place since the adoption
of resolution 62/122 last December. Two years ago, we
acknowledged in this very Hall that slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade represent one of the low points
in the history of humanity. We recalled the forced
removal of more than 18 million people, over a period
of 500 years, from Africa to the Americas, including
the Caribbean, the United States, Brazil and other parts
of Latin America, as well as to Europe.

12

We recall that 25 March has been designated as
an annual International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade,
beginning in 2008. In that context, on behalf of the
States members of CARICOM, I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for the update provided in his report
(A/63/213) on activities held earlier this year to
commemorate the anniversary of the abolition of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. We look
forward to collaborating with you, Mr. President, the
Secretary-General and the Department of Public
Information for similar commemorative activities on
25 March 2009.
The significance of that date is of historic
proportions, since some 200 years ago on that date the
final reward was granted to the abolition advocates
when their untiring efforts led to the passage in the
British Parliament of the act for the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade in the British Empire, and
subsequently the end of slavery throughout the world.
The annual remembrance day, linked to the
accomplishment of the abolitionists, will serve as a
valuable complement to the existing UNESCO
International Day for the Remembrance of the Slave
Trade and its Abolition, whose date of 23 August aptly
recognizes the historically important contribution of
the slaves of Haiti themselves, who rose up in
resistance to slavery and engineered their own
emancipation.
In 2001, the international community gathered in
South Africa for the World Conference Against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerances, which was held under the
auspices of the United Nations and subsequently issued
what is commonly referred to as the Durban
Declaration. We view the permanent memorial project
in a wider context, as a partial fulfilment of paragraph
101 of the Durban Declaration, which, inter alia, calls
upon the international community to honour the
memory of the victims of slavery. Consequently, we
have sought in the third preambular paragraph to
reaffirm the commitment made by States in 2001.
We cannot help but recall the horrific and
dehumanizing nature of slavery and the slave trade,
whereby the captives were forced into detention and
transported as human cargo, packed into the foul holds
of ships as mere chattels and taken across the Atlantic
to the so-called New World. They were emasculated,
sold and robbed of their culture, and their skins were

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

branded by hot irons and imprinted with the label of
their owners. Those horrific images still jolt the
conscience, recalling and reinforcing the depths of
man’s inhumanity to man. For that reason, we thought
it fitting to stress in the fourth preambular paragraph
the importance of educating and informing future
generations about the causes, consequences and lessons
of the transatlantic slave trade and slavery.
The permanent memorial will stand as an
acknowledgement of one of the most horrific tragedies
of modern history that is often forgotten. It will stand
as a reminder of the struggle against and triumph over
the enslavement and dehumanization of a single race
over five centuries for economic gains and the legacy it
has left behind; hence the theme “acknowledging the
tragedy, considering the legacy, lest we forget”. We
regard the placement of that memorial at the United
Nations as a significant symbol of what this
Organization represents — the promotion and
preservation of the dignity and worth of all human
beings, which are principles central to the United
Nations Charter.
In view of the importance of the permanent
memorial to humankind and the universal nature of
such a monument, we believe that it should be erected
in a place of prominence that would be accessible not
only to the representatives of this house, but to all who
visit the United Nations. We have therefore sought to
clarify the language used in the previous resolution,
which referred to the halls of the United Nations.
Indeed, it is the widely held view that a place of
prominence at the United Nations, easily accessible to
representatives, United Nations staff and visitors, such
as the plaza at the visitors’ entrance, would be a more
appropriate location for a monument of such great
significance. In such a setting, the memorial will truly
be accessible to all people and all nations.
Through the draft resolution, the Assembly will
endorse the establishment of the committee of
interested States, referred to in operative paragraph 2,
to oversee the permanent memorial project. The
committee is being drawn from all geographical
regions of the United Nations. Importantly, the States
members of the Caribbean Community and the African
Union are playing a primary role in advancing the
work of the committee and Jamaica has already been
elected to serve as its Chairman. Additionally, the
committee, given its inclusive nature, collaborates with

08-55671

non-State partners, such as the Secretariat, UNESCO,
the Schomburg Center and civil society representatives.
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
A voluntary fund, the Permanent Memorial Fund,
established in keeping with resolution 62/122, has been
set up under the custody of the Permanent Mission of
Jamaica towards the realization of the memorial.
However, in the interest of further transparency and
accountability, it is proposed that the wider committee
oversee the Fund. At the same time, the committee is
seeking to explore, with the Secretariat, methods of
ensuring enhanced transparency and accountability for
the management of the Fund in a manner that would be
acceptable to all Member States.
In response to enquiries about the budgetary
implications arising from the adoption of the draft
resolution, let me say categorically that there are no
such implications for the permanent memorial project.
It is our hope that the permanent memorial will become
a reality through the generous contributions given
voluntarily by Member States, as well as any fundraising activities that may be organized by the
committee. On behalf of the group of CARICOM
States, I wish therefore to acknowledge with
appreciation contributions and pledges towards the
Fund already received from Member States, while also
encouraging Member States and other interested parties
to join in that important effort.
We would also like to place on record our sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the Secretariat
and members of the Committee for their invaluable
support, technical advice and assistance towards the
implementation of the permanent memorial project.
Racism, racial discrimination and prejudice
continue to cast a destructive stain on societies across
the globe, and the roots and linkages with the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery are clearly
established; hence, the call to action by States.
It is in that context that, in paragraph 6, we
reiterate the request contained in resolution 61/19 of
28 November 2006 for Member States that have not
already done so to develop educational programmes,
including through school curricula, designed to educate
and inculcate in future generations an understanding of
the lessons, history and consequences of slavery and
the slave trade.

13

A/63/PV.29

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General,
which provides an update on the Secretariat’s activities
to establish, for the first time, an educational outreach
programme to mobilize, inter alia, educational
institutions and civil society on the subject of
commemorating the transatlantic slave trade and
slavery. We believe that this will help to address the
ignorance and knowledge gap, primarily among young
people, in understanding the impact and consequences
of slavery and the slave trade. Through the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would request that
the Secretary-General, in collaboration with and
building upon the work undertaken by UNESCO
through the Slave Route Project, continue the outreach
programme to inculcate future generations with an
understanding of the causes, consequences and lessons
of the transatlantic slave trade and to inform them of
the dangers of racism and prejudice.
The General Assembly would, by its consensus
adoption of this important draft resolution, recognize
the continuing impact of slavery and the horrific
transatlantic slave trade on the African diaspora and its
descendants, many of whom are in the Assembly Hall
today. That has added significance as we prepare to
celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights later this year.
It will engage in a practical and deliberate educational
outreach programme with a view to addressing the
dangers of racism and prejudice that continue to
threaten the full realization of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
In conclusion, the CARICOM group of Member
States sincerely thanks the many sponsors and
supporters of the current draft resolution and now
invites the General Assembly to give its unequivocal
support to its adoption with a view to bringing to a
successful conclusion the process begun in 2006 in this
our United Nations.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): The African Group is
pleased to render its support to the important draft
resolution before us today (A/63/L.5) at a time when
we are both introducing and taking action on it in the
Assembly. At the outset, we wish to convey our
sincerest appreciation to the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) group of countries for the initiative and
efforts that have allowed all of us to reflect on our past
deeds, our amazing ability to endure and overcome
immense adversity, and the collective action that led to

14

the demise of the most immoral and dehumanizing
aspect of history.
On behalf of the States members of the African
Group, I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
the update provided in his report on activities held
earlier this year to commemorate the anniversary of the
abolition of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
We look forward to working with the President, the
Secretary-General and the Department of Public
Information on similar commemorative activities next
year.
On 25 March 1807, Britain legally abolished the
slave trade and formally brought to a close the most
horrific experiences man has ever known. That action
was thereafter separately replicated by other Powers of
the time. Notwithstanding that seemingly noble action,
slavery was tolerated, condoned and allowed to
continue in practice a long time. Man continued to
enslave fellow man, treating him like personal property
and thereby robbing him of all his dignity. The process
of fighting for rights and taking back human dignity
was characterized by profound risk, danger and
sacrifice. It took collective efforts and great courage to
fight against and defeat slavery. With our discussion on
this subject, humanity is turning a page on a very
painful past indeed. Useful lessons are discernible from
those actions, which took place in not so distant a past.
Besides the abolitionists, the unsung heroes are the
slaves themselves.
We face many challenges today. We can draw
inspiration from those who rallied against the slave
trade and slavery just over two centuries ago.
Collective efforts worked before and we believe that
they are the surest way to address our challenges. The
draft resolution is proposing the construction of a
permanent memorial at the United Nations as a
permanent reminder of man’s inhumanity to his fellow
man and as an injunction against such a horrendous
institution ever being allowed to manifest itself in our
society again.
The permanent memorial dedicated to the victims
of the transatlantic slave trade and slavery can never be
an atonement for the wretched suffering of humankind,
but is just a token of appreciation to all those heroes
who stood steadfastly, who pitted their lives against
injustice, who opposed slavery and fought for freedom,
as well as those who fell victim to cruel and inhuman
treatment meted out against them by unscrupulous

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

profiteers, slave masters and unjust societies. The
permanent memorial will serve to remind us of the
heroic actions of the slaves, abolitionists and the
numerous unheralded men and women of conscience
who stood up to be counted in the face of grave danger
and adversity.
The permanent memorial will be a memory, a
history, a journey through a difficult time, a reminder
of the atrocities of the Middle Passage, the cruel
transatlantic journey and the seasoning camps. The
memorial will also be an educational resource and a
statue of lifelong learning. It will be a reconstruction of
the past in order to mould the future. It will be a
constant reminder of the vulnerability of humanity.
The permanent memorial will also be a reminder
of the challenges that we continue to face today. Vices
such as racism, xenophobia and discrimination, all akin
to slavery, have begun rearing their ugly heads again.
There have been incidences of bias, incitement to
hatred and hate crimes in our societies. We are called
upon to firmly stand up to and reject any and all
notions of supremacy or supremacist ideology. We
have to guard against the danger of slipping back into
barbarism.
By adopting the draft resolution, we shall point
out the importance of gaining a better understanding of
the slave trade and slavery in general. We shall be
committing ourselves to ensuring that information
relating to the slave trade and slavery is available and
disseminated to all segments of society, particularly
through institutions of learning, so that they can join in
the efforts to promote a cohesive international society
based on knowledge and understanding of our history.
By encouraging learning about slavery, we shall reduce
the danger of making the same mistakes in the future.
The construction of the permanent memorial will
require resources and we invite the international
community to join in the endeavour and donate
generously so that we may preserve our memory. Those
would be resources put to good use. I urge us to heed
the wise words of the Nigerian Nobel Laureate
Professor Wole Soyinka when he stated that “a people
who do not preserve their memory are a people who
have forfeited their history”. Let us give new impetus
to the words “never again”.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the African
Group’s support for the draft resolution and for the
construction of a permanent memorial in honour of all

08-55671

the victims of the slave trade, the brave abolitionists
and the collective international efforts that led to the
abolition of the slave trade and slavery. I urge all
Member States to support the adoption of the draft
resolution.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to
associate itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Guyana on behalf of the 14 States
Members of the Caribbean Community and of Kenya
on behalf of the 54 members of the African Group of
countries.
It is an honour and privilege for me to speak on
agenda item 108, “Follow-up to the commemoration of
the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade”. It is a well known fact that
my own region’s history is deeply rooted in the legacy
of slavery, having been colonized first by the Spanish
in the 1500s. Thereafter, most Caribbean countries
remained under British colonial rule for more than 300
years. During the colonial period, our region’s ports
witnessed the arrival of numerous vessels transporting
hundreds of thousands of Africans across the Atlantic
to fortify the labour-intensive market created by the
then-ruling British plantocracy.
It took the international community almost 200
years to acknowledge slavery and the slave trade as
crimes against humanity. We have been asked why we
bother to rehash an event that happened so long ago.
But for us, the people of the Caribbean and of Africa,
200 years is really not very long ago. As descendants
of those who lived and died during those 500 years, it
remains our solemn obligation to ensure that their
memories are honoured and that their suffering is never
forgotten.
It should also be recalled that among the most
pernicious legacies of slavery and the slave trade is the
existence of apartheid and racism, which remained
entrenched in southern Africa until towards the end of
the twentieth century. Those scourges were uprooted
only thanks to the indomitable spirit and struggle of the
peoples of the entire African continent to break free
from the dehumanization and hardship which they
faced.
Consequently, it is with a sense of duty and deep
humility that we seek to honour the memories of our
ancestors who were brought to the Caribbean region as
a result of the transatlantic slave trade. We firmly
believe that the permanent memorial that was

15

A/63/PV.29

mentioned by the Chair of the Caribbean Community
and endorsed by the General Assembly last year should
be viewed as a tangible source of hope and a means of
remembrance of the struggles to break free of the
hardships faced under colonial rule.
I take this opportunity to express appreciation to
the members of the committee that was established to
oversee the permanent memorial project and for
electing Jamaica as Chair and temporary custodian of
the voluntary fund. We thank the committee for the
confidence it has bestowed on us and we will strive to
fulfil the objective of executing the project in the most
effective and efficient manner. I make this point to
highlight the fact that, with the adoption of the draft
resolution before us today, we seek to broaden the
latter responsibility so that the committee will oversee
the fund while it seeks to explore with the Secretariat
methods of ensuring enhanced transparency and
accountability for its operation in a manner that would
be acceptable to all Member States.
With members’ indulgence, I also wish to express
sincere appreciation for the kind generosity of the
Governments of those countries that have already made
donations to the Permanent Memorial Fund. We are
thankful for the show of solidarity in acknowledging
the legacy of this dark period of history. In that regard,
I wish to publicly thank the following countries:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Belize,
Botswana, Brazil, India, Indonesia, Haiti, Luxembourg,
Mozambique, Namibia, Portugal, Qatar, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname,
Syria, Turkey and, of course, my own country,
Jamaica. We envisage that other countries will follow
in their footsteps in making contributions to the
Permanent Fund.
In closing, I would also like to make special
mention of those countries from which we have so far
received pledges: Denmark, the Netherlands, Spain
and, of course, the United Kingdom.
Finally, I took forward to collaborating with the
President of the General Assembly, the SecretaryGeneral, the Department of Public Information and
other Member States in the preparatory activities to
mark the annual commemorative event on 25 March in
honour of the anniversary of the abolition of slavery
and the slave trade.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The transatlantic African slave trade was one

16

of the greatest tragedies in the history of humankind
and the most serious violation of human rights ever
committed in terms of its scale and duration. Between
1450 and 1850, some 12 million African men, women
and children were torn from their homes, sold as slaves
and forced to cross the Atlantic Ocean from their
countries of origin to the American continent. Many
millions more perished en route. For each slave
transported and sold, three died. More than 60,000
voyages were necessary. Considered by many as the
largest human deportation in history, the transatlantic
slave trade had an irreversible effect on the enslaved
African population because, with the exception of
some small groups, millions of Africans were never
able to return to their country of origin.
However, the crime of imposed deportation was
not enough. The slave trade was accompanied by
strong racist ideology. Black people were classified as
inferior beings, frequently as animals. They were
considered to have no rights under the law and were
therefore treated legally as objects.
In Cuba, deep traces of that sordid chapter
remain. During the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries, approximately 1.3 million
Africans were forcibly transported to Cuba to be
enslaved on plantations and in services of various
types. During the colonial period in our country,
Africans and their descendants alike suffered the
ravages of racism, discrimination, a total lack of rights
and marginalization even after slavery was prohibited
in the second half of the 1880s. Unfortunately, Cuba
was not the only country in the American continent that
was a victim of the transatlantic slave trade. Stories
similar to Cuba’s were re-enacted throughout nearly
the entire American continent and the Antilles.
The so-called triangular slave trade was part and
parcel of the bloody exploitation and impoverishment
of the African continent and the cruel discrimination
that African descendents in the western hemisphere
suffered for years. The inhuman business of the slave
trade was profitable only for the colonial metropoles
that started, developed and maintained it over
centuries. It had disastrous consequences for the
economic development of the only affected areas, in
particular in the African continent, which was plunged
into several centuries of economic backwardness and
political disorder that continued with the formal
colonization of the so-called scramble for Africa of the
nineteenth century.

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

Paradoxically, nowadays many purport to be
unaware of, justify or, worse still, erase that sad
chapter from our history. The opposition of the former
colonial metropolises to any formula aimed at
honouring an historical debt to those who endured
slavery over centuries has become entrenched.
Those who amassed huge fortunes at the expense
of the slaves’ sweat and blood, and plunged our nations
into the disastrous consequences of monoproduction
and monocrop economies cannot wash their hands now
of their dark past by means of a self-induced historical
amnesia in the midst of a neoliberal globalization
whereby the rich — the very same as those of times
past — have grown ever richer and our nations have
been reduced to exclusion and impoverishment.
Cuba attaches great importance to the United
Nations endeavours to combat racism and xenophobia,
and particularly the actions agreed at the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance held in Durban,
South Africa, in August and September 2001, to focus
due attention on the needs of the victims of slavery, the
slave trade, servitude imposed on indigenous peoples
and colonialism, as well as their descendants.
Despite being subject to a tight economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
United States Government for more than four decades,
Cuba has developed and will continue to develop
cooperation programmes with African, Caribbean and
other third world sister nations as part of a joint effort
to reverse the consequences of the slave trade and other
sad moments of colonialism and neocolonialism.
We will continue to insist that slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade be declared crimes against
humanity and that the descendants of the victims of
those criminal practices, colonialism and the genocidal
exploitation of indigenous peoples be given the
reparations and compensation they deserve as an
outstanding measure of historical justice.
The commemoration of the two-hundredth
anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave
trade is also an opportunity to remember contemporary
forms of slavery: trafficking in persons, forced
prostitution, forced labour in slave conditions and the
use of children in international drug trafficking. Those
forms continue to flourish today, mostly as the result of
discrimination, social exclusion and vulnerability,
which are all exacerbated by poverty. The international

08-55671

community must be aware of that fact. Their
eradication is a goal for all of us.
Mr. Chabar (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, and as this is the first time I take the floor in the
plenary, allow me to congratulate Mr. Miguel d’Escoto
Brockmann on his accession to the presidency of the
General Assembly at its sixty-third session and on the
initiatives he has undertaken to mobilize Member
States to confront the challenges of today. His wisdom
and his erudition will be precious assets in uniting and
bringing together the international community on its
path towards a safer, fairer and more human world. He
may rest assured of our delegation’s support.
The Kingdom of Morocco aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Kenya on
behalf of the African Group, and wishes to add the
following comments.
Today, commemoration and remembrance
combine as the General Assembly prepares to adopt a
beacon draft resolution at the initiative of the States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
on the creation of a permanent memorial to the victims
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes that
decision, whereby the international community speaks
in one voice against collective amnesia regarding one
of the most sinister episodes of human history during
which, over four centuries, millions of Africans were
deported to the new world and reduced to slavery, a
lucrative trade that contributed to the development of
the Americas and Europe. According to estimates, the
different phases of the transatlantic slave trade
deprived 25 to 30 million individuals of their freedom,
without counting the 17 million who died on ships
plying the Atlantic Ocean.
On this solemn occasion, we remember with
emotion the tenacious struggle of abolitionists whose
names remain indelibly etched in the stone of the
pantheon of history: Toussaint Louverture, Frederick
Douglass, William Wilberforce, Harriet Tubman and
Victor Schoelcher.
The creation of a permanent memorial to the
victims of slavery will offer States Members and staff
of and visitors to the United Nations a place and a
symbol that invites them to reflect on the historical
roots, the modus operandi and the consequences of the

17

A/63/PV.29

inexcusable tragedy of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade.

of this tragedy on Africans and their transatlantic
descendants.

Beyond the duty of remembrance, it is
fundamental to raise awareness of the upheavals that
the trade of souls brought upon the various people
concerned. The slave trade, as a large-scale forced
migration, also led to cultural exchanges that deeply
marked habits, beliefs, social relations and knowledge
on several continents.

Mr. Christian (Ghana): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Kenya on behalf of the African Group in support of
draft resolution A/63/L.5, which is before the
Assembly.

The cultural footprint of the victims of slavery
and the slave trade connects fields as varied as
knowledge and the arts, oral patrimony, musical
genres, philosophy and literature. Slaves were
necessarily the vectors of a civilizational legacy that
resulted in the fusion of cultures from Europe, Africa,
the Indian Ocean, the Caribbean and the Americas.
The Kingdom of Morocco, by commemorating
“the greatest tragedy of human history in scale and
duration”, in the words of the French historian JeanMichel Deveau, wishes to readdress the intellectual
legitimization of slavery and its ideological basis in the
doctrinal formulation of anti-black identity and its
legal organization through the Code Noir of 1685.
The international community has a sacred duty to
deconstruct racial prejudice and to fight ideologies of
hatred of the other and intolerance. Of course, those
objectives involve the promotion of dialogue between
cultures, religions and, more broadly speaking,
civilizations. Thus, Morocco participates actively in a
number of initiatives, including the Alliance of
Civilizations, and untiringly works to promote
internally and internationally such values as tolerance,
dialogue and respect for others.
Such values are not accidental; they are the result
of the millennial history of Morocco, which embodies
overlapping and enmeshing African, Arab, European
and Andalusian identities.
We invite all States to contribute to the financing
of the memorial, which we wish to see serve as a
permanent testimony to our rejection of the
exploitation of the other, racism and historical amnesia.
As an African State, the Kingdom of Morocco calls for
a tightening of the bonds between Africa and its
diaspora and for the promotion of a relaxation of
tensions and reconciliation with others, through an
objective and uncompromising reflection on the impact

18

Ghana attaches great importance to this draft
resolution and is pleased to be a part of this initiative
which acknowledges one of the worst violations of
human rights in the history of humanity: the
enslavement and dehumanization of people of African
descent over hundreds of years.
We express our appreciation to the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) for leading the initiative to
erect in a place of prominence in the corridors of the
United Nations a permanent memorial in honour of
those sons and daughters of Africa who perished in the
Middle Passage, in resistance to slavery or as a result
of the indignities and alienation they suffered in the
New World. In this regard, we once again pledge our
support for the establishment of a permanent memorial
fund to bring the project to fruition.
The memorial will make a significant
contribution towards our global efforts to carry out the
action plan adopted in 2001 at the Durban Anti-Racism
Conference aimed at eradicating the scourge of racism,
xenophobia and discrimination. Indeed, the placement
of this monument at the United Nations will reaffirm
and attest to what our noble Organization stands for:
the promotion, protection and preservation of the
dignity and worth of all peoples.
We should all follow up to ensure that the
necessary resources for effective fulfilment of this
project are made available through our generous
contributions so that the preparations may proceed as
planned.
In conclusion, Ghana wishes to reiterate its
support for this important draft resolution.
Mr. McMahan (United States of America): This
debate is indeed a fitting reminder of a despicable
practice that devalued human life and dignity. After a
civil war that sought to reconcile the words and
concepts that gave birth to our republic with a brutal
reality of a largely agrarian society fuelled by the
blood and sweat of human bondage, the thirteenth
amendment to the United States Constitution was

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

adopted on 6 December 1865, officially abolishing
slavery in the United States of America.
While the transatlantic slave trade ended
centuries ago, a contemporary form of slavery thrives
today under a different name: trafficking in persons, or
human trafficking. Like the early slave traders, today’s
traffickers use many of the same tools: kidnapping,
fraud, threats and beatings, all aimed, just as in earlier
centuries, at forcing men, women and children into
labour and sexual exploitation.
Trafficking is a crime that respects no borders.
Each year, an estimated 800,000 men, women and
children are trafficked across international borders, and
millions of others are trafficked within their own
countries. And in virtually every country around the
world, including the United States, men, women and
children are held in domestic servitude, forcibly
exploited for commercial sex and coerced to work in
factories and sweatshops. In some countries, children
are forcibly recruited as soldiers. These forms of
human trafficking are in fact modern-day slavery.
The United States has taken a broad range of
actions to halt these practices, because we strongly
believe it is the right thing to do. We remain committed
to recognizing the abolition of the transatlantic slave
trade, commemorating its victims and reversing its
harms. We are proud to be in a position to co-sponsor
the draft General Assembly resolution regarding a
permanent memorial to the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade, which we are about to adopt.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, allow me to extend the Russian
Federation’s gratitude to the delegations of the
countries of the Caribbean Basin for their draft
resolution entitled, “Permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade” (A/63/L.5), which the
Russian Federation co-sponsors. We consider the
attention devoted to this problem by the United
Nations to be entirely justified.
As is well known, our Organization was born in
response to the horrors that afflicted the world during
the years of the Second World War. And even though
that war and the transatlantic slave trade were
separated by 150 years, the underlying causes of those
two historic events are very similar. Here we are
referring to a perverted concept that claims that one
group is allegedly superior to another. It seems

08-55671

especially important to us that the draft resolution
include provisions regarding the raising of awareness
about the causes and consequences of the slave trade
and the lessons to be drawn from its legacy. We are
convinced that the current generation and those to
come should not forget about this tragic chapter of
humankind’s history.
It is not often that the United Nations addresses
historical wrongs. Indeed, Member States focus first
and foremost on the most pressing and current
problems. Here, however, we have an example of a
case where a historical event is of a global scale; where
its effects can be seen on the course of humankind’s
history and it will continue to have a clear impact on
our present and future.
Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): I would like first of all to
align myself with the statement made by Guyana on
behalf of the Caribbean Community and Common
Market (CARICOM) member States. It was just about
two years ago that the CARICOM member States, with
the proud co-sponsorship of numerous countries,
including those from our ancestral home Africa,
ushered through the General Assembly the resolution
that established the basis for the commemoration of the
two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade. The adoption of that
resolution was indeed historic and, as was noted at the
time, its mission would be to erect a bridge spanning
two hundred years across the seas and lands of Africa,
Europe, the Americas and the Caribbean.
The legacy of the slave trade highlights, among
other things, the capacity in all of us to take principled
action, to speak out against injustice and to conquer
victimization by living, surviving, advancing and
forgiving, even in the face of seemingly
insurmountable odds. Looking at the lives of the
people enslaved for centuries in the Americas and the
Caribbean teaches us much about the capacity of
human beings to strive and be hopeful, even under the
most dehumanizing conditions. The triumph over
slavery is a testimony to the human spirit, which can
emerge from the harshest victimization, exploitation
and oppression, with remarkable joy, creativity and
inventiveness.
The indelible etchings of Africa on every aspect
of our life in the Caribbean are the bedrock of our
sustenance as a people and will always be the source of
our creativity and perseverance. On the stage of

19

A/63/PV.29

history, ours has not always been a joyful and
triumphant lot, and yet we participate here today in this
world body with utmost pride and determination, the
same pride and dogged determination that served to
ensure the survival of our forebears even under the
most cruel and dire of circumstances. The depths of
their humanity, the unyielding core of their spiritual
home, have become the wellspring of our undying
vision of a peaceful world that is at once hopeful,
diverse, tolerant and forward looking — essential
elements that must underpin the future in order to
ensure the survival of humankind.

sometimes referred to as Maafa, meaning holocaust or
great disaster. It is often overlooked that the tragic
crime of the transatlantic slave trade and slavery
extended over more than five centuries. Scholars have
estimated that during that period the Atlantic slave
trade led to the loss of at least 50 million potential
African lives. Had that not happened, Africa’s
population in 1850 would have been 100 million
instead of 50 million. The horror of the Middle Passage
is unique; during which, without food and basic
amenities, at least one sixth of those transported died
in loneliness, darkness and trauma.

Last year, in order to help inculcate in future
generations knowledge about the causes, consequences
and lessons of slavery, as well as to inform of the
dangers of racism and prejudice, the sixty-second
session of the General Assembly adopted resolution
62/122, designating 25 March as an annual
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. Our
watchword must forever be, lest we forget.

India shares the pain and suffering of the affected
countries. We remember our own tragedy of
colonialism and the export of indentured labour. The
racism that was an inevitable dimension of slavery
became part of the rationale for colonialism. There was
a boomerang effect. Nazism was simply that racism
applied within Europe. As the great Caribbean poet
Césaire said, the poison was slowly distilled into the
veins of Europe, and Nazism, before engulfing the
whole edifice of Western civilization in its reddened
waters, had oozed and trickled from every crack.

For the same compelling reasons, the Bahamas is
greatly heartened by the progress made in the ongoing
campaign to establish a permanent memorial here at
the United Nations to the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade, in acknowledgement of that
tragedy and in consideration of its legacy. As a sponsor
of draft resolution A/63/L.5, we wish to express our
appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Jamaica for
the pivotal role it has played in moving the process
forward, to reiterate our sincere appreciation to all
those who have contributed to that undertaking and to
express our hope that many more will support that
noble and worthy project. I am pleased to report that
the Government of the Bahamas has made a pledge to
the fund that will be forthcoming in short order.
Mr. Vishvjit P. Singh (India): I am pleased to
participate in the general discussion on the agenda item
entitled “Follow-up to the commemoration of the twohundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade”. I thank the Member States of
the Caribbean region for bringing that important item
on to the agenda of the General Assembly. I firmly
support the statement made by the representative of
Guyana on behalf of the Caribbean States.
Former Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru
called slavery and the transatlantic slave trade an
infinite tragedy. In the Swahili language, it is

20

We welcome the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly two years ago on the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade and the General Assembly’s
decision to commemorate that in the United Nations by
convening a special meeting of the General Assembly
on 26 March 2007. I would also like to welcome the
Secretary-General’s report (A/63/213) on the
programme of educational outreach on the transatlantic
slave trade and slavery.
We are honoured to co-sponsor this year’s draft
resolution entitled “Permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”. A permanent memorial will
symbolize that colossal tragedy and remain before our
eyes as a permanent remembrance to stir us to thought
and action. We join the Caribbean Community
countries in requesting that Member States contribute
to that memorial and adopt that draft resolution.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
(spoke in English)
Before proceeding to take action on draft
resolution A/63/L.5, I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, the

08-55671

A/63/PV.29

following countries have become co-sponsors of the
draft resolution: Belgium, Bolivia, Bulgaria, China,
Colombia, Croatia, Fiji, Finland, France, Greece,
Honduras, Iraq, Japan, Lichtenstein, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Monaco, New Zealand, Papua
New Guinea, the Russian Federation, Samoa, Serbia,
Slovenia, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, the United States of America and
Uruguay.
(spoke in Spanish)
I now call on the representative of Cape Verde on
a point of order.
Mr. Lima (Cape Verde) (spoke in French): The
draft resolution that we are about to adopt is an
important draft resolution, as we have seen from the
statements of the various representatives who took the
floor on this issue.
Personally, I cannot understand that all Africa can
be represented only by this month’s Chairman of our
Group. I request that all the States of Africa be listed as
sponsors of the draft resolution, and not only be
represented by the Chairman of the African Group. I do
not understand the decision that has led to this draft
resolution, which is of fundamental importance to all
Africa, being limited to being sponsored only by this
month’s Chairman of the African Group.
The Acting President: The Assembly takes note
of the clarification made by the representative of Cape
Verde.

(spoke in Spanish)
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/63/L.5, entitled “Permanent memorial to
and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.5?
Draft resolution A/63/L.5 was adopted (resolution
63/5)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 108?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President in the Chair
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I inform
members that consideration of agenda item 41 entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS”, scheduled for Monday, 3 November 2008,
has been deferred to a subsequent date that will be
announced in due course. May I also bring to the
attention of members that document A/INF/63/4/Rev.1
has been published. It contains a revised version of the
General Assembly programme of work and the
schedule for plenary meetings for the period from
22 October to December 2008.
I should also like to remind members that the lists
of speakers for items listed in document
A/INF/63/4/Rev.1 are open.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

08-55671

21
