A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/42
14 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 87
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/48/648)]
48/42.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other
relevant resolutions,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 47/71 and 47/72 of 14 December
1992,
Welcoming the progress made by the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations during its recent sessions,
Convinced that peace-keeping operations constitute a considerable part
of the efforts by the United Nations to maintain international peace and
security and to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations in this
regard,
Recognizing that the peacemaking activities of the Secretary-General and
of organs of the United Nations, which are actions to bring hostile parties to
agreement essentially through peaceful means such as those foreseen in Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations, constitute an essential function of
the United Nations and are among the important means for the prevention,
containment and resolution of disputes, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and security,
Emphasizing that respect for the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States and non-intervention in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any States is
crucial to any common endeavour to promote international peace and security,
/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 2

Taking note of the statement by the President of the Security Council of
28 May 1993 and the recommendations contained therein, 1/
Convinced that in order to ensure the effectiveness of peace-keeping
operations it is necessary that they have precise and clearly defined
mandates,
Taking into account that the increase in activities in the field of
United Nations peace-keeping requires both increasing and better managed
human, financial and material resources for the Organization,
Aware of the extremely difficult financial situation of the United
Nations as described in the report of the Secretary-General 2/ and of the
heavy burden on all the troop contributors, many of which are developing
countries,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization, 3/ having examined the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, 4/ and being aware of the relevant parts of the report of
the Joint Inspection Unit on staffing of the United Nations peace-keeping and
related missions (civilian component), 5/
1.
Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations; 4/
Resources
2.
Notes with appreciation the initiative of the Secretary-General in
establishing a stand-by forces planning team and looks forward to periodic
reports on that initiative;
3.
Recommends that contact between the Secretariat and Member States
should be enhanced with a view to clarifying the military and civilian needs
for United Nations peace-keeping operations and such capabilities of Member
States as could be made available for those operations;
4.
Encourages Member States, to the extent that their domestic
arrangements permit, to develop, in cooperation with the Secretariat,
arrangements for military, police and civilian personnel to participate in
peace-keeping operations and to notify the Secretary-General of the existence
and the modalities of such arrangements on an ongoing basis;
____________
1/

S/25859.

2/

A/48/503 and Add.1.

3/

A/48/1.

4/

A/48/173.

5/

A/48/421, annex.

/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 3

5.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to develop a proposal for
regularly updated data banks recording the type and availability of resources
Member States could provide, as described in paragraph 4 above, as well as
individuals with skills appropriate for civilian peace-keeping duties, and
invites the Secretary-General to propose such other measures as he believes
necessary to meet the urgent need for timely availability of personnel
qualified to serve in the full spectrum of civilian peace-keeping capacities;
6.
Stresses the need for the United Nations to be given the resources
commensurate with its growing responsibilities in the area of peace-keeping,
particularly with regard to the resources needed for the start-up phase of
such operations;
7.
Takes note of the recommendations of the Secretary-General
concerning the timely provision of basic peace-keeping equipment 6/ and
suggests the development of a limited revolving reserve of such equipment
within existing resources;
8.
Invites the Secretary-General to consult in advance with Member
States on their willingness to earmark certain equipment specified by the
Secretary-General for immediate sale, loan or donation to the United Nations
when required;
9.
Encourages Member States to make available air and sea-lift
resources to the United Nations at the best available rates in accordance with
the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;
10.
Requests the Secretariat to develop guidelines concerning the
disposition of United Nations equipment upon the termination of a peacekeeping operation;
Finances
11.
Recalls that the financing of peace-keeping operations is the
collective responsibility of all Member States in accordance with Article 17,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations; notes the report of the
Secretary-General on improving the financial situation of the United
Nations, 2/ reiterates its call upon all Member States to pay their assessed
contributions in full and on time, and encourages States to make voluntary
contributions in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the
United Nations;
12.
Invites the Secretary-General to review, as appropriate, the
applicable United Nations financial and administrative regulations concerning
peace-keeping operations and, to that end, urges that steps be taken to
strengthen lateral communication and the distribution of information within
the Secretariat;

__________
6/

See A/47/965-S/25944.

/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 4

13.
Requests that the Secretary-General improve the financial control
mechanisms relative to peace-keeping by strengthening the system of audit and
inspection, including external controls, and stresses the need to ensure that
appropriate accountability is maintained and, in that regard, notes with
appreciation recent steps to strengthen the capacity for independent oversight
and investigation;
14.
Stresses the need to delegate the appropriate degree of financial
and administrative authority to Force Commanders or Special Representatives
while ensuring that measures relating to responsibility and accountability are
strengthened in order to increase the missions’ capacity to adjust to new
situations and specific requirements;
15.
Notes that a number of military officers have been made available
on loan on a non-reimbursable basis to the Secretariat at its request and
welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to implement financial
arrangements, within existing resources, which would enable all Member States
to contribute to such a system in the future and would ease the costs borne by
Member States contributing those officers;
16.
Calls upon the Secretariat to prepare comprehensive budget
estimates for all new and ongoing peace-keeping operations in a timely fashion
in order to allow for a thorough examination by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the General Assembly;
17.
Stresses the importance of reimbursing all outstanding dues of
troop-contributing or other participating States without delay and notes the
report of the Secretary-General in that regard; 2/
18.
Reaffirms the competence of the General Assembly for the
appropriation and apportionment of the costs of United Nations peace-keeping
operations, and notes the importance for the Security Council to be aware of,
inter alia, the availability of adequate physical and material resources and
the cost implications before it establishes new peace-keeping operations;
19.
Considers that the issue of supplementing diversified financial
resources to the assessed contributions should be studied further in all the
appropriate United Nations forums;
20.
Encourages the consideration in the appropriate forums of further
measures that could improve the financing of peace-keeping operations,
including the feasibility of an improved billing system;
21.
Requests the Secretary-General to consult with Member States
during his current review of the rates of reimbursement for depreciation of
contingent-owned equipment deployed at the request of the United Nations;
22.
Requests the Secretariat to compile all the existing financial and
administrative rules, regulations, practices and procedures relating to peacekeeping into a comprehensive document available to Member States;
23.
Welcomes the creation of the Peace-keeping Reserve Fund, notes the
importance of adequate resources for peace-keeping start-up costs and that
sufficient resources have not been made available for this purpose, stresses
that the Fund should be supplied with the amount specified in General Assembly
resolution 47/217 of 23 December 1992, thereby making the Fund operational as
/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 5

soon as possible, and emphasizes that the Fund should, in the future, serve as
an essential source of funds for peace-keeping start-up costs;
Organization and effectiveness
24.
Suggests that the Security Council and the Secretary-General
should continue to analyse a given situation very carefully before the
establishment of a United Nations peace-keeping operation, that a realistic
mandate, including clear objectives and a time-frame for the resolution of the
problem, as appropriate, should be formulated in each case, conducive to the
furtherance of the political process, that the Security Council should review
periodically the effectiveness of current operations with a view to ensuring
that they are consistent with the objectives and the mandates as approved by
the Council, and affirms that no change in the mandate, character or duration
of peace-keeping operations authorized by the Security Council is possible
except through a specific decision of the Council;
25.
Notes with appreciation the steps taken by the Secretary-General
to strengthen and reform those units of the Secretariat dealing with peacekeeping, as outlined in his report on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in "An Agenda for Peace"; 6/
26.
Stresses the need for the Secretariat to deal effectively and
efficiently with planning, launching, managing and providing administrative
and logistics support to peace-keeping operations and urges the SecretaryGeneral, as the chief administrative officer of the Organization, in
consultation with Member States, to initiate a comprehensive review of the
role, tasks and functions, including civilian functions, of the various units
of the Secretariat with a view to identifying the optimum Secretariat
structure in that respect and to assuring the unity of command and control
indispensable for successful peace-keeping by assigning executive
responsibility for all aspects of a peace-keeping operation to the Department
of Peace-keeping Operations of the Secretariat;
27.
Also stresses the importance of coordination of all aspects of the
planning process in peace-keeping operations and suggests that the emergency
relief coordinator should be fully consulted in the overall planning of a
peace-keeping operation when the mandate for such an operation contains a
humanitarian component and in other cases should be consulted at an early
stage when close coordination between humanitarian and peace-keeping
activities is required;
28.
Takes note of the transfer of the Field Operations Division from
the Department of Administration and Management to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to strengthen and make more effective planning, management and
administrative support for peace-keeping operations and the capability of the
Secretariat for overall evaluation and analysis of peace-keeping operations
from their initial stages to their conclusion;
29.
Urges the Secretary-General in his review of Secretariat
capabilities to improve information flow and to enhance coordination and
communication between United Nations Headquarters and field missions in order
to manage peace-keeping operations effectively and inform Member States as
appropriate;
/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 6

30.
Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member States informed on
organizational responsibilities of the various units of those Secretariat
departments responsible for peace-keeping operations;
31.
Invites the Secretary-General to identify a focal point for
contact by Member States seeking information on all facets, including
operational, logistics and administrative matters, of ongoing and planned
peace-keeping operations;
32.
Also invites the Secretary-General to continue arrangements and
procedures for providing additional personnel on a short-term basis in order
to ensure that the Secretariat can respond effectively and efficiently to
fluctuations in its workload, particularly when new operations are planned and
launched, and to keep the Member States informed of such procedures;
33.
Once again invites the Secretary-General to consider means whereby
Special Representatives, Force Commanders and other key personnel of newly
approved missions are identified and involved in the planning process at the
earliest possible time;
34.
Welcomes the establishment in the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations of a 24-hour/7-day-a-week situation centre which will be equipped
with appropriately standardized communication and information management
systems so as to enhance the management of all peace-keeping operations and
requests the Secretary-General to keep under review the efficiency and
efficacy of the situation centre;
35.
Also welcomes the initiative of the Secretariat in establishing a
logistics doctrine and procedures project charged with developing a set of
guidelines of United Nations logistics doctrine and procedures in order to
standardize logistics practices and procedures and thereby enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of logistics support to peace-keeping operations;
36.
Requests the Secretary-General to consider, in the ongoing
restructuring of the Secretariat, the inclusion of a logistics planning
capability in the Department of Peace-keeping Operations which would consider
all aspects of support required for peace-keeping operations;
37.
Stresses that the conclusion of a status-of-forces agreement
between the United Nations and a host State is of the utmost importance when
deploying peace-keeping operations and calls upon host States to give their
fullest cooperation in that regard, and recommends that after the
establishment of a peace-keeping operation by the Security Council the
concerned Member States should cooperate fully with the operation in the
implementation of its mandate;
38.
Requests the Secretary-General to include in the status-of-forces
agreement between the United Nations and host States requirements for host
States to treat United Nations peace-keeping forces at all times with full
respect for the principles and relevant Articles of the Charter, for United
Nations peace-keeping forces to respect local laws and regulations and for
both parties to such an agreement to act at all times in accordance with the
provisions of the status-of-forces agreement and the principles and relevant
Articles of the Charter;

/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 7

39.
Notes the importance of concluding arrangements between the United
Nations and troop contributors before deployment occurs and urges
implementation of the agreements along the lines of the model agreement
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General of 23 May 1991; 7/
40.
Also requests the Secretary-General to include, in the agreements
to be concluded with States providing contingents, a clause by which those
States would ensure that the members of their contingents serving in United
Nations peace-keeping operations were fully acquainted with the principles and
rules of relevant international law, in particular international humanitarian
law and the purposes and principles of the Charter;
41.
Stresses the importance of the institution of appropriate rules of
engagement, on a case-by-case basis, for all United Nations peace-keeping
operations;
42.
Notes the recent increase in the number of peace-keeping
operations, and requests the Secretary-General to prepare a detailed report on
operations that have significant difficulties in implementing their mandates
by highlighting the root causes of such difficulties and suggesting possible
measures to address them;
43.
Requests the Secretary-General, once again, to report periodically
to Member States on the performance of all peace-keeping operations;
44.
Welcomes the increasingly frequent informal consultations between
the Secretariat and contributing States, strongly recommends the continuation
of such consultations on peace-keeping operations from their initial stages to
their conclusion and strongly encourages the presence of the President of the
Security Council and other members of the Council, as appropriate, at such
consultations;
45.
Recognizes that the training of peace-keeping personnel is
primarily the responsibility of Member States;
46.
Also welcomes the establishment of a focal point for peace-keeping
training in the Department of Peace-keeping Operations and recommends that the
focal point act as the coordinating centre for the relationship between the
United Nations and national and regional training facilities;
47.
Requests the Secretary-General to review and improve arrangements
for training civilian, police and military peace-keeping personnel, using the
appropriate capabilities of Member States, regional organizations and
arrangements, in accordance with their constitutional mandates and Chapter
VIII of the Charter, and of non-governmental organizations and the
Secretariat;
48.
Acknowledges the increasing challenge of forging large and
cohesive peace-keeping missions from many and diverse contingents, stresses
the need for the effective training of civilian, police and military personnel
before deployment and, in that regard, urges the Secretary-General to develop,
__________
7/

A/46/185 and Corr.1, annex.

/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 8

in consultation with Member States, official United Nations guidelines
combined with performance goals for individuals and units, so that peacekeepers can be trained within a national framework in accordance with agreedupon common standards, skills, practices and procedures;
49.
Also requests the Secretary-General to develop and publish peacekeeping training guidelines, manuals and other relevant training material,
including material for correspondence instruction, in order to assist Member
States in preparing their civilian, police and military personnel for peacekeeping operations in a standardized and cost-effective manner;
50.
Further requests the Secretary-General, in close consultation with
Member States, to initiate, within resources which may be allocated for
training purposes, a trial programme designed to train national peace-keeping
trainers as a supplement to national training programmes, as well as to
develop a proposal to strengthen the leadership cadre available for peacekeeping by training potential Force Commanders and senior military and
civilian personnel for peace-keeping leadership and management duties;
51.
Recommends that training for peace-keeping operations should, as
appropriate, be included in the training of those military, civilian and
police personnel being sent on peace-keeping operations and encourages Member
States that have already developed such training to share information and
experience with other Member States;
52.
Strongly recommends that peace-keeping operations personnel be
made generally aware of relevant local laws and customs of the host State and
of the importance of respecting them;
53.
Encourages troop contributors to consider arrangements between
themselves for the loan and/or exchange of peace-keeping operations experts to
enhance operational effectiveness through sharing of information and
experience gained in peace-keeping operations;
54.
Once again requests the Secretary-General to consider establishing
a training programme for key staff personnel of peace-keeping operations with
a view to creating a pool of trained personnel with knowledge of the United
Nations system and its working procedures;
55.
Recognizes that public information on peace-keeping operations,
particularly an understanding of their mandates, is important and calls for
significant enhancement of the press and public information function for
peace-keeping missions and in particular for rapid deployment at the start of
a peace-keeping operation of a robust and professional media outreach
programme in the area of operation commensurate with the scope and needs of
the missions;
56.
Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member
States, to establish guidelines for the public information function of peacekeeping operations;
57.
Requests the Secretariat immediately to make all necessary
arrangements for the reissue of The Blue Helmets 8/ in 1995;
8/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.90.I.18.
/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 9

58.
Also requests the Secretariat to take the appropriate steps to
record, in a dignified and yet simple manner in a public area of the United
Nations Headquarters, the names of those who have given their lives in the
service of United Nations peace-keeping operations;
59.
Welcomes the intention of the Secretariat to establish a memorial
dedicated to those peace-keepers who have given their lives in the service of
peace;
Issues arising from "An Agenda for Peace"
60.
Recalls its resolutions 47/120 A of 18 December 1992 and 47/120 B
of 20 September 1993 and takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the recommendations contained in "An Agenda for
Peace", 6/ welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to take appropriate
steps through preventive diplomacy and, recognizing the need for those steps
to be based on timely and accurate knowledge of relevant facts, encourages the
Secretary-General to strengthen the capability of the Secretariat to secure
and analyse all relevant information from as wide a variety of sources as
possible in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, urges
Member States to assist the Secretary-General in this regard and requests the
Secretary-General to keep the Member States regularly informed of such
capabilities and mechanisms;
61.
Reaffirms its resolution 47/120 B, in particular section II,
entitled "Preventive deployment and demilitarized zones", and, in this
context, recalls the importance of considering, on a case-by-case basis, the
use of preventive deployment and/or the establishment of demilitarized zones
as a means to prevent existing or potential disputes from escalating into
conflicts and to promote efforts to achieve the peaceful settlement of such
disputes, the continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security;
62.
Encourages, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter, the
involvement of Member States through regional organizations and arrangements,
as appropriate, in accordance with their respective areas of competence and
the purposes and principles of the United Nations;
63.
Welcomes efforts by the Secretary-General to develop, in
consultation with Member States, a set of guidelines governing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations;
64.
Takes note of the existing cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular in the area of peace-keeping;
65.
Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter, to consider ways to provide advice and assistance, in a variety
of forms such as advisory services, seminars and conferences, to regional
organizations and arrangements in their respective areas of competence, so as
to enhance their capacity to cooperate with the United Nations in the field of
peace-keeping operations;
66.

Resolves to continue consideration of these items;

/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 10

Status and safety of United Nations peace-keeping personnel
67.
Urges all Member States in whose territory United Nations peacekeeping operations are conducted to provide, in accordance with relevant
Articles of the Charter and other instruments, comprehensive support to all
United Nations peace-keeping operations personnel in fulfilling their
functions, as well as to take all necessary measures to ensure respect for and
guarantee the safety and security of those personnel;
68.
Considers that any State in whose territory a United Nations
peace-keeping operation is conducted should act promptly to deter and
prosecute all those responsible for attacks and other acts of violence against
all personnel of United Nations peace-keeping operations;
69.
Notes the particular difficulties and dangers that can arise when
United Nations peace-keeping operations are conducted in situations where no
authority exercises jurisdiction or discharges responsibilities with regard to
ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel and in such an
eventuality agrees that measures appropriate to the particular circumstances
and in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
should be considered by the Security Council and other appropriate bodies of
the United Nations;
70.
Emphasizes the importance of all relevant information on
conditions in the field of operations for the safety of United Nations peacekeepers and invites the Secretariat to adopt measures to secure and analyse
such information from as wide a variety of sources as possible for immediate
transmission to field missions;
71.
Considers that it is the responsibility of host countries to
disseminate to their populations necessary information on the role of peacekeeping operations and the inviolability of the safety of peace-keepers,
including the information the United Nations may make available for that
purpose;
72.
Also considers that host countries are required to provide all
available information in a timely manner to the United Nations and the
respective peace-keeping missions in the field on any potential dangers that
might jeopardize the safety of the peace-keepers, and that that requirement
should be clearly specified in the status-of-forces agreements;
73.
Urges the Secretary-General to review the current arrangements of
compensation for death, injury, disability or illness attributable to peacekeeping service with a view to developing equitable and appropriate
arrangements, and to ensure expeditious reimbursement;
74.
Recognizes that conditions in the field require practical steps
aimed at enhancing the necessary operational, political and legal environment
to deal effectively with the problem of the growing vulnerability of United
Nations operations personnel deployed in the field;
75.
Requests the Secretary-General to take concrete steps to improve
the physical security of all United Nations peace-keeping personnel deployed

/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 11

in the field, including all aspects related to material, organizational,
operational and other aspects of safety;
76.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on current measures
and new proposals to ensure and enhance the security of United Nations
operations, 9/ and will consider what further steps might be taken to enhance
their status and safety, taking into account the need for concerted action by
all relevant bodies of the United Nations, and in that context welcomes
resolution 868 (1993) adopted by the Security Council on 29 September 1993, in
which connection the General Assembly:
(a)
Will give consideration to promoting the elaboration of a
declaration that would, inter alia, reaffirm the principles of international
law and the obligations of Member States concerning the status and safety of
United Nations personnel;
(b)
Calls upon the Security Council to include in mandates for the
deployment of United Nations personnel, specific provisions recalling the
obligations of Member States and the expectations of the United Nations
concerning the status and safety of United Nations personnel;
(c)
Notes that a legally binding international instrument to reinforce
the existing arrangements regarding the status and safety of United Nations
personnel is being considered by the Sixth Committee;
*

*

*

77.
Recommends that, should any of the proposals contained in the
present resolution result in budgetary implications for the biennium 19941995, such additional costs should be accommodated within the appropriation
level approved by the General Assembly for this biennium;
78.
Decides that the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, in
accordance with its mandate, should continue its efforts for a comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects;
79.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that full conference
services, including translation of official documents and simultaneous
translation into all official languages, are provided to the Special Committee
and its working group whenever they meet, normally for up to one month in
April and May;
80.
Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to
the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session;
81.
Invites Member States to submit further observations and
suggestions on peace-keeping operations to the Secretary-General by 1 March
1994, outlining practical proposals on specific items in order to allow for
more detailed consideration by the Special Committee;
82.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, within existing
resources, a compilation of the above-mentioned observations and suggestions
and to submit it to the Special Committee by 30 March 1994;
___________
9/

A/48/349-S/26358.
/...

A/RES/48/42
Page 12

83.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session the item entitled "Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peace-keeping operations in all their aspects".
75th plenary meeting
10 December 1993
