UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Ptr,p

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2337) .....................................

Adoption

of the agenda ................................................

1

I

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913) ......

I

S/W.2337

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
‘i
‘*’
: ,**43..,> : x,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~pplement.s of the Oflkial Records of the Smurity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security ,Council’, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
und
Deci.sions of the Secwrity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2337th MEETING
Weld in New York on Friday,
Prrsitivrtt:

Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).

Pr(~.vcnt: The representatives of the following Stiltes:
China.
France. Guyana, Ireland. Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland. Spain, Togo. Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Zaire.
Provisional

I

agenda (S/Agenda/2337)

I.

Adoption

2.

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Nicaragua to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/14913)

26 March

1982, at 3 p.m.

ante with the relevant provisions
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional

of the Charter and
rules of procedure.

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/14927. which contains the
text of a letter dated 25 March from the Representutivc of El Salvador to the Ilnited Nations, addressed
to the President of the Council.

of the agenda
4. The first speaker is the representative
I invite him to take tl place at the Council
to make his statement.

of Cuba.
table and

ROA KOURI
(Cuba) (intr/p,‘cJtotion
.fi*o/jr
Madam President. I thank you and the other
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to speak today in my capacity as representntive of
Cuba.

5.

Mr.

Sptrnistr):

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913)
1. The PRE:SIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the 2335th meeting, I invite the representative of Nicaragua to take a place at the Council table
and the representatives of Angola, Argentina, Cuba,
Honduras and Mexico to take the places reserved fat
them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRE<SIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative
of Viet Nam in which she requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
LIsu~II practice, 1 propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accord-

6. We live in uncertain times. Irresistible winds are
blowing. This Council is meeting to consider, nlmost
simultnneously,
the persistent violation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people by the Zionist
rCgime of Israel on the illegally occupied West Bank
of the Jordan and the grave threats of intervention
-direct,
indirect or covert-hanging
over Central
America and the Caribbean.
7. Yesterday morning [233Sth wvtin!:
1, Commander
Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Co-ordinutor
of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua,
in a calm, responsible and well-founded
manner,
exposed the plot that is being hatched against the
fatherland of Augusto Cdsar Sandino. That plot is
reflected in the economic pressure and diplomatic
harassment of recent months and by the more recent
armed provocations nnd aggression he described to
the Council. which, furthermore.
are publicly known.
He also reiterated the well-known commitment
to
peace of the Sandinist revolution and its readiness to
contribute to the achievement of negotiiited political
solutions to the serious crisis in Central America and
the Caribbean.
8. An attempt has been made-in
a vklin outbuI’st
of hackneyed wonder-working-to
have us believe
that the origin of this crisis lies in an alleged surge of

hnve been suffered in the Americas for almost ;I century. Rather. we have come here in order to avoid,
through the action of the members of the Council. any
new acts of aggression against the independence and
sovereignty of our peoples. such as that which--as
even admitted by the spokesmen of the United States
Government who refuse to rule out the possibility of
engaging in covert or other actions against Cuba and
Nicaragua and to reject the use of force ugninst OLII
countries-is
already under way in Central America.

subversion remote-controlled
by the Governments of
Cuba and Nicuragun against “peaceful” and “democratic” rlgimes of the isthmus struggling intrepidly
to liberate their peoples from the poverty, ignorance,
oppression and underdevelopment
that have characterized this region since time immemorial.
That attempt
ignores-indeed,
blithely ignores-the
ominous role
played in ensuring the persistence and worsening of
those detestable conditions by that great Power which,
in the words of the Liberator, Simdn Bolivar. “seems
destined by Providence to plague the Americas with
misery, in the name of freedom”.

13. What we wish at this time is to know. in a clee~
and unequivocal manner. whether the present United
States Administration
is willing to recognize the vital
need for far-reaching changes in the economic and
social structures of Latin America: if it is willing to
rocognize the right of our peoples to choose and freely
rule over their destinies: if it is willing, in brief. to
develop its relationship on an equal footing, on the
basis of mutual respect and reciprocal benefit.

9. Where in fact lie the causes of the political and
social upheaval now jolting Central America? They
lie in the existence-among
other things-of
a 36 pet
cent illiteracy rate: in the nearly 2 million children
who die before their first birthday: in the 7 million
people searching in vain for employment: in the I2 million who lack adequate housing; in the 8 million
-nothing
less than 40 per cent of the Central American population-who,
according to recent studies
by the United Nations Economic Commission
fol
Latin America. live in conditions of extreme poverty:
in the external debt of almost $IS billion which painfully burdens their frail economies: and in the removal
from those countries by the transnational corporations
of profits of more than 100 per cent on every dollal
invested.

14. Of course this is not an idle question. I can only
vividly recall that from the very outset of the Cuban
Revolution-not
to go back to the end of the last
century. when we were robbed of our independence
by means of the Paris Treaty and the subsequent military occupation by the United States-the then President of the United States, General Dwight Eisenhower.
firmly opposed our carrying out such changes in 0111
country. He arbitrarily suspended our sugar quota in
the United States market and initiated invasion plans
that ended in the ignominous defeat at the Bay of
Pigs: I can only recall that since then, six [Jnitcd
States Administrations
have maintained a criminal
economic blockade against Cuba and iI policy of
harassment, aggression and intolerance that indeed
reveals incredible reactionary paranoia.

IO. For those who like to back up their statements
with academic quotations, it would be useful to ponder the following statement by William M. Leogrande,
the Director of the Political Science Department in
the School of Government and Public Administration
of the American University in Washington:
“The idea that these insurgencies”--and.
of
course, he is referring to insurgencies in Central
America--“could
be truly indigenous and that there
might be no solutions to the crisis of the region
without the involvement of the insurgents is drowned
in the cacaphony of anti-Cuban rhetoric. Washington disregards the true origin of Central American insurgency: decades of economic inequality
and political oppression.”

1.5. Despite the enmity of the various United States
Administrations
towards Cuba-and,
might I say, the
present Government
is no exception-my
Government has always maintained the same position of principle with regard to its readiness to negotiate and
normnlize its relations with the Government of the
United States. Of course we can do that only on an
equal footing. one where nationnl dignity i\nd the selfdetermination
of the people of Cuba are not undermined-in
other words, without compromising
;I
single principle.

It.
A curious unidentified flying object-a
UFOcame yesterday into the calm atmosphere of the Council in the strange concept of the “paranoia”
of revolutionaries of alI stripes. Thirty-one
United States
interventions
in Central America from 1855 to the
present time -not
counting the tirades we heard in
this room, which constituted one more unprecedented
interference in the internal affairs of Nicaragua--u11
of a sudden became psychotic “projection”;
on the
other hand. no serious consideration was given to the
points made in this forum by someone whose simplicity needs no subterfuge: Commander Daniel Ortega.

16. Much has been said recently about the will of the
United States to negotiate its differences with Cuba
imd Nicaragua.
17. In the dramatic light of the situation in Central
America and the Caribbean. where the blood of patriots
is currently being shed daily by the genocidal r&imes
of BI Salvador and Guatemala-the
Guatemala which
has ngi\in been violated by the supporters of reaction
after much-talked-about
elections
and imperialism,
where the people were not seen: in a situation Where
threats have been made und aggression carried out

12. We have not come here to give a historical account of the interventions and acts ofaggression which
2

;~gainst Njc~~gua,
where there has been harassment
nguinst Grenada and provocation
against Cuba, the
President of Mexico, Mr. JosC Ll,pez Portillo-confirming once again. in the words of Presiden’l Fidel
Castro, “his outstanding statemanship in the Mexican
line of continuity
traced by the illustrious
Benito
Jurirez, who proclaimed that peace is the respect for
the rights of others” --launched
in Managua an initiative which is supported by my Government, by Salvadorf\n revolutionaries
and by the Governing Junta
of Ni~tionnl Reconstruction
of Nicaragua,
IX. Cubu concurs
President

in the noble desire of the Mexican

“to guarantee for our region of Central America
and the Caribbean a situation of peace based on the
right of peoples to full sovereignty,
complete selfdetermination
and the achievement of the political
and social changes which they may themselves
choose democrntically”.
19, But while this is Cuba’s attitude, some representatives of the United States Government
continue to
maintain an ambivalent and unacceptable policy, On
the one hand, they proclaim their wish to negotiate
with Cuba and Nicaragua
in accordance
with the
Mexican proposals: on the other, they refuse to rule
out the use of force as one of the options which, ille&itimately and without any respect for international
law, is used exclusively to “punish”
Cuba. destabilize
Nicaragua and impede a real solution to the Salvadoran
tragedy.
20. In its insane decision to freeze the historical
processtaking us all the way back to the Neanderthal period of the diplomacy of gunboats and the
so-called cold war-the
Government
of the United
States. which refuses to listen to its own public opinion. to that of a growing number of Congressmen.
Senators and other leaders of American society. as
well as to that of not a few of its allies in the world
in general. attributes the rebellion of the Salvndoran
people to :i sinister Cuban-Nicaraguan
plot in the puy
of who knows
what interests of the Soviet Union
-which.
might I say in passing, has no transnational
corporations
in this part of the world or elsewherea plot in which even Viet Nam and the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) seem to be involved in one
way 01’ another, with the purpose of establishing
in
that territory of our Americas-small
in size but great
because of the heart of its patriots--a
terrible threat
to the nutionul security of the United States.
2 I. We Cuban revolutionaries
feel the deepest
admiration and respect for the Salvadoran patriots of
the Farabundo
Mart1 Front for National Liberation
(FMLNI
and the Revolutionary
Democratic
Front
(FDR). the legitimate heirs to the independence leaders and to the mnssucred peasants of 1932. those who
fell at the hands of the stooge of oligilrchy and servant
of the Yankee monopolies,
Maximilian Herm’mdez.

Our solidarity with their noble idcnls flows naturally.
just as we naturally repudiate those who have brought
El Salvador to a situation of poverty. illiteracy, oppression. as:;assinntion.
torture and banishment.
22. We could not conceal that solidarity.
born out
of the crucible of ;I common Latin American fatherhind: to do so would be to betray our roots in Bohvar.
Juarez and Mart!. Jose Mart1 himself reflected this
when he said ‘*What was contains what is.” We would
;I thousand times over rather cease to be than cease
to be what we were nnd are.
23. It is. however,
complezely false to say that Cubi1
is sending weapons to the Salvadornn revolutionaries
-which
does not mean that we do not have the right,
the right that Bohvar had when he brought freedom to
the peoples-to
help in the liberntion of a brothel
people. After all. the Government of the United States
arrogates to itself the right to arm the counterrevolutionury gangs of the traitor Savimbi in Angola and to
finance the destabilizntion
of various revolutionary
countries,
in addition to being the acknowledged
ncconiplice
of Israeli misdeeds
and an “intimate
and ally of the South African racists in open
friend”
violation of intern:ltional law and of the resolutions of
the United Nations.
Cuba. I repeat, is not sending
weapons to El Salvador.
24. In this connection,
the statements
contained in
the so-called United States report on the role of Cuba
and Nicaragua
in the rebellion of El Salvador published on 21 March 1982 in Tl~r N~II- Yo1.k Tir?~c~.rare
pure fabrications:
they constitute a deliberate distortion of reality.
2s. I clearly proclaim before the members of the
Council that the statements
referred
to there are
nothing other than a series of lies. falsifications
and
deliberate distortions.
26. They deliberately
distort the statements
mnde
by President Fidel Castro to Mr. Wishniewsky,
leadel
of the German Social Democratic Party. its they distort
the statements
made by Vice-President
Ctu-Ios Rafael
Rodriguez to the West German weekly Dar Spirgi>/.
The accusation
that we have used the Moni/71/)0 and
trafficking”
to Nicaragun
other vessels
in “arms
reveals :I brazen attempt--in
keeping with their threat
of a naval blockade, recently adduced by one of the
better-known
minor figures in its neo-colonial
&arpiece- to impede or to hinder normal commercial
trnffic between Cuba and Nicaragu;k.
27. This misnamed “report”,
which, :IS the United
States press itself recognizes, adds nothing new to the
fi\bles already put forth on the Cuban-Nicaraguan
“connection”
with the Salvadoran
revolution,
is, as
everything
previously
published
to that same end,
empty of any proof. Its authors do not offer any evidence, resorting
to the crude pretext of “protecting
their sources” , since they of course know that they
could not confirm or corroborate
what does not exist.

2X. Those who are sending weapons on II daily basis
to El S~llvndot-wenpon~,
of course, to massacre the
people i\nd not to free them-are
the rulers themselves
of the United States, themselves.
those who have
raised II hypocritical
outcry about the so-called arms
buildup of Cuba and Nicaragua while they squondel
on their naval exercises,
:hreateningly
carried out in
the Gulf of Mexico and in the Caribbc;m. many more
millions than the ridiculous sum offered to the countries of the region. allegedly for their “development”,
within the framework
of the so-called Caribbean Basin
Initiative.

enceh with these countries.
to negotiation.

to restrict

itself exclusively

34. Cuba
will unalterably maintain its decision tu
support the peace proposals of the President of Mexico
u-d to contribute
to the solution of problems in Central
America
and the Caribbean through peaceful and
negotiated means. with the same firmness with which
we have rejected and will reject definitively
any
attempt tu intimidate us. blackmail us and impose
conditions or ultimatums on us. As stated by President
Fidel Castro in his message to President Lopez Portillo: “Faced with tiny act of aggression. we will know
how to defend our dignity. WI‘ sovereignty
and our
principles nt any price, to the last man and woman
of our revolutionary
people and to the last drop of our
blood.”

29, As President Fidel Castro stated at the 68th InterPnrliamentary
Conference.
held at Havana from I3 to
24 September 1981,
“With weapons one can kill the hungry and the
exploited in El Salvador. but one cannot kill the
hunger. illiteracy, ill health and in.justice which prevail in that country.
nor can one kill the just and
centuries-old
right of peoples to rebel against
tyranny.”

35. The PRESlDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Mexico. I invite him to take ;I place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
MUNOZ
LEIXI
(Mexico)
Iintc~/pl.rffrtir~ll
Madam President, first of all. I should
like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the
presidency
of the Council, whose proceedings have
thus come to benefit from the intelligence and dedication that are your hallmark. I am especially pleased
by the impartiality
you have shown in expediting the
handling of this delicate matter. You have. unqucstionably,
honoured the democratic
tradition of you1
country.

30. The Governing Junta of National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua has addressed this Council for “serious
and extremely
urgent reasons”.
to use the words in
the statement
of Commander
Daniel Ortega [ihid.,
penal. 281, and-we
must say this-on
the basis uf a
right firmly est:lblished in the Charter of the United
Nations.
3 1, Therefore there can be no whimsical
interpretation of Article 52 of the Charter as limiting in any way
the sovereign
right of Membor States. No regional
orgnnization,
no pact or simitnr treaty stands above.
or can be invoked to the detriment of. the supreme
authority which the Charter confers on the Security
Council in connection with the maintenance of internntionul peace
lmd security-and
even less when the
regionul orgunization
in question lacks universality,
excluding some and denying entry to others while
admitting a Power that has nothing to do with the Latin
Amcr-ican region.

36.

Mr.

$YJU~

Sptrnislr):

37. Mexico is ugnin taking a plnce at the Council
table. in keeping with its duty ;IS ;I member uf the community of nations and as an integral part of :I region
deeply in the throes of social turmoil and very much
in need of peaceful means of resolving its conflicts
and of assuring its independence.
38. The Council has met to hear the Co-ordinator
of
the Governing
Junta of National Reconstruction
of
Nici\ragui\.
Commander
Daniel Ortega Suavedra. and
to examine facts and circumstances
which could conhtitute :\ grave threat to the independence and soveroignty of the nations of Central America and to
intern;ltional
peace and security.

32. In our view, the question of Centr;ll America
and the Caribbean-in
the context of and at the level
referred to by the Head of State of Nicaragua-is
fully
germane and legitimate in the proceedings of the Council, a body which must reiterate, with the full force of
its iluthority.
the cardinal principles
governing the
Organizntion
and which we applicable to this situntion, among them the principle of non-intervention
and
non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. the
right of every people to self-determination
and indcpendence and to the determination
of its own destiny.
and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes,

39. Yestcrday
we heard accounts
of the affronts
and threats directed against Nicurugua since the victory of the Sundinist Revolution. affronts and threats
which have built up to the point of bringing its people
to 21atnte of nntional emergency. WC have ~SO heard
the considered analysis by ~1major political leader who
does not seek confrontation
but dialogue, provided
the right of his country freely to decide its own destiny
is rcspecttld.
To Commander
Ortega-through
the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs 0% Nicaragua,
who is
d to the young Nicaraguan
revolution.
present--an
I offer once ;lgain, and no matter what may happen.
the whole-hearted
solidarity of the people and the
Government
of Mexico.

33. The Council must urge the United States Covcrnmcnt explicitly to rule out the use of direct. indirect or covert force i\g:linst Central American
and
Caribbean countries ;Ind, in the settlement of its diffcr4

40. My country is vitally concerned with what is
hrippeninp in Central America and in the C;u-ibbean,
not only because these are neighbouring countries but
;tilso because these a-e fraternal peoples which hnve
endured. 11s we ourselves have endured, the adverjities imposed by geography throughout
a history
stitined by blows to their sovereignty and by viohltions
uf their integrity.

mine the nature of ;I revolution. and they could never
he used to -justify foreign intervention,
Mexico. like
many other nutions. has had its own revolutionury
experience. It was opposed and sl;lndered in euch of
its efforts at emancipation
and therefore profoundly
respects and demands respect for the efforts of all
nations to liberate themselves.
47. The strict respect -for the rules of international
I;IW which my country
has invariably
maint;rined
testifies to the sincerity of its position in this case.
We have spoken unequivocnlly
against :my violutions
of the sovereignty
and integrity of States wherever
they halve occurred.
We have firmly upheld the right
of peoples to self-determination
and its logicul conscquence, which is political pluralism at the region i\nd
world levels. We have struggled to make relations
between North and South follow in path of internntionul economic co-operation
;md to keep them from
being distorted by the effects of confrontations
between ideological blocs. We have actively promoted
the denuclearization
of Latin America
within
the
framework
of the Treaty of Tlatelolco’
so that the
nations of our region will not become instruments
of
foreign interests.
In short. we have opposed the use
of third-world
nations as chips on the table of ~lobi\l
strategic interests.

41. Few regions of the world have seen so many
recurrent examples of ull forms of foreign interventinn and interference.
Perhaps in no other area
has
the cncircletnent
of domination been so persistent and
the internid systems of oppression
that perpetuate
backwardness
:md dependency so persevering.
42. This is not the time to open up the painful record
of ikggression committed against the peoples of Latin
America: r;lther, it is the time to reaffirm in precise
terms the busic
principles of international coexistence:
the right to self-determination
of all peoples, nonintervention
in the internal affairs of other States and
the peaceful settlement of disputes. We must see to
it th:rt these principles are respected everywhere,
in
particular in itreas contiguous to the super-Powers.
as
these areas are the most vulnerable.
43. This is also a time for us to use our imagination
and Our political will in the search for negotiuted alternatives to a crisis which, if it worsens,
would have
irrepantble
consequences
for all the States involved.
It would compromise
the efforts of many developing
Miens
towards
independence
and jeopardize
the
precarious political balance of the world. As President
Ltipez Portillo has requested:
let us all &ive ourselves one lust chance, and let us make good use of it.

48. Consistent with that tradition. and coupled with
the excellent relations of friendship it maintains with
the States of the region. Mexico has promoted constructive solutions ti, the Central American crisis. SOIUtions that would safeguard the rights of all parties.
We have done so in LI most open manner, while trying
to avoid the verbal belligerence of either side. which
in itself becomes an obstacle to understanding.
49. My Government
hns repeatedly
declared that
;I new intervention
by the United States in Central
America would represent LI gigantic historical
error
that would send us back to the bitter days of continental relkltions. We have proposed, instead, realistic
negotiation alternatives
that would prevent ;I conflict
of unpredictable
consequences.

44. The question of Centnil America has become a
question of conscience for all mankind. The unaccusturned interest thut the region’s problems have aroused
on :III continents
is an unambiguous
signal of theil
seriousness
and overriding
importance.
The great
mitjority
of public opinion, in the North as in the
South. in the East CIS in the West, recognizes the
iluthenticity
of the Latin American
revolutionary
movements
and hopes that those peoples will not be
hacked into :I corner and that their rights will not be
trampled upon by policies of force that lend nowhere.

SO. On 21 Fehruury
of this year, in Mi~nagua, the
President of Mexico set out ;I series of steps that could
ftlvour ;I relaxation of tensions and stability and development in the Central American Basin and the Caribbean. This requires systematic
dialogue among the
interested pLu’ties and a genuine readiness on their part
to grant mutual concessions
without abilndoning thei!
essential principles and their legitimate interests.

45. Today the distinctive feature of our region is the
struggle to chunge centuries-old
conditions of poverty
and exploitation.
Just as the battles for political independencc in Africa, Asia and Latin America were not
imd have not been by-products
of conflicts of interest
between the major Powers, the social revolutions of
wr own day cannot be encompassed within the framework of East- West rivalries.

51. From all evidence, the solution of our problems
requires a substantial
improvement
in relations between Cub:\ and the United States. The Cuban revolution is Lln irreversible
historical fact. Keeping Cuba
out of regional decision-making
forums is a mistake,
and constructing
strategic hypotheses
based on the
isol:ltion of thut country and on the rhetoric of aggression only leads to ;I poisoning of the continental politicill clim;lte by importing the cold war.

46. No evidence of outside support could cancel
out one fundumental
truth: revolutions
are made by
peoples using all the means at their command, It has
;I~K’:IYS been thus. But it is not those me:ms that deter5

52. The most searing regional problem is surely thut
of 13 Salvador. With full respect for that sovereign
nation. we have repeatedly expressed our concern
over the levels of violence and of human-rights violations that have been reached there. The overwhelming
miiority of the international community has come out
in favour of a negotiated political solution to the Salvndorun conflict to put an end to the absurd annihilation of human lives and to protect that nation against
the dangers of apparent triumphs or intolerable foreign
intervention.
s3. With regard to Nicaragua, we have stated that
the Government of the United States should rule out
any threat or use of force against that country. We
believe-‘ ,md the President of Mexico has so stntedthat any such design would be dangerous, unworthy
and unnecessary.
Invoking the close friendship between Mexico and its neighbour to the North, the
President of my country has directly and respectfully
called upon President Reagan to refrain from any
action along those lines. Fortunately, the American
Chief Executive has given assurances that he does not
propose to undertake any military action in Central
America.
51. The Government of Mexico has stated also that
it considers it both feasible and desirable to create a
system of mutual non-aggression pacts between Nicaragua and the United States, on the one hand, and
between Nicaragua and its neighbours, on the other.
We are confident that such agreements would make a
significant contribution to peace in the region and
would eliminate the anxiety arising from threats and
the waste involved in unproductive military buildups.
55. Mexico’s Secretary for Foreign Affairs recently
held intensive talks successively
with the United
States Secretary of State, with the President of the
Council of State and with the Council of Ministers
of the Republic of Cuba, and with the members of the
Governing Junta of National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua, in order to expedite dialogue and understanding as regards the fundamental questions that
up to now have divided their respective countries.
56. The result of those meetings has been highly
satisfactory,
and my Government is in a position to
state that there are logical and objective bases on
which to reach a series of agreements among the
purties involved in the conflict. We harbour the hope
that a process of substantive negotiations will commcnce shortly on the situation in Central America,
57. At the proposal of our country, the United States
and Nicaragua have agreed to meet at a high political level at Mexico City in the coming month of April
in order to discuss the main questions that separate
them. There is no doubt that in order for these talks
to produce the results that all of us desire, it will be
necessary to set aside the threats and recriminations
which. unfortunately, have increased in recent weeks,

5x. We calI upon our two friends the United Stntex
and Nicaragua to agree to an effective truce in w~M*ds
and facts that will permit the creation of a propitious,
climate for understanding.
There are at present two
p;~l*;~llelpaths being pursued: the pnth of confi’ontution and the path of negotiation.
Mexico pleads for
the second path, and the United States and Nicaragua. in accepting our proposal. have indicuted that
they also prefer that path. But we cannot continue
to move on two different tracks. Confrontation
and
negotiation are opposed to one another. Let US give
the two parties a chance to come to an understanding.
49. The Council hns before it u serious and comp1e.u
problem that by any reckoning could represent :\ threut
to international peace and security. Under the Churter.
its function is to see to it that tensions are reduced
and catastrophe
avoided. Its primary responsibility
in this area could not be called into question without
running the risk that, in the future and in the face of
similar conflicts in other parts of the world, its jurisdiction would also be questioned.
60. The Security Council hus indisputable jurisdiction over the investigation of any dispute or any situation that is likely to lead to international friction. Similarly, every Member State has an absolute right to
bring before the Council uny matter of this nature.
61. Member States that are members of :I regional
organ or parties to a regional agreement are not ohligated under those mechanisms
to deal with such
matters before submitting them to the Council. The
option of whether or not to resort to a prior authorily
becomes a sovereign decision of the States--as
sovereign as the search for a direct solution between the
parties to a dispute, or the utilization of any of the
peaceful procedures provided for in the Charter.
62. We are calling upon the Council to contribute.
using the means it deems most suitable, to promoting
a climate of dialogue that will encourage I\ negotiated
solution to the Central American conflict. The Council could not in any event waive its essentinl functicms.
On the contrary, it must employ all its authority and
its preventive powers in a prudent and timely manna
that will avoid polarization while there is still time to
prevent the irreparable.
63. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana):
Madam President.
my delegation welcomes your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current month. You bring
to this high office-in
addition to your well-known
brilliance-your
methodical.
efficient
manner and
Your domination of the art of diplomacy,
which together give an assurance that under your stewardship
the Council will effectively and successfully
discharge
its responsibilities,
64. 1 must ;IISO take this opportunity
to express
Your immediate predecessor.
Sir Anthony Parsons
the United Kingdom, my delegation’s appreciation

tr,
of
of

the very capable. smooth and efficient manner in which
he. in his time. conducted the business of this Council.
65. Guyana has been following with deepening concern the constant deterioration
in recent months of
the political situation in Central America. as well as
the threats to peace and security in other parts of o1.11
t’egion, No one can deny that these meetings are
taking place against the background of a charged atmosphere in Central America-one
characterized
by
acute tensions and mutual distrust and suspicion in
relations among the States of the region. Unfortunately, this situation of tension is being exacerbated
by external involvement in pursuit of interests which
are inconsistent
with those of the peoples of the subregion. Not surprisingly,
those relations have now
deteriorated
into sporadic armed attacks with consequent loss of life. Guyana is very concerned that
with the fragility and uncertainty
now prevailing in
Centre] America, localized situations of conflict could
escalate into full-fledged armed confrontation,
with
implications
not only for Central America but for the
entire Latin American region.
66. My delegation therefore believes it appropriate
and timely that the Council should have been convened now at the request of the Government of Nicaragua-in
exercise of its right under the Charterto consider the worsening situation in Central America
and the threat that this poses to the independence and
sovereignty
of Central American
States, to Nicaragua’s own peace and security and to international
peace and security in general. We deemed it OLII
mature duty to support that request. We believe that
in supporting
that request and in participating in this
debate we are rendering a service to the cause of
peace in Latin America.

ical process.
The people of Central America have
already shed enough blood in defence of their own
causes and of their own interests: they have no wish
now to shed more blood on behalf of the strategic
advantage of any outside Power. Guyana believes that
their struggles are not struggles to prove or disprove
the superiority
of one or another ideological world
view, Theirs are not struggles to spread revolution in
the region. We therefore see it as unhelpful and as a
dangerous
mistake to distort and misrepresent
the
domestic impulses for change in Central America and
to seek to make them out to be what they clearly are
not.
69. The problems of Central America are not susceptible to military solutions, especially where such solutions are encouraged from without. The providing of
military material, the encouragement
of violent confrontation.
the rhetoric of intervention
and threats of
destabilization
do nothing but lead to greater tension
and instability
in the subregion and the widening of
the arena of conflict. There can be no solutions imposed on Central America from outside. The only
viable solutions to the problems of the region are those
which emerge from within the region itself and which
correspond
to the interests and needs of the people
as determined by them. Those solutions must respect
the peoples’ right of self-determination
and the political independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of the States of the region.
70. ]n the relations between States, the principles of
international
law must be inviolate and must be scruThat is our only guarantee of
pulously
respected.
peaceful and stable inter-state
relations. The international community
long ago outlawed
intervention
as an instrument
of State behaviour.
More recently,
in 1970, the General Assembly
adopted the Declaration on Principles
of International
Law concerning
Friendly
Relations and Co-operation
among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.’
That Dechlration,
taking the Charter as its point of
solemnly proclaims,
infr/’ o/if/ 1 the prindeparture,
ciple that States shall refrain in their international
relntions from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State.
or in any other manner inconsistent
with the purposes
of the United Nations. The Declaration also sets forth
the principle that States shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered.

67. Long enough have the shrill voices of intervention and belligerence dominated the air. It is time that
the voices of moderation, of calm, reasoned dialogue
and of peace be heard, There must be-and there isanother way in Central America. My delegation sees
the request by the Government of Nicaragua as a plea
on behalf of the millions of people in Central America
for whom peace and stability do not have to be achieved
at the price of blood and destruction.
68. Central
America is undoubtedly
experiencing
:I process of internal change, and any external attempt
to dictate or influence the nature, direction or extent
of that change or to frustrate it constitutes an nbr-idgement of the inalienable right of self-determination
of
the peoples of Central America. That process of change
is evolving against the backdrop of particular politicd, economic and social factors which have been a
real part of the history of the peoples of that region.
The people of Central America are responding to impulses which no one can pretend to interpret for them,
for it is they and they alone who have experienced
these forces. The struggles of the peoples of Central
America are struggles for an improvement in the quality of their lives and for fuller participation in the polit-

as December
1981. the General
71, As recently
Assembly
adopted the Declaration
on the Inadmissibility of Intervention
and Interference
in the Internal
Affairs of States. That Declaration sets out in pellucid
language the duties comprehended
in the principle of
non-intervention
and non-interference.
Those duties
include:
“The duty of States to refrain in their international re]ations from the threat or use of force in
7

any form whatsoever to violate the existing internntionally recognized boundaries of another State,
to disrupt the political, social or economic order of
other States, to overthrow or change the political
system of another State or its Government,
to cLn.rse
tension between or among States or to deprive peoples of their national identity and cultural heritage:

f/~r/?c’.~I. It is clear that there is widespread political awareness among the people of El Salvador as
expressed. for example, in the alliance of the Farabundo Martr Front for National Liberation and the
Revolutionary
Democratic
Front. The Declaration
just referred to recognizes that alliance as a political
force which must have a role in the search for a settlement in El Salvador. Guyana believes that a just lasting
settlement of the problems now facing El Salvador
must be worked out by the peoples of that country
themselves, without any form of pressure or interference from outside.

*. . . .
“The duty of a State to refrain from armed intervention, subversion,
military
occupation
or any
other form of intervention
and interference,
overt
or covert, directed at another State or group of
States. or any act of military, political or economic
interference in the internal affairs of another State,
including acts of reprisal involving the use of force:

76. The need for discourse and negotiation in Central
America was never more urgent, nor the moment more
propitious. In this context, my delegation welcomes
the peace plan recently made public in Managua by
Mr. Jose Lopez Portillo, President of Mexico. We
believe that this plan offers 21 sound. practical basis
for negotiated solutions to the problems which the
States of Central America have with one another as
well as with the United States-solutions
that would
respect the independence of the countries concerned
and also take account of their needs and of their concerns. We express the hope that this plan will provide a mechanism and a basis whereby belligerent
postures will once and for all give way to constructive dialogue with a view to the introduction
of a
regime of peace and of stable, harmonious relations
among the States of Central America.

... * .
“The duty of a State to refrain from any action
or attempt in whatever form or under whatever
pretext to destabilize or to undermine the stability
of another State or of any of its institutions.“.’
72. This Declaration enjoys the total support of the
member countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement,
because its principles are principles which have historically been the cornerstones of our Movement.
We
felt it was necessary to set them out in lucid declaratory
form as another protection for small States which are
invariably the victims of aggression and intervention.

77. My delegation has taken note of the willingness
expressed by Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra to
improve the climate of relations with the United
States on the basis of mutual respect and uncondi..
tional recognition of Nicaragua’s right to self-determination and to begin immediately
direct and frank
conversations with the Government
of the United
States. even in a mutually agreeable third country,
with the objective of reaching concrete results through
such negotiations.

73. Those lofty instruments are not intended for the
adornment of the archives of the United Nations or
of chancelleries in State capitals: they are conceived
of as embodying guiding principles for the behaviours
of States in their relations with one another. in accordance with the system of international
relations based
on the rule of law as contemplated
in the Charter,
Their only value lies in strict observance of them,
The lesson of recent experience in Central America is
that departure from these principles endangers peace
and stability and leads to needless human suffering.

7X. We have also noted the indication he gave of
the willingness of the Salvadoran patriots of the Fwnbundo Mart1 Front for National Liberation and the
Revolutionary
Democratic Front to begin immediate
negotiations without preconditions, as well as that of
the revolutionary Government of Cuba to begin negotiations with the United States without delay.

74. My delegation would like to express its support
for the Government
and people of Nicaragua in theit
efforts to consolidate
and defend their revolution,
to strengthen their political and economic independence and to orgunize their internal affairs in such a
manner as they themselves, in exercise of their sovereign right, shall decide upon.

79. My delegation has noted with satisfaction the
stated commitment
made by the United States in this
chamber yesterday [2.?35th mwting 1 regarding its
rendiness to engage in dialogue and negotiations, as
well as its assurance that it has no intention of invading anyone. We also note the positive disposition
of the Government of the United States to the Mexican
initiative for peace in Central America.

7.5. The other foc;rI point of Guyana’s concern with
regard to Central America is El Snlvador. The Government of Guyana profoundly
regrets that change
must come in El Salv;rdor at such a high price in human
life and suffering and material damage. It is in the
context of this increasing concern that I here reiterate
the support of the Government
of Guyana for the
positions expressed in thejoint Frnnco-Mexican
Declnration on El S:rlv:tdor of 28 August 1981 (.y/1465Y,

80. The current situation in Central America has
provoked such wide international preoccupation that it
was proper that this Council, in the discharge of its
8

.

m:lior

responsibilities

for

the maintenance
of intershould address itself to it.
My dclcgation
is confident
that the Council’s
delibrratjons on the complaint
brought
by Nicarugua
will
serve as a stimulus to the process of dialogue
which
h:ls already begun, or which appears to have begun.
within
the framework
of the Mexican
peace plan. My
delegation
supports and wishes to give every enoourugement to that process. Rut to begin :I dialogue is not
to find solutions.
My delegation
would
urge that
while
the process of dialogue
is under way, restraint
be exercised
in both rhetoric
and actions so that the
ilttainment
of the objectives
of the dialogue
is not prejudiced.
In the meantime,
my delegation
considers
it appropriate
that this Council
should
reaffirm
the
relevant
principles
concerning
peaceful
and friendly
relations
among States. It is only on the basis of those
fundamental
principles
of international
relations
that
a just and lasting solution
to the problems
of Central
America can be found.

n;~tionul pcacc and security.

81.
The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative
of Viet Nnm. I invite her to take il place
at the Council table and to make her stntoment.

82.
Mrs. NGUYEN
NGOC
DUNG
(Vict
Nam)
(i,l.trlp/‘cltfrlir,n
,fi~~ Finch):
Madam
President,
the
delegation
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam would
like sincerely
to thank you and the members
of the
Council
for having granted it the opportunity
to take
part in this debate, although
my country is not ;I member of the Council.
83.
Together
with the whole of mankind,
Viet Nam
is deeply concerned
at the extreme
tension now prcvailing
in Central America,
where some young States,
including
Nicaragua,
are confronted
with the imminent
danger of military
aggression:
this gravely imperils the peace i\nd security of thu entire Central American and Caribbean
region.

84.
I share the belief of previous
speakers that the
situation
is a result of the policies of the United States.
which
has deliberately
ignored
the far-reaching
c hangs
in the social. economic
and political
situation
that hod been imposed on the peoples of the region
over
the centuries
by feudalism
and underdevelopmerit,
The people
ol’ Nicaragun,
like those of tll
Salvador,
Grenuda
and Cuba. and their brothers
in
Asia and Africa. cannot tolerate the burden of poverty,
oppression
and humilintion
that has weighed
on them
for too long, and they must struggle to change the
internal
and external
structures
of their societies,
whether
they be colonial
or neo-colonial
in form.
85.
After the triumph of its revolution,
the people of
Nic~agua
is dediciiting
itself to the work of reconstructing
its country
in the way it hns itsc1.f chosen.
Wc greatly regret that this revolution
and ith ;iLtcndant
chmges
---changes
that hi~vc :~lways cxihtcd.
as long
iIS the history of mankind.
:md which are ~1s impossible
to prevent
as ;I pregn;int
wommn’s
giving birth-are

not understood
by some. For some time the world
ha5 been witnessing
an avalanche
of hostile actions
in :\I1 fields against Nicaragua
and the countries
uf the
Caribbean.
especially
Cuba and Grenada.
perpetrated
by the United
States on the pretext
that Nicaraguu
has helped the forces of the Farnbundo
Mart1 Front
in their struggle
against
the dictatorinl
Salvadoran
regime.
86. I do not want to enumerate
ag:lin the long list of
large-scale
espionage
operations
by air and destroyers
off El Siilv:Idor
and Nicaragua
and the gross campaigns of lies launched
by the United States. by means
of the most sophisticated
techniques,
against those
small countries.
All the media from Enst to West h:ive
spoken much of this. 1 should just like to stress that
this policy of blackmail.
war and intimidation
cannot
frighten the heroic people of Nicaragua
or the Sulvudornn fighters.
Furthermore,
it has given rise to ;I
swell of energetic
protest.
not only among Govcrnmerits and peoples
throughout
the world.
but also
among the Amcricnn
people itself. C:uguntuan
demonstrations have been heId in many United States cities.
“No
more Viet Nams”.
Sabrcunder the bnnnel
rattling and arrogant
declarations
are out of step with
our times, when the vast majority of peoples arc’ taking
their destinies
into their own hands.
87. The Government
of the Socialist
Republic
of
Vict Nam. in the statement
by the hpokcsman
of its
Ministry
for Foreign Affilirs. has said that it considers
that the war-like
interventionist
policy. the policy of
intimidation
and aggression,
of the United States Government
is entirely
contrary
to the interests
of the
American
people and is contrary
to the growing tide
of protest from nearly all the peoples
and Governments of Latin America
and the Curibbcan.
8X. This interventionist
policy in Central
America
and the Caribbean,
in p:\rticular
against El Si~lvador,
Nicnragua.
Cuba and Grenada,
which
directly
violutes the independence,
sovereignty.
scourity
and
paace of those States, constitutes
;L clear example of
the IIse of force in international
reI:Itions
in defiance
of the fundnmental
principles
of the Charter
of the
United Niitions.
And the unavowed
goal of these policies is to liquidate
the Nicaraguan
revolution
and the
liberation
movements
of the peoples of that region.
89. The people
and Government
of the Socialist
Republic
of Viet Nnm vigorously
condemn
that plot
and the adventurism
of the Reagan Administration,
so
fraught with consequences.
We resolutely
support the
cause of the defence and reconstruction
of the country, people and Government
of Nicaragua.
as well as
those of Cirenuda and Cuba.
90.
Wvc are convinced
that the just
people of t:l Salvador
for democracy,
4t~/i‘-~i~~ti~I.i~ii!.l;Ili!lll
\,vill 2riiirrlpll.
91.
W/e arc firmly convinced
\,ophic.
religious
or political

struggle
of the
freedom and

that. whutrvcr
philudifferences
may exist,

the world’s
peoples are in favour of the settlement of
disputes by negotiation. Our Government
is thus very
much gratified at the initiative taken by the President
of Mexico. Mr. Josl Lcipez Portillo. in putting forward his three-point peace plan announced on 21 February in Managua. Our Government
supports all the
measures aimed at preserving the inaliennble national
rights of the people of Nicaragua,
its national independence. its freedom and its right to self-determination.

political reality end political vocabulary. I find it worth
noting. and interesting,
as an observer of political
affairs as well ~1sthe representative
of my country, tc
hear the representative
of the Government
of VieI
Num speaking with such conviction about the principle
of respect for national independence.
I trust that the
Member States of the United Nations would all agree
that most of us believe that respect for the principle
of national independence should apply in Kampuchea.
as well as in the rest of our countries.

92. In my delegation’s
view, the only alternative to
the present tense situation in the Central American
region and the Caribbean
is the assumption
by the
Reagan Administration
of its duty to put an end to
its policy of intervention and aggression and to respect
the right to self-determination
of the peoples of that
region. It is to be hoped that there will be a positive
response to the five-point proposal of the Government
of Nicaragua,
as set forth by Commander
Daniel
Ortegn.

I found it interesting to listen to the
99. Yesterday
representative
of Angola paying homage to the principle of respect for national independence,
since
Angola is a nation whose national independence is in
some sense subject to the will of 30,000. 25,000.
20,000-however
many thousand-foreign
troops
who occupy that land. with the consent of that Government which is invoking the principle of national
independence.
100. I find it, I suppose, particularly
interesting to
listen to the representative of the Government of Cuba
commenting
on peaceful affairs in this hemisphere
nnd respect for the principles
of national independence and non-intervention.
Cuba is a very strange
nation which today. as members of this Council know,
maintains some 40,000 soldiers in Africa illone, where
those troops dominate two countries, doing for the
Soviet Union there what the Gurkha mercenaries did
for nineteenth century England.

93. My delegation calls upon the Council to do everything in its power, within the framework
of its mandate, to help to bring about a settlement of this situation by fruitful negotiations between the two parties.
for the benefit of peace and the security of that region
nnd of the whole world.
94. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make :I statement in my capacity as the representative
of the
UNITED
STATES: it will be made in exercise of the
right of reply.

101. In Central America,
Cuba is attempting to
export aggression.
subvert established Governments
and intervene in :I most persistent and massive fashion
in the internal affairs of more than one nation in that
region. In Nici\ragua alone, it maintains no fewer than
1,800 to 2,000 security and military personnel.

95. I should like to begin by thanking the various
Member
States of the United Nations
who have
spoken today in support of the principles of national
self-determination,
national
independence,
strict
respect for territorial
integrity,
and non-intervention
in the affairs of other States. Those are principles
which are very dear to my country and which the
United States in its foreign affairs does its very best
to honour in a serious and consistent fashion.

102. In others words, as Assistant Secretary of State
Thomas
Enders noted yesterday
in his testimony
before the United States Congress, “Cuba is a wouldbe foreign policy giant superimposed
on an economic
pygmy, whose people have had to sacrifice all hope
for 11rising standard of living in order to gain advantages in foreign affairs.” Those advantages are largely
purchased for it by some $3 billion nnnual economic
d ;I great deal more
ad from the Soviet Umon-an
military aid of course.

96. I should like also to express the sincere agreement of the United States with the principles of international law that were cited by the representative
of
Guynnn and various other speakers today, particularly
with reference to the use of force and threats of force
in the affairs of nations. The United States is very
profoundly
committed to the principle of the non-use
of force in international
relations and committed also
to following and abiding by the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations concerning
the use and nonuse of force.

welcomes any move of
103. My country, however,
the Government
of Cuba towards
greater concern
for the economic development
and well-being of its
people,

i

104. Finally.
commenting on the use of language
and the realities of politics, it occurred to me that
members of the Council might be interested in 51recent
article concerning
Sandino and Sandinismo in Nic~II*U~UU,
since we are discussing here the letter of the
Co-ordinator
of the Nicaraguan Junta. A prestigious
Pablo Joaquln Chamorro
y Cardenale, WS
writer.

97. I should like also to express the soljdarity
of
the United States with all those peoples which hope
for change, for democracy and development in Central
America.
98. I cannot forbear noting that today there have been
some rather odd disjunctions
between some aspects of
IO

;tssassinated in the final days of the Somoza rkgime,
;IS members of the Council perhaps know, and his
death certainly was a precipitatingfactor
in the successRI1 revolt against the Somoza rlgime, leading evenfltally to the installation of the current Junta in Nic;~regua. Pablo Jonqum Chnmorro
was a very highly
respected writer,
whose name is from time to time
invoked by the leaders of the revolution,
but not as
often us that of Sandino. and he was, of course, the
editor and publisher of Lr/ Pwt7str.
the last remaining
independent newspaper in Nicaragua-which
may or
may not have been permitted to publish today. Chamorro wrote:

election, it risks being defezlted. It takes ;I very brave
Government that is more committed to freedom and
to democracy than to retaining power to run such ;I
risk. My Government
congratulates
the Government
of El Salvador on being willing to risk its power fc)r the
sake of freedom.
106.

I now resume my functions

as PRESIDENT.

107. The representative
of Cuba has asked to speak
in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him to take :I
pluce at the Council table and to make his statement.
108. Mr. ROA KOURI
fintoprv~ttrtiorl ,fjw~ Spm
id?): It is not, of course, to engage in polemics that
I have requested to speak once again, in the exercise
of the right of reply. In my previous statement I said
that we have come to the Council precisely to seek.
through the action of the members of the Council. to
prevent a new act of intervention
in Central America and the Caribbean, to prevent the use of force
against the countries of our region. Actually, I should
like to clarify several concepts expressed by the President of the Council in her capacity as the represent&ive of the United States Government.

“Sandino
should be exalted precisely as a contrast to the Communists,
who obey signals from
Russia and China, Sandino fought against the
United States Marines, but he did not bring Russian Cossacks to Nicaragua. as Fidel Castro did in
Cuba. There is a great difference between the Communist Fidel Castro, who in his false battle for the
independence
of his country has filled it with Russian rockets,
soldiers,
planes and even canned
goods, und a Sandino. who defended the sovereignty of his ground with home-made bombs but
without
accepting the patronage of another Dower.
For this reason. Sandino was great-because
he
was not handed over to Communist
treason like
Csslro.
but fought within an Indo-Hispanic
limit.

109. In the first place, it seems to me that the representative of the United States has today used a new
-or at least it seems new to me-form
of the wellknown Orwellian “double-speak”
when she says that
the principles that guide the foreign policy of the
United States are precisely the non-use of force, respect for the territorial integrity of nations, non-intervention and non-interference
in the internal affairs of
other States. The non-use of force-l
repeat. Perhaps
I suffer from historical myopia or blindness, but I seem
to remember that it was not the Republic of Cuba that
invaded Viet Nam or Laos or Kampuchea: that of
course it was not the Republic of Mexico that took
:~wny from the United States 40 per cent of its national
territory: that obviously
it was no small Latin American country which intervened, from the middle of the
last century up to very recently, in 1965, in the Dominican Republic-where,
curious as it may seem. the
Interamerican
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance”
was
invoked, but only after 42 United States Marines had
disembarked in Santo Domingo and then some 500 soldiers were brought in from some Latin American countries to somewhat legalize that state of affairs. Nevertheless, I am very pleased to see the representative
of the United States Government
stating before the
Council that those principles embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations are the ones which guide the
foreign policy of her Government.
We hope that that
is the cnse, at least in the future.

“Naturally
the Communists
who attacked and
slandered
Sandino when he was in the mountains
now try to use him, because they have no moral
scruple to restrain them. Sandino was a pure product of our land, very different from the products
exported
by Russia or China, and as such we must
exult and preserve his memory. The value of his
exploits
has ;I Nicaraguan value. not Soviet, and
his nutionmlism is indigenous, not Russian.
“S.andino is a monument to the dignity of our country and we must not permit the Communists,
with
whom he never communed, to besmirch his memory in order to use his prestige and to succeed some
day. on the pretext that they are fighting imperialism, in delivering our land to Russia, as Castro
did with Cuba”.
105. Finally, I should like simply to mention that
there has been a good deal of talk of change in Central America today and there has been a good deal of
invocation
of the hope of change for the people of
Central
America,
The Government
of the United
States hopes very much for change in Central America: we hope it will be as peaceable as possible and
bought at as low a price to the people of Central Americ;, its possible. We believe that an example of penceable change may be observed this very week-end in
Ef Salvador,
where free elections with a free press,
with competition
among the parties, will take place.
The risks of ;I free election are. as every office-holdel
knows,
very great, When a Government
risks a free

I IO. The representative
of the United States said
that Cubn was a strange nation. That surprises me.
coming, as it does, from someone living 90 miles from
th:\t strange nation and because for many, many years,
very close ties existed between our two peoples.
II

tries

I I I, To me. for instance, the United States is not at
ull II strange nation. We know it very well. It prevented
us from acceding to independence
at the end of OUI
war against cotoniill
Spain. It militarily
occupied
our
this is interesting,
country
for four years. Indeed,
because, as usual. much is said about concern for elections. and now elections are being mentioned
in connection with El Salvador.
I shall refer to this again

sljs

decide
of

cl)~ll-se.

th;lt

it is necessary
this

but it is il silcjfice
Cubans

glndly

lqlysents

that

they

;I SilChfiCC

which :\lI Cubans

who

shl>LIId
fOl.

do

C’Llh.

iI1’C tI’llIy

make.

117. It is si\id Ihilt we interfere
in the affi1iI.s of SL’vcKll countries
of the hemisphere.
This remains
to be
proven, sl) f;lr tI1el.c hns &n
no real evidence that
this is the ciise.

I 12. However,
for four years after the end of the
war :\gninst Spain, the United States military
interventionists
never concerned
themselves
with holding
elections in Cuba. And when they were held. it was in
order to elect ;I President
who accepted
the Platt
amendment-in
other words, who accepted a urpitis
tl~nli/lntio
Republic of Cub;~: he accepted an amendmcnt allowing the United States Government
to intervcne whenever it considered its interests to be affected.
That wils done by the Government
of the United
States.

118. It is snid thnt in Nic;\r:\gui\
wt‘ hnvC bCtwcen
l ,800und 2,000 security ilnd military personnoI.
IieiilIy*
I think thut figtires are being inflated with helium !$I\.
Yeh. wc do have 3,000 Cuban
technicians
in Niti\r~\g~~i\. We cnn give the names of C;IC~and t?VrQ one
of them, wllert: they reside in Cuba. what their PI.+
fessions
:~ly-cjoctol.s,
teachers.
builders-and,
of
course. we illstj have ;I small number
of military
iIdvisers theI-e at the request of the Nicaraguan Government. But this should come as no surprise to :ll~ycWW:
it is normal practice in today’s world. It is not i\ crime.
It is done on the busis of ngrecments
between
indcpendent und sovereign
Governments.

I I?. It is said that we maintain
40,000 soldiers-a
figure which I huve never heard in my own countryin occupation
of two African countries.
Really, I find
it unique that such language should be used in the
Security Council by the President of this body-even
though she used it in her capacity as representative
of the United States-to
refer to ;I presence agreed to
between independent
and sovereign States, Members
of the IJnited Nations. I believe that this is truly offensive Iungllilgtl.
I do not think that the Government
of
the United States can improve its relations with African countries by insulting independent
and sovereign
nations.

I 19. A gentlernun
whose name I do not rec:~Il-I
cclt~ld
not take the name down-has
been quoted
i\s saying
in the United States Congress
that Cuhu WLISa politicnl giant superimposed
on nn economic
pygmy
[ptl~rr. 102). Well, I think that it is iIn ~si\gg~Wil~n tcj
say that Cuba is a political
giant-and.
of cou~‘sc, it
is also un exaggeration
to say that Cuhn is an CCOnomic pygmy. We ill72 ii poor nation.
in the pi*cXXss
of development.
But should the representative
of the
United States be interested
in looking
some time ilt
the figures published
by the Economic
Commission
for Latin America,
the Food ilnd Agriculture
Ot’giInization
of the United
Nations,
the United
Nation\
Educational.
Scientific
and Culturnl
Orgnnization,
iInd
other organs of the United Nations system. she would
see that W~Zhave the highest life expectancy
of almost
alI developing
nations,
and certainly
of Latin
Amcricil: that our infant mortality
rate per I.000 live birth>
is comparable
to thnt of the most developed
cl>1111tries: that protein consumption
in our country
is cl>mparable to that of the most developed
countries:
and
thut public health in WI country
is tl)tilIIy
free crT
churge. :IS is ~ISO public
education
iit all levels,
In
other words, while being ;I poor and underdcvclopcd
country,
our standard
of living is much higher
than
that of’the vast majority
of the sl)-cilllcd thil-d-world
countries.
And we have achieved
this through
(XII’
own efforts, in the face of an economic
blockudc
decreed by the most important
and powerful
cupitalist country
in the world.
which even prevents
\I%
from buying its medicine
and food. not to speak of
CilPitul
goods or equipment.
We hnve done this thr~~@~
our own efforts and. yes, 211~ with the nssistancc
of the Soviet Union and the other sociuliat
cotlntrieh.
This is fraternal assistance for which we ure gr:lteftll:
it is economic
and commcrcinl
exchange
which
WC
pructisc on terms extremely
f~lvollri\blc
to over country.

114. It is true that my Government
sent a limited
military force to Angola. at the request of the Government of that country. in order precisely to prevent the
racist regime of South Africa rind the so-called FLNA
1N(rtioll(tl I;j.out ,fiJr t/lo Lihcrtrtion I$ .4ngo/rr I, under
the leadership of someone known as Holden Roberto,
whom the whole world knows to be an agent of the
United
States Central
Intelligence
Agency,
from
impeding
the independence
of that country.
I IS. But it was the South African rncist Ggime which
invilded
Angola,
II rigime
which according
to the
President
of the United States, is America’s
ally.
Furthermore.
everyone knows that that invasion wns
programmed
by the Government
of the United States
in order to prevent the Popular
Movement
for the
Liberation
of Angola from attaining
power and consolidating
it in Angola.
116. I wish very clearly to state that the Cubnn
troops which are in Angola and in Ethiopia
to contribute to the defence of the independence
of those
countries
arc there under sovereign
agreements
between WI‘ countries.
in conformity
with Article 51 of
the Charter,
and that they will remnin there for ;\s
long as the Governments
of Cubu nnd of those coun-

IL

120.

and :ldopted
resolutions
discussed
the question
expressing
the deep concern of the international
community over human rights violations
in that countrythat there should be freedom of the press, freedom of
movement.
freedom of assembly.
that is to say that
there should be the minimum
necessary guarantees
for the holding of elections
with the participation
of
all the political
parties. excluding.
of course. the revolutionaries.
who do not believe in the feasibility
of
those elections,
but who nevertheless
we
saying that
they are ready to seek a negotiated
settlement
with
the military juntu of El Salvador and have subscribed
to the proposals
of the President
of Mexico to seek
a peaceful solution.

So we are ii poor

and underdeveloped
country.
us pygmies is. I believe.
done in a pejorative
sense, in an attempt at displeasing
us. But we shall not be displeased
by it.

But to go from there to culling

I2 t.
However.
concern
over the presence
of :I few
thousand
Cuban
soldiers
in two Africnn
countries
and ;t handful of advisers in Nicaragua
is truly inconceivable
coming from the representative
of a country
which has more than 360 military bases abroad. including
one on Cuban national
territory,
in Guant5namo.
against the express will of the Government
and the people of Cuba. And the United States Government
not being a friend of Cuba, it is really nonsensical
for our people to have to tolerate
a world
Power having one of the largest military bases of the
al’ea on our own territory.

12s. Hence, elections
in El Salvador would appw
to me to be only elections on paper. Even the results.
whatever
they may be, would appear to me in these
circumstances
to be very doubtful.

122.
Finally.
I should like to say that of course the
ftzw thousand
Cuban soldiers who are in two African
countries
to contribute
to the safeguarding
of the
independence
nnd sovereignty
of these two countries
are no threat to anyone.

126. That is all I wnnted
to say. not to engage
polemics
but merely to dot the i’s.

in

123.
I wonder.
given the record of successive
United
States
Administrations,
what we could say about the
hundreds
of thousands
of American
soldiers who are
found all over the world, from Asia to Africa, in all
hemispheres
and in the Cuant$namo
naval base.
124.
Concerning
the forthcoming
elections
in El
Salvndor.
I would
simply say the following.
It seems
to me that it is being over-optimistic
to think that in
a country
shaken by a deep civil war, :I country where
hwman
rights
are nut respected--and
the United
Nations
Commission
on Human
Rights itself recently

1 Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin Amer.
ica (United
Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 634. No. ‘9068).
1 General Assembly
resolution
2625 (XXV),
annex.
t General Assemblv
resolution
36/103. annex. part II. paras. ((I).
(c) and (c).
I

I3

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nationa
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publicaritrns
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from hookstorcs
and distributors
throughout
the
or write IO: llnited
Nations.
Salus Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Lcs publications
dcs Nations
Unies
monde cnticr.
Informez-vous
auprPs
dcs vcntes,
New York ou Cicotve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

‘i 1
:!
‘11

DES

NATIONS

sent en vente dans Its lihrairies
de votre Iii-Are
ou adresscz-vous

PUBLlCAClONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partcs
del mundo.
Consultc
Nucva
York o Gincbra.

!
j
1.

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en libretias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

UNIES

et Its agences
g : Nations

dPpositaires
du
Units. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Secci6n de Vrntas.
