NATIONS

TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 24/25 NOVEMBER 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1383) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . . . .

1

Statement by the President . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . , , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Letter dated 24 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security.Council (S/8262) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

, S/PV.l383

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AN

EIGHTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday,

24 November

1967, at 8 p.m.

President: Mr. Mamadou Boubacar KANTG (Mali).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/13831

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Letter dated 24 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8262).
Statement by the President

1. The PRESIDENT
(translated from FrenchJ: The
present meeting of the Council has been convened at very
short notice at the urgent request of the representative of
Cyprus. Owing to the urgency of the situation, I was
obliged to convene the meeting without being able to hold
the customary consultations with all members of the
Council. I have no doubt that members will understand that
I have acted solely in the interest of international peace and
security in the very serious circumstances of which we are
all aware.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Letter dated 24 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8262)

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): BY letters
dated 24 November 196’7, the representatives of Cyprus,
Greece and Turkey have requested permission to participate
without vote in the discussion of this agenda item. These
letters have been circulated as documents S/8263, S/8264
and S/8265 respectively, If I hear no objection 1 propose
with the consent of the Council to invite the repreSentatiW
of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to take places at the Council
table.

At the President3 invitation Mr, Z. Rossides (Cyprus),
J-!k. 0. Eralp (Twkey) and Mr. A. S. Bitsios (Greece) took
places at the Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
Security Council will now take up the complaint submitted
to it in document S/8262. I call upon the first speaker on
my list, the representative of Cyprus.
4. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I am sorry that the Council
had to be convened at such a late hour, but my country is
under imminent threat of attack and invasion by a powerful
neighbour, Turkey, with which we wish to live in peace.
During the last few days there have been continuous threats
of invasion, preparations for invasion, by the navy, military
forces and air force of Turkey. Then we have had a series of
flights over the territory of Cyprus-a great number of
them, daily-some flying at a very low level-as low as 500
feet-and some remaining over the Island for as long as
thirty minutes, flying from one end of the Island to the
other, terrorizing the population and constituting a threat
of invasion.
5. I have sent two letters dated 22 and 23 November to
the President of the Security Council giving a list of the
overflights, the hours and the heights in each case, and the
type of aircraft which was flying over the territory /S/8260
and S/8261].

6. I do not think that I need elaborate’to a great extent on
the existing threat of invasion. It has been proclaimed
almost boastfully by Turkey itself and it is within the
knowledge of all Governments that this week-end has been
predetermined as the time when this illegal act of invasion
of Cyprus is to take place. Of course, if this were the
eighteenth or the nineteenth century, or even the days
before the Second World War, this would have been a
normal practice. But we are now in the United Nations era.
We have the Charter of the United Nations, which explicitly
forbids any threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of any State. No threat
or use of force in international relations is allowed under
the Charter, and this is an obligation solemnly undertaken
by all States Members of the United Nations; it is indeed
the cornerstone of the Charter. It is that part of the Charter
that introduced the change into our world from a world of
force and domination to one of reason and co-operation in
peace, If this concept, contained in Article 2, paragraph 4,
which is a legal obligation under the Charter, is tom to
pieces, then the United Nations can no longer exist, or it
will have no meaning, and the world will find itself on a
steep downward path-not just a downward path, but on

the edge of an actual precipice-to regression, to the rule of
the jungle. That is the meaning contained in the threats of
aggression against Cyprus which, as I said before, we are
very sorry to note are made with little concern for the
Charter.

prevent aggression and invasion from Turkey and make it
less easy for Turkey to invade Cyprus. But it has become
more difficult to defend Cyprus from external dangers,
because for the past two years Turkey has begun an
intensive build-up and a feverish training of troops and has
undertaken airborne operations for the specific purpose of
invading Cyprus. That is the reason why it is threatened
now, and I ask this Council to afford us the protection we
need.

7. I shall cite a few of the facts as given out. A military
source in Ankara said that air force, army and navy units
stationed in south central Turkey, just forty miles north of
Cyprus, were on the alert. Military activity has been noted
around Ankara and on the highways leading to the
Mediterranean coast. Then, when Prime Minister Siileyman
Demirel was asked whether a landing would be made on
Cyprus, he told reporters: “Let no one worry; we can
land.”

11. I have a long list of facts here but I do not wish to
take up much of the time of this Council in quoting from
them. Mr. Erkin, who was the Turkish Foreign Minister, in
an interview given in June 1964 said: “The radical solution
of Cyprus would be to cede one part of Cyprus to Greece,
and the other, closest to the Turkish Adriatic coast, to
Turkey”. So that is the position with which we are now
faced. I will not proceed further but. I would ask for a
resolution of this Council that would protect the territorial
integrity, the sovereignty and political independence of
Cyprus from this grave threat of invasion by Turkey.

8. The list of threats to invade Cyprus is a long one and I
shall refer to it if necessary, but this has been linked with
certain events that took place at Ayios Theodhoros. A
patrol which had regularly patrolled for the last four years
stopped its patrols and resumed them again later; the attack
by Turkish rebels against the patrol led to bloodshed and
fighting. All this is most regrettable and causes great
concern on our part. However, these events are not the
cause of Turkey’s threatening attitude with regard to
Cyprus. If we look back, we can see that this is not the first
time that Turkey has threatened to invade Cyprus; each
time it has found some pretext. The real reason is that, all
along, it has been the policy of Turkey to invade Cyprus
and partition it by force, Partition of the Island has been
the aim of Turkey. It knows very well that it cannot attain
it through the United Nations or by any peaceful means. It
cannot even bring it forward as a claim in any international
forum. It may do so in private negotiations which it tries to
carry on, but not in any international forum, Therefore, if
Turkey cannot achieve its aims by negotiations, it wants to
attain them by force. There is a great deal of evidence to
this effect not only now, but there has also been in the
past.

12. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I now call
on the representative of Turkey.
13. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): The Council has been called to
a meeting at this late hour upon an urgent appeal by
Ambassador Rossides whom we have just had the privilege
of hearing. This meeting comes at a time when the peace in
Cyprus and the Eastern Mediterranean has been once again
jeopardized by the irresponsible actions of the Greeks and
Greek Cypriots under General Grivas. It comes at a time
when not only the friends of all parties to the dispute but
also the Secretary-General of the United Nations and his
Special Representative in the area are making a supreme
effort to avert the fire which has been kindled in Athens
and Nicosia. The meeting has obviously been called by
Ambassador Rossides so that he may once again indulge in
his now well-known distortions of fact and in his attempts
to whitewash brazen and brutal aggression by crying “wolf’
and diverting the attention of the Council to other wider
issues. I shall attempt briefly to correct the perspective by
dwelling on the real issuesinvolved.

9. In 1964 we heard repeated statements to that effect. In
May of that year Mr. Kemal Satir, who was Turkish Deputy
Prime Minister, said: “Today everything is ready for
Turkish intervention in Cyprus and Turkish forces can
occupy Cyprus within six hours.” Was that in anticipation
of the Ayios Theodhoros events? But we know more. What
did the same Mr. Kemal Satir mean by saying, in a public
statement made in the same month and in the same year,
“Cyprus will be divided into two sections, one of which will
join Turkey”? That was the purpose of invasion at that
time and that is the purpose of the projected invasion now.
So let us see things as they really are. The reality is that
Turkey insists on having Cyprus partitioned by the use of
force, and in following that use of force it simply rules out
the rule of law.

14. We have heard from Ambassador Rossides pious
protestations of national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus and the existence of an imminent threat
to this integrity. We do believe that the territorial integrity
and the independence of the State of Cyprus are in mortal
danger. We also believe that the Greek and Greek Cypriot
attack on the Turkish Cypriot villages of Ayios Theodhoros
and Kophinou was the initiation
of the process which
would have ultimately put an end to the independence of
Cyprus by completing its union with Greece. Those areasof
Cyprus which are under the authority of the Greek Cypriot
Administration have been, in most respects, under the
occupation of Greece since 1964. The Secretary-General in
his numerous reports has brought to the attention of the
Security Council the infiltration of the Greek Amy of
occupation into Cyprus’ which was taking place in collusion
with the Greek Cypriot Administration. The result of this is
that the Greek Cypriot armed forces on Cyprus consist
largely of the army regulars in Greece; the officer corps
consists almost entirely of the Greek Army officers and the

10. My appeal to you, Mr, President and members of the
Security Council, is that my country must be protected
from this threat of invasion. Cyprus is a small island in the
Mediterranean and it is threatened by a big, powerful,
neighbour Turkey, which boasts of its great population of
over 30 million and of its military power. For our part we
have no military power, We had no forces at all before the
events, and what we have now was built up purposely to
2

,

Commander-in-Chief is a Greek general responsible not to
any Greek Cypriot authority but directly to the Office of
the Greek General Staff in Athens. When in 1966 a personal
misunderstanding arose between this Commander-in-Chief
and the Greek Cypriot President of Cyprus and Archbishop
Makarios requested from the Government of Greece the
replacement of the Commander-in-Chief, he was properly
rebuked by the then Greek Prime Minister and had to
withdraw his request.

18. First, the attack was launched at a time when
UNFICYP had already been informed by the Turkish side
that its plan-that is UNFICYP’s plan-for the resumption
of patrolling in Ayios Theoclhoros was acceptable and that
this reported change in the Turkish attitude was reiterated
to the Greek Cypriot Administration on 14 November.
19. Second, Kophinou, the second Turkish village, which
simultaneously came under attack, was not connected with
the question of patrolling [ibid., para. 101.

15. The latest warning sounded by the Secretary-General
regarding this encroachment on the sovereignty of the State
of Cyprus was contained in paragraph 29 of his report of 13
June 1967 submitted to the Council in which the
Secretary-General informed the Council that:

20. Third, even though the patrolling, the resumption of
which was the subject of negotiation, was to take place
twice a week, on 14 November the Greek Cypriot armed
personnel conducted several patrols at short intervals-which was not customary and no doubt was an
important factor in the developments that followed /ibid.,

“Over the past few months the Force has noticed
increased signs of a tendency to identify the Cyprus
National Guard with the Greek Army, These include the
widespread use of the Greek Army cap badge by the
National Guard and the use of the Greek royal crown in
flags and sign boards at many National Guard camps,
while the oath taken by recent National Guard recruits on
enlistment now incorporates allegiance to the King of
Greece”. (S/7969, para. 29.1 l

paru. JP].

21. Fourth, the magnitude of the operation and the speed
with which it was carried out clearly indicated that it was
planned in advance [ibid., para. 241.
22. Finally, the UNFICYF’ Commander saw no justification for what the Greek Cypriots tried to explain away as
defensive action [ibid., para. 221,

16. Greece and the Greek Cypriot Administration, acting
in collusion and relying on the military strength they built
up on the Island, set out, in total disregard of resolution
186 (1964) of the Security Council of 4 March 1964, to
adopt measures designed to lead to the annexation of
Cyprus to Greece. As the build-up of Greek military power
in Cyprus grew, Greece and the Greek Cypriot
Administration became more audacious in their actions. In
February 1966, in a joint cornmuniqu& issued in Athens the
then Prime Minister of Greece and Archbishop Makarios
precluded any solution to the question of Cyprus which
excluded Enosis. More recently, the most influential member of the junta which is ruling Greece at the moment,
Colonel Paiadopoulos, thought his Government’s military
position in Cyprus strong enough to refer with impunity to
Cyprus as “the southern part of Greece”, during a visit he
paid to Cyprus in August of this year. Archbishop Makarios
sawno harm in stating on the occasion of that visit that the
immutable aim of their struggle wasEnosis, while the Greek
members of the Cyprus House of Representatives, meeting
without the Turkish members, adopted a resolution in June
1967 which affirmed that the struggle would continue until
Cyprus as a whole was united with Greece.

23. In fact, the Turlcish Government is in possession of
reliable information that a joint Greek and Greek Cypriot
Force of approximately 3,000 men supported by about
three dozen armoured cars and heavy weapons and artillery,
was utilized in this attack. Furthermore, there were strong
indications that the military operation launched against
these two Turkish Cypriot villages would be extended to
Mar-i, another Turkish Cypriot village some five miles
further south. General Grivas, who personally directed the
Greek attack, was apparently out to put into practice what
he had vowed on 30 October 1967 to do. On the occasion
of Greek celebrations held annually on that date, he
declared: “If Enosis is denied to them then the Greeks will
conquer it with their swords.”
24. The attack on the two Turkish Cypriot villages has
been brutal beyond description. The villages were almost
completely destroyed as a result of indiscriminate shelling
by heavy artillery and mortar fire. But, the attackers were
not content with the destruction of non-military buildings
and death they had rained on the civilian population. When
they overcame the resistance of the one hundred-odd
Turkish Cypriot fighters who defended the two villages,
they ransacked, pillaged and looted every building. We have
first-hand information from the Turkish Embassy in Nicosia
about the hatred and enmity unleashed on the Turkish
Cypriots of this village. Bodies were found in the two
villages which were dismembered, which had been shot
repeatedly, burned and had the eyes gouged out. Among
those were elderly civilians and women.

17. The military action against the Turkish Cypriot
villages of Ayios Theodhoros and Kophinou was launched
against this background. The detailed account of the
preparation and the initiation of the Greek and Greek
Cypriot attack is provided with accuracy in the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the Council in document S/8248.2 I
shall not, therefore, abuse the patience of the Council by
going over this account once again, and shall confine myself
to pointing out its salient points. These are:
1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second

25. We have reason to believe that had the Turkish
Government not taken the very firm attitude that it took
and had it not been for the very energetic intervention of
the Secretary-General and of UNFICYF’, the same fate
would have befallen the Turkish village of Mari and possibly
the Turkish sector of Larnaca, town in the South of the

Year,

Supplement
for April, May and June 1967.
2 Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1967.

3

Island where recent fbrtification and troop deployment by
the Greek Cypriots along the Artemis Road, encircling the
Turkish sector of the town, as early as May of this year, are
viewed by the Cypriot Turks as one of the links in the
Greek plan of completing the de facto union of the Island
with Greece.

found then the response they deserved. I think it will be
quite in order to say now that had the Council taken that
course we would have been spared the ominous dangers of
the present grave crisis.
29. It is somewhat poor satisfaction for us to seethat the
Secretary-General, in the appeal he issued this afternoon to
the parties, envisages more or less the same measures we
had then demanded and failed to obtain.

26. Moreover, the Turkish Government believes that the
Government of Greece is directly responsible for the attack
on the two Turkish villages. General Grivas, as I just
mentioned, personally directed the operation and it is also
known that the Greek units which were occupying the two
villages were withdrawn on orders which emanated not
from Nicosia but from Athens. The sipificance of this can
be better realized when it is considered together with the
method utilized in the execution of the operation. The
Secretary-General’s report on the Greek Cypriot operation
relates [ibid., para. 22/ how UNFICYP units were forced to
evacuate their positions, how these positions were occupied
by the Greek troops and how UNFICYP soldiers were
forcibly and deliberately disarmed and their means of
communication
disabled. The inescapable conclusion drawn
by the Turkish Government from these incidents is that the
presence of this powerful Greek army in Cyprus greatly
jeopardizes the ability of UNFICYP
to carry out its
mandate and that the Greeks are in a position to eliminate
the UNFICYP presence, whenever they desire, from the
area of their intended operation. Based on these considerations and in the light of recent events, the Turkish
Government firmly believes that the only element which
threatens the peace on the Island, which poses the greatest
danger to the stcurity of life of the Turkish community,
and the most direct impediment to the effective functioning of UNFICYP in Cyprus, emerges as the presence of the
illegal Greek Army of occupation which has been brought
to the Island surreptitiously and with the collusion of the
Greek Cypriot Administration.

30. Despite the ferocity of the Greek Cypriot military
action mounted against the two Turkish Cypriot villages,
their near total destruction and the heavy casualties
inflicted on their Turkish inhabitants, the Turkish Government acted with restraint and refrained from taking action
directly connected with the Greek and Greek Cypriot
operations, in order to save the peace of the region. Despite
this restrained attitude and in complete disregard of the
repeated appeals and protests addressed to the Greek
Cypriot Administration by UNFICYP, the Greek Cypriots
have not only continued to send frequent patrols to the
Turkish sector of Ayios Theodhoros, but they have gone so
far as to establish a permanent patrol post there in an
extremely provocative manner. Information in our possession indicates that the Greek Government continues at an
accelerated pace to ship military arms and equipment,
particularly heavy arms, to the Island, and Greek papers on
the Island announce with fanfare that actions against the
Turkish Cypriots will be launched and extended all over the
Island.
31. With respect to the immediate action which the
Council may feel disposed to take concerning the situation
around Kophinou and Ayios Theodhoros, my Government
believes that the following three points should be seriously
considered:
(a) The condemnation of the inhuman crimes perpetrated against the Turkish community at Kophinou and
Ayios Theodhoros;

27. This Greek Army of occupation, which has not
flinched at attacking and putting out of action units of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force, thereby openly defying the authority of this Council, must go if peace is to
return to the troubled Island.

(b) The payment of compensation to the inhabitants of
the two villages; and
(c) The provision of effective guarantees for the security
of the two Turkish villages.

28. At the time this Greek military build-up was initiated
and the Greek Cypriot National Guard was in the process of
formation with the material assistance of the Government
of Greece, the Secretary-General in his reports of 15 June
1964 (S/5764/ and 10 September 1964 [S/5950] drew the
attention of the Security Council to the ramifications of
this build-up and raised the question whether the importation of arms into Cyprus was consistent with the letter and
spirit of the Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964. For our part, we had no doubt in our minds
that this build-up, which continued unabated to date, was
inconsistent with the letter and spirit of that resolution.
we, therefore, proposed on 8 August 1964 (1142nrd nzeetingl and at subsequent meetings of the Security Council,
several measures which we believed could effectiveIy check
the Greek and Cypriot military build-up on the Island.
These proposals included, inter alia, the placing of points of
entry into Cyprus under effective control and surveillance,
and controlled disarmament of both sides. Unfortunately,
neither the Secretary-General’s warning nor our suggestions

32. From what I have just said, it is evident that my
Government believes that the most important question we
are faced with at the moment is the removal of the element
of ever-present threat posed by the illegal presence of the
Greek forces in Cyprus. Unless this is accomplished and
accomplished promptly we cannot hope to achieve anything concrete towards the restoration of peace and quiet
on the Island; we cannot expect to remove the impediment
obstructing the efficient functioning of UNFICYP, and we
cannot dispel the fear and doubt lurking in everybody’s
mind that such Greek atrocities may occur again.
33. The PRESIDENT (z’rarzsluted j?onz French): 1 call on
the representative of Greece.
34. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (transZatedfrom French): “Tk
hour of reckoning has come .” These threatening words are
the Turkish Foreign Minister’s reply to the appeals for
4

moderation addressed to him from all sides. It is likewise
the reply which Mr. Caglayangil gave to the conciliatory
proposals made to him by the Foreign Minister of Greece in
a supreme effort to avoid the worst. To give substance to
these utterances, the Turkish army, navy and air force are
preparing for war and again threatening the Island of
Cyprus. This is the reason which has brought us here again
tonight .

was not forthcoming, and for a good reason! Obviously,
Ankara wanted to set up another Turkish enclave in the
region of Ayios Theodhoros, in other words, to prevent
peaceful coexistence between Turkish and Greek elements
there too.
41. Yet only a few days before these incidents took place,
the Cypriot Government gave spectacular proof of its desire
to prevent the situation in Cyprus from worsening by
setting at liberty that most fanatical of fanatics Mr. Raouf
Denktash.

35. Before we furnish proof of the danger which is
threatening peace in this area of the eastern Mediterranean,
the Council would no doubt like to hear the views of the
Greek Government on the circumstances which have led to
this lamentable state of affairs.

42. It seems to me that it was for Ankara to make a
conciliatory gesture in its turn by informing the Turkish
army officer commanding the rebels at Ayios Theodhoros
that it had agreed to the resumption of patrols.

36. Mr. President, you have heard the account given by
the representative of Cyprus of the circumstances surrounding the events which took place on 15 November at Ayios
Theodhoros and Kophinou. We deeply deplore these events,
and we are opposed to any action likely to involve the loss
of human life. The Greek Government’s attempts at
moderation over many years lend weight to what I say.

43. But apparently, in and around Cyprus conciliatory
gestures are regarded by Ankara as one-way traffic. Otherwise, how are we to explain the shooting and machine-gun
fire with which the Turkish Cypriots have welcomed the
government patrols?
44. A series of grave events ensued which, I say again, we
deeply deplore. The Greek Government’s regret is to be
measured by the speed with which it brought its moderating influence to bear and helped to bring about appeasement .

37. The Turkish representative saw fit to add his somewhat violently expressed indignation to the general expression of regret and disquiet concerning these developments.
He was wrong to do so because the root of these events is
the refusal of the Turkish Government to co-operate with
the United Nations regarding the resumption of patrols by
the Cyprus police. The resumption of patrols fell within the
framework of the sovereign rights of the State of Cyprus.
This right is incontestable and has not been contested by
the United Nations. What the United Nations did was to try
to secure the prior agreement of the Turkish Government
so that the patrols could take place without incident.

45. I now feel it my duty to put before the Security
Council a number of facts which will enable it to make a
better evaluation of the situation now under consideration.
This information concerns the behaviour of the Turkish
Government prior to the incidents of 15 November and will
help to show that, during the week which preceded these
incidents, Turkey spared no effort to create an atmosphere
charged with tension. And of course, the spark at Ayios
Theodhoros set the powder alight.

38. It may seem strange that it was thought necessary to
secure the agreement of Ankara regarding action which
came within the sovereign rights of the Cyprus Government. Certainly there is no legal, juridical explanation and
one is tempted to conclude that the efforts made in Ankara
resulted from the idea that, in the last analysis, the reaction
of the Turkish Cypriots in Ayios Theodhoros towards the
patrols would depend on the instructions given them by the
Turkish Government.

46. I should like to remind the Council of certain facts
with which it is already familiar. As a result of talks
between the representatives of Greece and Turkey lasting,
with a few interruptions, over a period of more than a year
and conducted on more than one occasion by the Foreign
Ministers of the two countries, the Greek Government took
the initiative of crowning these talks with a meeting at the
highest level in an endeavour to bring them to a successful
conclusion. The Prime Ministers of Greece and Turkey,
accompanied by their closest collaborators, met on 9 and
10 September this year to discuss the state of relations
between the two countries and the Cyprus question, as well
as ways and means of solving existing problems. Unfortunately, in Thrace the negative attitude of the Turkish
Government caused the meetings to end in a stalemate and
brought the solution of the Cyprus question to an impasse.
However, the two Prime Ministers reached agreement on
two points which were mentioned in the final commu?ziqud
of that meeting: (1) That appropriate measures were
necessary to prevent any increase of tension in Cyprus;
(2) That it was in the interest of both countries to
strengthen their bonds of friendship, good neighbourliness
and co-operation.

39. It has been established that for two months the
Turkish Government has turned a deaf ear to the injunctions of the United Nations. The Secretary-General tells us
in his report:
L‘I
made repeated representation at Headquarters to
the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United
Nations in support of these efforts” (that is, the efforts of
the Force). “On 27 October I addressed an urgent
personal appeal to the Turkish Government, requesting its
co-operation with the Force and its acceptance of the
proposed time-table for the resumption of patrols.”
[S/8248, para. 6./

40. September, October, mid-November-the
patrols were
not resumed until the 14th of this month. In virtue of what
obligation could the Government of Cyprus be expected to
wait any longer for the assent from Ankara? The assent

~$7. The communiquk is dated 10 September 1967. It
would be interesting to look more closely at the manner in

5

which Turkey has implemented the agreement on those two
points, especially following the accusations which our
colleague, Mr. Eralp, has just made against Greece.

than 50 per cent of the Greek inhabitants of the island have .
been forced to flee their homeland and their birthplace,
54. So much for the genocide, and so much for the
balance established by the Treaty of Lausanne, and cited by
Turkey as an excuse for its armed opposition to the just
and equitable solution of the Cyprus problem, while in the
meantime it upsets that balance to its own advantage, For
as it stretches forth its right hand in the name of the
balance set up by the Treaty of Lausanne to receive
“compensation” in any solution-I repeat, in any solution
of the Cyprus problem-with its left hand it has already
taken the lion’s share throwing that balance to the winds.

48. First of all, as regards the peaceful situation on the
Island of Cyprus, the Council has already taken cognizance
of the responsibility of the Turkish Government on the
qr:estion of patrols. The background to its stonewalling
attitude which led to the events of 15 November is amply
described in the Secretary-General’s reports to the Council.
49. But that attitude does not apply to those particular
events alone. The aggressive and threatening voice of
Turkey made itself heard long before they took place. One
or two examples will give an idea of the tone used.

55. My Government has already brought before the
Security Council the question of the fate of Greek nationals
in Istambul and the Greek minority living in Turkey,
Although the Council has been unable to help them,it will
at any rate recall the facts described to it by my delegation
at the time and confirming the accuracy of the additional
information I have given today. I therefore express the
hope that the Council will advise the Turkish representative
to broaden his field of vision, since we are not only dealing
here with the question of the victims of the incidents at
Ayios Theodhoros and Kophinou; we are concerned with a
tragic escalation stemming from Ankara which has on each
occasion resulted in the gradual but systematic extermination of the Greek element, and the Greek element alone.

50. On 18 September the Turkish newspaper Yeni
Isturzbul published the following statement by General
Tansel, the Turkish aviation chief:
“We are ready, not to repel aggression, but to launch an
attack at any time. Look at the example of Cyprus . . . .
We launched our attack on 8 August 1964. If we had not
been stopped, there would be no Cyprus problem today.
Even today, the same result could be achieved at any
time. However well Cyprus may organize its defences,
there is no problem for us; it is a matter of hours.”
This was on 18 September, a few days after the meeting in
Thrace and the communiqu6 promising co-operation, and
two months before the events at Ayios Theodhoros.

56. After that diversion, let me return to the events of the
present. Among the provocative acts of the Turkish
Government
which preceded the events at Ayios
Theodhoros were wholesale violations of Greek air space,
from 2 November 1967 onwards, by Turkish military
planes, singly and in formation. Contrary to the belated
explanations of the Turkish Government these violations
-which
my delegation reported to the Security
Council-took place without the knowledge of the Greek
authorities and in defiance of international rules. None of
the international or ad hoc procedures governing the flight
of military planes belonging to one State in the air spaceof
another State were followed by the Turkish Government,
whose military planes in some cases penetrate? Greek air
space to within a few minutes’ flight of the Greek capital.

5 1. This warlike atmosphere is reflected characteristically
in a speech made by the head of the Turkish National Party
at Edirne on 17 September. This is what he said, speaking
of Cyprus:
“The solution to the Cyprus problem is extremely
simple. All that is necessary is to bomb the Island with
200 aircraft, conquer it, then negotiate from a position of
strength. It is as simple as that.”
52. Then we have the secret dispatch to Cyprus of
Mr. Raouf Denktash, whose extremist views are well
known. It is so obvious that the Turkish Government was
aware of the disastrous effect of his presence in the island
that Mr. Denktash was carefully kept in Turkey throughout
the entire period of the talks between Greece and Turkey.
So much for the “peaceful situation” on the Island!

57. Following the events of 15 November, Turkey pushed
its intimidation tactics to extremes. Turkish sabre-rattling
could be heard throughout the entire region from Cyprus to
the Greek-Turkish frontier, and can still be heard today. In
addition, the Turkish National Assembly authorized the
Turkish Government to use the country’s armed forces
beyond its national borders. Any possible doubt as to the
significance of that resolution of the National Assembly
was dispelled by the government-controlled Radio Ankara
in a broadcast on 18 September 1967 at 7 p.m. I quote Part
of it:
“Even without this National Assembly resolution,
Turkey could intervenr! ii Cyprus under the treaties of
London and Zurich in the capacity of a guarantor Power.
Consequently, the great National Assembly was not
convened for this reason but, although it has not been
clearly stated, in order to authorize the Government to
extend the scope of its action should Greece become
involved in the course of the intervention in CYPrus."

53. The voice of the Turkish representative is familiar to
me. I have memories of his statements in the Council in
1964 and 1965, of his rapid-fire accusations against the
Greeks, charging them with genocide against the Turkish
race, I ask him to examine his statistics more carefully. He
will find among them some very startling figures. But he
will also discover that the genocide is on his side, for the
statistics will show him that, while the number of Turkish
Cypriots and Muslims in Thrace has remained unchanged,
the Greeks of Istambul and those of the island of Imvros
have been decimated. Of the 100,000 living in Istambul at
the beginning of the Cyprus crisis there are now only
30,000 left. On Imvros the extermination programme is
diabolical in conception and ghastly in its details. More
/

6

58. The reason why I am being so frank and downright in
my criticism of the Turkish attitude is my confidence in my
Government’s role as moderator and peacemaker, prompted
by a true desire for peace, justice and fair play.

and recommendations
of the various United Nations
bodies? Who then bears the responsibility for the tragic
events which have resulted from that refusal thus prolong
ing the crisis? Surely not those who accept and are willing
to abide by the recommendations of this organization.

59. Thus, in the course of the many months during which
efforts were made by the United Nations Force and by the
Secretary-General on the question of the patrols at Ayios
Theodhoros, the Greek Government constantly brought its
influence to bear in favour of restraint.. From the very
beginning of the incidents at Ayios Theodhoros and
Kophinou, my Government did not hesitate to run the risk
of being criticized for its conciliatory and peace-seeking
attitude by calling for a cease-fire and a withdrawal of the
United Nations Force to its former position, in the
conviction that what is important first and foremost is the
maintenance of calm and order in the island and peace in
the region as a whole.

66. At the present moment preparations seem to be
complete in Turkey for launching an attack. Armed forces
and units of the military air arm are massed along the coast
facing Cyprus and along the frontier between Turkey and
Greece. The latest information indicates that the launching
of an aggressive attack is imminent. The Turkish Foreign
Minister confirmed that the day before yesterday when he
told the Greek Ambassador in Ankara: “We can no longer
return to the stage of diplomatic negotiation.”
67. As we know, the Secretary-General has appealed to
the Governments involved and has reinforced his appeal by
dispatching a Special Representative [see 5’/8248/Add.3/.
We are grateful for what he has done and hope that this
move will be successful. Meanwhile events are gathering
momentum and danger is threatening. We are confronted
by a threat of the use of force which is to be carried out.
We are sure that the Council is aware of the extreme gravity
of the situation, It is evident that the independence and
territorial integrity of a State Member of the United
Nations are in danger. The United Nations body primarily
responsible in. matters of international peace and security
cannot afford to shirk its responsibility at this critical
moment. The fundamental principles of the Charter are at
stake. Peace in the eastern Mediterranean is in danger. It
seems to me that the Council’s immediate task is clear: it
must prevent the use of force and put an end to the
threat to use force.

60. The Greek Government has also asked General Grivas
to return to Athens. Its behaviour was the same before the
incidents. Thus, despite the highly provocative nature of
the repeated violations of Greek air space by Turkish
military planes, the Greek Government has displayed a
restraint and a cool-headedness without which the present
critical situation would have become explosive at a much
earlier stage.
61. I do not believe I need to continue this enumeration.
It is a well-known fact that Greece has perseveringly
followed an undeviating policy of peace and conciliation.
62. During the Council’s meeting of 19 March 1965, the
last in which I had the honour to participate, I made the
following statement:

68. I address these words to you on behalf of a country
which has a clear conscience in that throughout the entire
Cyprus crisis, and particularly during the last few days,
Greece has done everything in its power to safeguard peace,
both by impressing on Cyprus the need for moderation and
by itself making every conciliatory gesture compatible with
national dignity.

“At Athens we are waiting for the time when some real
progress can be made towards the solution of this
problem. Of course, we want this solution to be just and
lasting.” /I 193rd meeting, para, 148. /
I also said that as far as we were concerned we would do
everything in our power to achieve that.

69, Mr. FEDORENKO

(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubThe Security Council is
today holding an emergency meeting to deal with the
serious aggravation of the situation in Cyprus and the
adjacent area. The Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, U Thant, on the
question under consideration [S/8248], and we have just
heard statements by the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey
and Greece. The facts they have given uncontrovertibly
reveal the danger of the situation, which is fraught with
far-reaching consequences.
lics) (translated

63. I now appeal to the Council and put the question to
it: Has Greece kept its promise or not? Has it spared any
effort on its side to try to solve the problem? Has it not
taken the initiative in the sincere desire to reach agreement? Has it advanced reasons of prestige-I emphasize:
prestige-as Turkey has done, to impede all progress and
prevent a solution by making demands first for one thing
and then for another, but always in the most uncompromising manner?

from Russian):

70. The Soviet Government is attentively following the
course of events in the area of Cyprus and we deem it
necessary to state, as we have stated earlier, that the USSR
strongly supports the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and opposes
foreign interference in the internal affairs of that country
and provocations and attempts to increase tension on the
Island.

64. A second question called for at this point, I think, is
what was the attitude of Greece and what was that of
Turkey towards the attempts made by various United
Nations bodies to try to find a solution?
6.5. At no time has Greece refused its co-operation. I leave
it to the Turkish representative to enlighten the Council, if
it needs enlightenment, as to his Government’s attitude. Or
does no responsibility lie with those who repeatedly and
categorically refuse to be guided by the suggestions, advice

71. There is, and can be, no doubt that it is for the
Cypriot people themselves to settle their own internal
7

under the command of General Grivas, the henchman of
the reactionary militaristic circles in Greece, took part,

affairs. The question of Cyprus must be settled without
outside interference and the legitimate rights of the Greek
and Turkish populations on Cyprus must be upheld. The
Soviet Union is firmly opposed to any intentions or
attempts to settle the question of Cyprus behind the backs
of the Cypriot people, at the expense of their vital interests
and for the benefit of the imperialist Powers,

79. In the light of the foregoing, we consider it necessary
to draw the attention of the members of the Security
Council to the actions of the Greek authorities, who are
widely using methods of physical coercion against their
ideological opponents, guilty only of having raised their
voices in defence of the rights o,f their people. The whole
world has seen a new wave of mass persecutions of
democrats in Greece, over whom hangs the threat of
reprisals, that may even go as far as their physical
annihilation, as the trials in Athens and Salonika have
shown.

72. We are deeply convinced that, in order to preserve the
genuine independence and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus, all foreign troops must be withdrawn
and the foreign military bases located there must be
dismantled. We have said this many times before, in the
Security Council as elsewhere. All this takes on special
importance now, when there has been a sharp turn for the
worse in the situation on Cyprus.

80. We should like to inform the members of the Security
Council that the Soviet Government has sent a communication to the Greek Government in which it vigorously
protested against the acts of lawlessness and arbitrary rule
that are being perpetrated in Greece, the flouting of
elementary humanitarim principles, the flagrant violation
of universally accepted standards confirmed in the Uni.
versa1 Declaration of Human Rights, one of whose signa.
tories is Greece. The Soviet Government has urgently
appealed to the Greek Government to show good senseand
restraint and to allow no action that might threaten the
lives of Greek democrats.

73. In this connexion, we should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the Soviet
Union Government’s statement of 22 November 1967 [see
S/8268] explaining the position of the USSR on the most
recent events in Cyprus and the adjacent area.
74. Although armed clashes on Cyprus have now ceased,
the situation in the region remains tense and the threat to
the sovereignty and independence of the Republic of
Cyprus and to the cause of peace in the eastern Mediterranean is increasing.

81. From all indications, the deterioration of the situation
on Cyprus is directly connected with the plans of those
NATO circles which wish to settle the differences that have
arisen among the members of that military bloc at the
expense of the interests of the Cypriot people and their
freedom and independence. We are struck by the difference
between statements made by official circles in the United
States of America, describing United States policy in that
region as a policy of “peacemaking” and the practical
actions of the United States Government, which tend to
exacerbate the situation and lead to interference in the
internal affairs of the Cypriot people. It is hardly credible
that the Greek officer corps could act in Cyprus without
the influence and support of the United States inasmuch as
Greece itself is firmly in the grip of the United States
military bases. It is obvious that this new and serious
complication of the situation on Cyprus was the work of
reactionary foreign forces, trying to aggravate the situatiotl
in the area and threaten the existence of the Republic of
Cyprus. Such action can lead to a deterioration of the
situation on Cyprus and threaten international peace.

75. The information
we have received shows that the
Greek Army has been placed on battle alert. The reactionary officers’ group in Athens has been making patently
inflammatory statements in an effort to establish a pretext
for open interference in the internal affairs of Cyprus.
76. We know, too, that the Turkish Government, for its
part, having regard to its own particular interests, has taken
a number of measures in connexion with the worsening
situation on Cyprus. Turkish armed forces have also been
brought to a state of battle readiness; special detachments
are being formed for a possible landing on Cyprus; and
warships are conducting manoeuvres in that area.
77. The Soviet Union has already drawn attention to the
fact that the military coup d’etut in Greece in April of this
year has posed a direct threat to the independence and
normal democratic functioning of the State of Cyprus, a
full Member of the United Nations. Current events in
Cyprus must not be viewed in isolation from the policy
followed by reactionary circles in Greece, which, with the
support of outside forces, have for a long time been
working out plans for settling the problem of Cyprus by
military means and for depriving the State of Cyprus of its
independence and territorial
integrity through what is
called &osis, i.e. the Union of Cyprus with Greece.

82. The Soviet Government, prompted by a desire to
maintain and preserve the peace in the Eastern Medifep
ranean, calls upon the parties to exercise restraint and good
sense and to refrain from attempting to solve the problems
that have arisen between the Cypriot Greeks and the
Cypriot Turks by force of arms.
83. A solution to the problem of reducing the tension
prevailing on Cyprus and in the surrounding area must be
sought on the basis of a peaceful settlement, respect for the
sovereign rights of all the Cypriot people, and strict
compliance with the Security Council’s resolutions on
Cyprus, which have repeatedly called upon all sides to
exercise restraint and to refrain from actions that ml&t
worsen the situation.

78. The military circles now in power in Greece, which, as
we know, have their henchmen in the Cypriot armed forces,
are trying to transform the whole Island of Cyprus into a
NATO military base and to deal with the democratic forces
of that Island by using the same criminal and terrorist
methods that they are now using in Greece itself. Casualties, including civilian casualties, have occurred as a result
of recent military action on Cyprus, in which Greek troops,
8

84, The Soviet Government hopes that all sides will show
an awareness of their great responsibilities and ~JJunderstanding of their duty to the peoples, since a widening of
the conflict around Cyprus, and particularly a military clash
in the area of Cyprus, might lead to unforeseeable consequences.
85. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I had not intended to speak at this stage in our debate, and indeed I
gather from a number of other members of the Council that
it is generally agreed that there is no call for a long list of
speakers tonight. But as I listened to the speech of the
Soviet representative I felt that some comment might be
made without further delay.

the time, nine years ago, when I was responsible for the
affairs of Cyprus. I had at that time twenty-one regiments
in the Island, and when communal fighting took place it
was with the utmost difficulty that, with that number of
troops, we could maintain security as between the Greek
Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots of the Island, If war
should come, I think not only of the devastations of war
but also of the terrible results which would be inflicted
upon the innocent civilian populations, both Greek and
Turkish, of the Island. If the dangers of war should be
released, then it is impossible for us to calculate the
consequences, both in Cyprus and beyond; nor could we
ever compute in advance the amount of suffering to
innocent people which would be involved.

86. If I may very respectfully say so, I thought that the
betinning of his speech and the end were admirable in their
appeal for respect for the principles of the Charter, for
restraint and for respect for the sovereignty of the State of
Cyprus. I regret that in the middle the standard of his
speech sagged somewhat.

92. Therefore, it seems to me that we here in this Council
tonight should devote ourselves not to accusations, not to
an attempt to allot bIame, but to a most serious effort to
find amongst ourselves the action which can most be
conducive to maintaining the peace and to making a start
towards the removal of the causes of tension and friction.

87. I would say to him, in respect and in friendship and,
indeed, in full regard for what he said to us at the beginning
and at the end of his statement, that all of us have
tonight-as we always have, it is true, in this Council, but
tonight we have specially-a very great responsibility. If we
attempt in our debate tonight to increase animosity, if we
make wild accusations, allot responsibility for past events,
then it may be that we will fail to carry out the heavy
responsibility which we have on this dangerous night.

93. I would, therefore, most respectfully-and if I may do
so without impudence-commend
the actions which have
been taken by our Secretary-General. Not only has he sent
his personal representative to the area, where he is now
actively engaged in seeking a way to peace, but he has given
us in two statements, in two appeals [see S/82#8/ddd.3
and 51, a lead in the directions, which we must subsequently consider, of a reduction of tension and a reduction,
too, of the armed forces involved. And in his appeal which
he issued today (see S/8248/Add..SJ, in pointing the way to
a reduction in the numbers of Greek and Turkish troops to
the numbers allowed under the 1960 Treaty, and indeed
speaking of the possibility of a complete withdrawal of
troops from the Island, he has been seeking out the
practical courses which can be taken towards the establishment of a permanent peace.

88. No doubt all of us who have been concerned in the
terrible history of the last ten years or so in Cyprus have
faults and failures. I think it is true that even in this
Council, as a Council, we must admit that, although we
have regularly provided the means to keep the peace, we
have as a Council failed to go to the root of the
disagreements and divisions which take place, and the
situation which we now face, the dangerous situation which
we now face, in Cyprus is to some extent due to the failures
of us all. But if at this grave moment we are to embark on a
series of accusations and counter-accusations between the
countries involved in the present crisis, then it seems to me
we will be failing to live up to the heavy responsibility
which now lies upon us.

94. We thank him for that leadership. We are grateful to
him for pointing the way to all concerned, not only in
general phrases or in appeals, but in the practical methods
to reduce the numbers of Greek and Turkish forces in the
Island so that we can move towards, God willing, a final
settlement.
95. I do not suppose that any words of mine will have
much effect on others who feel the necessity for reply, but
I would greatly hope, if replies are to be exchanged across
the floor of this Council tonight, that they should, in the
interests of the maintenance of peace, be kept to a
minimum, and that we should, as I greatly hope, under
your leadership, Mr. President, conclude our discussions as
soon as possible in order that we may be able, together, to
accomplish what I believe we all wish to do tonight-record
a general consensus that can make a contribution following
up the appeal of the Secretary-General in a way which will
be effective.

89. Moreover, I think that it is incumbent upon US to
guard our language tonight because we know that a single
word could provide a spark which would cause an explosion
which we would live to regret.
90. The extent and the gravity of the danger is, I think, in
all our minds, We meet here in comparative calm and quiet,
but we know that tonight very many people are living in
fear-fear of bloodshed, violence and all the devastating
effects of war and, worse than that perhaps, the suffering
which can come to civilian populations when war sets off a
conflagration which envelops far beyond the soldiers who
are engaged.

96. I myself have had opportunities to consult with you,
Sir, and with other members of the Council, and I am sure
that we are all willing to rally to’ your leadership in securing
a result from tonight’s debate which will be fully constructive. I welcome the lead that you are giving us, and I hope

91. Tonight, as I think of the Island of Cyprus, with which
I am familiar, I think of the forests, the villages, the
populations of Cyprus in that beautiful Island. I remember
9

we may soon proceed to that task. No doubt, we must keep
this matter under constant review and be ready to
reassemble at any time, But tonight I wish that we can send
out to all concerned, and to the world, a message from this
Council that will have the effect-so we dearly hope-of
reducing tension, and tbe friction, reducing the enmities
which exist, and of pointing the way to practical results, in
an endeavour to find a way to the pacification of the Island
and to a peaceful settlement which will not be a mere truce
but which will be a final peace.

105. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): In the first place I wish to
thank those members of the Council who have spoken
drawing attention to the dangerous night that we are now
passing through and the dangerous situation which we are
at this very moment facing in regard to Cyprus, and to the
need for a peaceful settlement with strict observance of the
resolutions of the Security Council and the Charter of the
United Nations. These were words spoken by members of
the Council. Yet, the representative of Turkey, who spoke.
at length of the incidents at Ayios Theodboros and
Kophinou, astonishingly had no word to say about the
dangers of this night.

97. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Like our
distinguished colleague Lord Caradon, I did not intend to
speak tonight; I shall do so, however, only briefly, because
of what has been said.

106. And what are the dangers of this night that the
members of the Security Council have referred to but the
threat of aggression and invasion of Cyprus by Turkey?
There was no word from the representative of Turkey to
the effect that Turkey did not intend to invade Cyprus,
that such gross violation of the Charter was far from
Turkey’s mind, as one would expect, that Turkey would
abide by its obligations under the Charter and would not
for a moment consider invading a small country and bring
all the destruction that an invasion would entail and which
the war which would follow would mean, the war that has
been deferred by those members of the Security Council
who have spoken.

98. I had hoped that after hearing from the parties, this
Council could act promptly and without debate in the
interests of pacifying the dangerous situation regarding
Cyprus. However, if we are to appeal to the parties to
exercise restraint, then we must first of all exercise restraint
ourselves. Despite the provocation, I shall merely say of
Ambassador
Fedorenko’s
comments concerning my
country and our NATO allies that they are the products of
his fertile imagination. I reject them categorically as typical
Soviet “boiler.plate”.
99, Now, Mr. President, my country is not interested, in
light of the grave situation which confronts us, in scoring
debating points; rather, we are interested in prompt Council
action in the interests of peace. We are deeply disturbed
and troubled by the tension and dangerous situation in the
eastern Mediterranean between countries and peoples for
whom the United States has the greatest respect and
affection.

107. We are not here tonight to face dangers arising from
the past or of an operation launched to overcome resistance
to the police patrol. We said that that was a deplorable
event; that we are sorry about the loss of life, but that has
now ended; what happened afterwards was merely local
provocations and the killings of Cypriot Greeks by the
Turks-a list of which I have provided-the cold-blooded
killing of women and men by Turkish terrorists, without
any provocation and without any retaliation from the
National Guard or anyone else. But those were local events;
they do not constitute the danger that facesus tonight. We
all know what the danger is.

100. Efforts are now under way, initiated with commendable and great vigour and urgency by the distinguished
Secretary-General, and there are other efforts, including
efforts of our own, to avert the tragedy which armed
conflict would entail for the free countries concerned, as
well as for the peace in the area.
101. We believe strongly that these efforts must be
allowed to continue unimpeded and that the Governments
concerned should extend their fullest co-operation to these
efforts, missing no opportunity and overlooking no possibility to ensure their successful outcome, for their success
will benefit all concerned.
102. We therefore appeal to all concerned to exercise
every means to maintain the peace and offer their fullest
co-operation to the peace efforts now under way-efforts
which offer the promise of bringing about a permanent
settlement.
103. My Government, for its part, will continue to do
everything within its power to ensure the successof such
efforts, and tonight will do everything within its power to
contribute to constructive Council action.
104. The PRESIDENT (trarzsla ted ffom French): I call on
the representative of Cyprus to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.
10

108. Turkey has proclaimed openly and boastfully that it
is going to invade Cyprus this weekend. It is very
regrettable indeed that the representative of Turkey made
no reference to this fact. Is Turkey going to invade Cyprus,
or is it not?
109. The Secretary-General has made an ardent appeal in
this matter. He said: “Alarming reports continue to reach
me of military preparations”-what
are the military
preparations but the preparations of Turkey? -“the movement of forces and threatening statements by Governments
particularly concerned . . .“. [S/8248/Add.3.]
What are the
movements of forces but the ones which I leave mentioned,
movements of naval, air and military forces that have been
moved about opposite Cyprus and along the Greek-Turkish
frontiers with such energy for warlike purposes? Turkey
now feels that it has been so well supplied with weapons
that it can bravely trumpet about its intention to go to war.
These are the concerns which prompted the Secretary
General, in his concern for the peace of the world, and as
representative of the United Nations, to appeal to the
parties interested. And one of the parties primarily COIP
cerned in this dangerous night-as the representative of the
United Kingdom called it-is Turkey.

ll(), The Secretary-General went on to say: “Sucl~ activities can only add to the high degree of tension already
prevailing in CyprUS
. . .“. IS IlOt the representative of
Turkey the one who should speak about this matter, which
dire& cO1lcernS
his COWltry?
what iS the ominous
meaningof his avoidance of saying that Turkey will not use
force?

War and to bring war, means that the Treaty of Guarantee
is Of no value if it COntains
provisions for war.
I1 5. The reason for my intervention now is to point out
that we would wish to hear the representative of Turkey
say what other members of the Security Council have said,
and what I say now-that we abide by the appeal of the
Secretary-General and wish to see a peaceful solution of the
problem of Cyprus within the principles of the Charter and
in strict obedience to the resolutions of the Security
Council and the consensus of the Council
of 1 I August
1964, forbidding overflights over Cyprus in violation of its
sovereignty. These resolutions and this consensushave been
violated by Turkey so many times in the last few days that
it would take a great deal of work to count the violations
which have been carried out so lightheartedly by Turkey.

111. In the Secretary-General’s second appeal he said:
“Tile portents regarding Cyprus are increasingly ominous.”
[s/&$?/AddS.] Why are these portents increasingly ominous? Becausethe threats from Turkey continue, because
of the overflights, and because of the statements that are
made and the information that has come-some confidential and some not--that this weekend is a critical one in so
far as invasion is concerned. Furthermore, indications at
this moment are that Greece and Turkey are at the brink of
war,Are these the reasons why the Security Council has
beenconvoked, or is it because of the events of a fortnight
ago in Kophinou and Ayios Theodhoros, with which the
representativeof Turkey has been dealing?
112. I wish it to be recorded that my country has already
said that it will abide by the Secretary-General’s appeal in
every respect and also by his second appeal for the
elimination of all military forces in Cyprus. We do not want
to have forces. The reason why we built up a force
there-and in this respect we had assistance from
Greece-wasthat we were so constantly threatened with
aggressionand invasion from Turkey. If that threat had not
existed,those forces would not have been needed. We had
no forcesbefore the events of December 1963. We had a
right to maintain 2,000 men and we established a force of
only some 300. We should be very happy to have no
military forces in Cyprus, to remove them all from the
territory of the Republic, provided the United Nations
would guarantee the territorial integrity and political
independenceof our country, provided that there could be
someprotection from outside invasion that wasthreatened
three times in 1964. It was threatened, and in some cases
attempted, for the sole purpose of partition. In June 1964
preparation was made not for any particular incident, but
for the invasion of Cyprus. Who remembers any incident?
The purposewaspartition.
113. In a letter dated 5 June from President Johnson to
‘PremierInijnii, it was stated: “It is our understanding that
You propose to invade Cyprus for the purpose of partitioning the island.” And that letter also stated: “If you rely for
that right on the Treaty of Guarantee, we should remind
You that this is in direct conflict with the Treaty of
Guarantee,”
114. But that is not the point. We consider the Treaty of
Guaranteeinvalid ab im’tio as conflicting with the principles
of the Charter and it is under the Law of Treaties which has
been adopted here and which, we hope, will eventually be
implemented, and under Article 103 of the Charter, that
any international agreement which conflicts with the
obligations under the Charter is void ab initio. Therefore,
snYidea that Turkey has of being able to use the Treaty of
Guarantee as a means of giving it the right to violate the
Charter and to use force or the threat of force to turn back
the will of history to the days preceding the Second World

116. . We respect Turkey, It is a neighbour of ours and we
wish to have friendly relations with it, We have the best
feelings towards Turkey. Indeed, we have the best feelings
towards all the Turks in Cyprus, and I would remind the
representative of Turkey that it is only when they resist that
there is fighting: it is only when they are armed that there
is fighting. Over 60,000 Turks live without any trouble i?
the Republic outside the enclaves and there is no fighting.
There is the desire among the Greek and Turkish Cypriots
to live in peace and amity, but this is being prevented by
Turkey, by Turkish rule and Turkish terrorist activities, by
their forbidding the Turks to have friendly relations with
the Greeks, from even entering their shops; they are
punished by thrashing and imprisonment and even the
gravest punishment if they show any tendency towards
conciliation with the Greeks. Why is that? It is because
they feel that if there is conciliation, if they mij< with the
Greeks, if they are allowed to become friendly, then the
prospect of partition would disappear. That is really the
cause of the whole trouble in Cyprus. This idea, this idie
fin, of partition which makes them keep up the strife in
the Island, which makes them wish to invade the Island,
which causes the enclaves, the fighting, the armed posts-all
that is because the people of Cyprus must not be allowed to
conciliate and live together in peace.
117. Why should other countries from outside interfere
with the human rights of the people of Cyprus to live in
peace and amity? That is the situation. I do not in the least
wish to say that all the fault Iies on one side and all the
rights are on the other side. We admit our faults; we admit
our mistakes; we admit everything and we regret it. But
basically partition is responsible. For our part, we have a
unified policy. We go along with the moral forces of the
universe in this respect, not with splitting countries. If we
look around the world today we see which are the very
dangerous situations, which are the problems with which
the world and the Security Council are faced. The situation
in Viet-Nam? Partition. The situation in Palestine? Partition. Are there problems which are dormant but always
pregnant?
Korea, Berlin, Germany? Partition. That is the
scourge of our world today-partition,
the legacy of
partition through colonialist policies and cold war, mixed
together
in some cases,and this is what is the trouble with
Cyprus.
I 18. But we have not come here to discuss the question Of
That is why I have not entered on that problem nor

Cyprus.

11

”

_
1
4

am I going to enter into the details of that problem. 1 only
want to concentrate on the central basic cause which runs
through the whole Cyprus situation, and specifically come
to the very point on which my speech at first centered-I
had to say those things in answer.

125. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): I am very much tempted to
abide by the well-meaning appeal of the representatives of
the United Kingdom and the United States, and to refrain
from any reply. But unfortunately recriminations and
accusations have been made and I must put the record
straight. But, I shall try to be very brief.

119. We have a dangerous situation in the eastern Mediterranean, and I would say not only in Cyprus, arising from
the threat of invasion of Cyprus.

126. I shall start with the remarks made by my colleague
from Greece, Ambassador Bitsios. He took avery different
view of this incident involving the patrols which ended UP
in the massacre of the villagers in Ayios Theodhoros. In the
first place, he said that these patrols were the right of tile
Cypriot Government, as he calls them, and that the Turks
had no authority or right to prevent them from entering the
area. Furthermore, the Turkish Government need not have
been consulted on the subject. Bit, the fact remains that
trouble started in the area in July and the Greek patrols
were stopped so as to avoid just the kind of incident astile
one with which we are faced. The Turkish community
leaders said that they would view favourably the reviving of
the patrols along with the UNFICW forces, in accordance
with the plan submitted by UNFICYP, as soon as the
tension in the area was dispelled and, in fact, one day
before the attack-the premeditated attack-on the villages
started, communication was made to UNFICYP that the
plan had been accepted, as I mentioned in my main
statement.

120. We are very happy to have heard the very constructive words of those members of the Security Council who
spoke in favour of a peaceful settlement, not through
aggression and war, but through a peaceful settlement. This
would be the sense of the resolution. I repeat that my
country and all small countries which are today in the same
position as Cyprus-which
were yesterday or will be
tomorrow-wish
to see this Council pronounce itself very
directly and very courageously-not by evading questionsto the effect that the threat and use of force is not allowed
in our time; that the acquisition of territory by force and
invasion is not permitted in this United Nations age. I think
that was very clearly stated in the resolution which this
Council adopted on the Middle East question. We want a
resolution clearly protecting Cyprus From the threat of
invasion under which it now finds itself and we also want
the resolution to endorse the very constructive appeal made
by our Secretary-General.

127. Ambassador Bitsios said that it was obvious that the
Turks were creating an enclave there. That does not
correspond with the facts because assuranceswere given at
the time to the UNFICYP authorities that the Turks did
not intend to create an enclave in the area and were willing
to revive the patrols if and when the tension subsided,It is
obvious that this was just an excuse to put into effect a
premeditated plan which had been arranged for a long time
and which would be the beginning, the thin end of the
wedge, for a series of incidents like the one in Ayios
Theodhoros. If there had not been effective opposition to
that, today we might have had other incidents leading on
and on to heaven knows where.

121. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Frerzch): I call
upon the representative of Greece in exercise of the right of
reply.
122. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (translated from Fknch): I
have listened to the Soviet Union representative’s statement
with the utmost attention, such as I always accord to the
speeches of Ambassador Fedorenko, the representative of a
great Power which plays a very active, at times perhaps a
trifle too active role in all parts of the world. But this
evening I was unable to follow him. I missed his customary
clarity. I thought there must be something wrong with my
earphone switch; I turned it to all the languages and in all
of them I heard the same thing, that Greece was threatening
to intervene in Cyprus and was directly threatening its
existence. I asked myself how that was possible, since
Cyprus has a representative here and it would have been
quite easy for Mr. Fedorenko to ask Mr. Rossides whether
Greece was in fact threatening his country. What has
happened? If Greece were really threatening Cyprus,
Mr. Rossides would have appealed to the Security Council
to take action against my country. But if my earphone was
functioning correctly, I heard Mr. Rossides complaining
about another country!

128. I was very shocked to hear my friend Ambassador
Bitsios use the word “rebels” with regard to the peaceful
villagers of Ayios Theodhoros. There is rebellion in the
Island as I have said on many other occasions, and the
rebels are the Greek Cypriot usurpers of power in the
Island. They are the rebels, not the Turks who have been
defending their constitutional rights, gun in hand, for the
last four years, nearly.

123. I can assure Mr. Fedorenko that I listened most
carefully and with concentration to his appeal, and that I
shall of course transmit it to my Government. Athens is
always open to all appeals for peace; this is in keeping with
our outlook, I trust that such an assurance will also be given
to Ambassador Fedorenko by his-shall I say his newerfriends?

129. I was glad, on the other hand, that he referred to the
talks between the Prime Ministers of Greece and Turkey
which he said had met with failure due to the illtransigence
of the Turkish Prime Minister. That, of course, could not be
further from the truth. The talks failed becausethe Greek
counterparts came to us with one idea and one idea ah%
the idea of Enosis, out and out expansionism. We have
never accepted it and they knew that. They thought fiat
perhaps the time had come for us to collaborate With them
to bring about the territorial expansion of Greece. I am
afraid they were in for a disappointment there.

124. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Turkey.

130. On the other hand they did show good till in
reacting this agreement which I shall read from the joint
12

communiqu&-“The Prime Ministers further agreed on the
need to take appropriate measures to safeguard and
facilitate the efforts aimed at reaching a peaceful and
agreedsettlement and preventing the increase of tension in
Cyprus”-which, of course, the Greek Government promptly proceeded to implement by giving orders to the General
in command to attack a.defenceless Turkish village.

thing. I was very much surprised he did not go back to
Sultan Mohammed the conqueror and make quotations
from him.
136. As for the flights over Cyprus, we are all aware of the
faulty intelligence of the Greek Cypriot authorities. Therefore, we must rely on the reports of the Secretary-General
and UNFICYP regarding any flights over Cyprus. We have
had these reports and they refer to various unidentified
planes. Well, unidentified flying objects have been flying all
over the place. I think the last one was over Sotia in
Bulgaria, but they have not caused anybody any undue
alarm.

131. I am also glad he mentioned the meeting at the
frontier between the two Prime’Ministers because the joint
communique has in it a clause which I shall also read, It
says:“They noted with gratification that there existed an
identity of views that all treaties between the two countries
should be respected.“-“All
treaties between the two
countries” including those which concerned the fate, the
presence, the independence, the territorial integrity of
Cyprus. And that is sufficient explanation to other questions put to us before as to our interest and grave concern
regardingevents which take place in Cyprus, We would have
thought that the Greek Government would have been
equally concerned.

137. Finally, he referred to the danger of this night. The
danger of this night is a failure of all concerned, with the
help of the Secretary-General and other friendly countries,
to provide effective means of avoiding massacres similar to
the ones which occurred recently in Cyprus. If we fail to do
that, the aggressor will be emboIdened and we shall always
be in trouble.

132. It was a great disappointment to me to see a very
able and distinguished ambassador like my colleague,
Ambassador Bitsios, refer to the fate of Greeks in Turkey
and attempt to draw a parallel between their fate and the
genocide attempts in Cyprus. He even used the word
“genocide” and pretended that there was decimation in the
caseof the Greeks in Turkey. I think it is hardly fair to
make a comparison there. It is a well-known fact that not a
single Greek in Turkey has had a bloody nose, even at times
when the furoreprose very high. And that, of course-the
other story-we are fully acquainted with.

138. Mr. FEDORENKO

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-

lics) (translated from Russian): We wish to speak in order

to exercise our right of reply to the statements made by the
United Kingdom and United States representatives. We
certainly do not wish to analyze their speeches in detail,
The contents of their speeches hardly warrant any such
searching analysis. However, in their statements, they made
it a point to stress that they did not wish to speak today,
thus seeming to say that they had come to the Security
Council to sit in meditation. It was probably precisely this
that provoked their complaints that their concerted silence
was unexpectedly disturbed by our statement. But each of
us has his own position and his own thoughts on the
subject, and we should like to ask whether it is possible to
iemain silent, whether it is permissible to remain indifferent, at this disquieting moment, when the Security Council
has been called into emergency session to consider the
highly dangerous situation that has arisen in the Mediterranean. Really, have we come here to give ourselves over
to silent melancholic reverie, however sweet the idyllic
recollections of the former United Kingdom Governor of
Cyprus may be?

133. As for the flights of military planes over Greek
territory, my colleague wrote a number of letters to which I
replied in one final letter [S/8244]--as I thought it would
be-to the effect that these were training flights and they
wereundertaken with the full knowledge of Turkish and
Greek authorities. Of course, if the Greek Government did
not know about this, they might have a policy of keeping
their right hand from knowing what their left hand is doing.
134. Ambassador Bitsios accused us of failing to COoperate with the organs of the United Nations; in that
regard I would merely say that the Council is given the
answerto that charge in the last reports of the SecretaryGeneral. It was a Greek General, a Greek officer who
ordered soldiers of UNFICYP dislodged from their positions, disarmed by force and their means of communication
disabled. Is this a Greek understanding of.co-operation with
the United Nations organs?

139. Our statement gave a realistic assessment of the
dangerous situation prevailing in the region of Cyprus,
which, as we showed, has been created and is being
intensified by certain specific forces. We tried to abide by
the facts, and I doubt whether there is any justification for
the complaints of the United Kingdom and United States
representatives, and the other speakers who followed them,
about the contents of the statement made by the Soviet
delegation. If they saw reason for their concern in the facts
we adduced, this can only be a proof of the compelling
nature of those facts, which revealed those who are to
blame for the situation created in the area of Cyprus.

135. Finally, I must turn again, very briefly, to my
colleague Ambassador Rossides. For a moment I thought I
was listening to him as he spoke on television the other
night. But, of course, here there is an entirely different
audience and you cannot put things over on the Council.
The points he tried to make are very well known to the
members of this Council because they have been hearing
them for four years and they know the real issuesinvolved.
I shall dismiss very summarily the various statements which
he adduced, were made several years ago, by several
statesmen, about intentions of partition and that sort of

140. The PRFGIDENT (translated from F?“ench): 1 CalI
upon the representative of Cyprus, who wishes to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.
141. Mr, ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I shall be very brief but
there are two or three points raised by the representative of
13

Turkey,
tion.

Ambassador Eralp, which require slight clarifica-

consensus; we disregard the Charter and throw it awayand
we are going to do these things because we have a right
given to US by God”-or I do not know what-or else he
must say “We are not going to do them”, or “We have net
done them”, or “We are not committing these offencesand
aggressive acts”. None of those things has been stated; that
is very ominous, and I hope the Security Council will keep
it in mind in drafting the resolution that is going to be
issued, that that posture of aggression is there and should
be met by an effective Security Council resolution.

142. First of all, he referred again to the events concerning
the patrol and he spoke as if it were a massacre of innocent
civilians whereas it concerned a nest of fighters, armed to
the teeth. A whole mass of heavy armaments was taken;
there was fighting on both sides, and of course in a fight
like that in an inhabited area there are more casualties than
there otherwise would be. However, I said that we very
much regretted and deplored this. Why continue to speak
about that event and pass silence over the most important
things that this Council is meeting to consider? The
representative of Turkey has not mentioned anything about
the violation of the air space of Cyprus, which constitutes a
violation of the consensus of 11 August 1964. He has not
said anything to explain that. He has not said that they do
not intend to repeat it. He has not said anything so far
about any of the substantive matters that have been
brought out in this debate.

149. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1 have
no further speakers on my list. I suggest that we suspend
the meeting for half an hour to allow members of the
Council to consult with one another regarding what is to be
done about the problem before us. If I hear no objection,1
shall take it that it is agreed, and the Council will resume at
11.20 p.m.
It was so decided.

143. He said that I quoted very old matters, going back to
Mohammed, but I only went back to 1964; I can quote
even today’s statements-this year, 1967-by Minister for
Foreign Affairs Caglayangil, who said: “The four Turkish
forces are keeping watch on our coast near Cyprus like the
sword of Damocles, paralysing those of bad will.” Who are
those of “bad will”? Those who do not bow to the will of
Turkey. If you so decide, he says to the National Assembly,
we will act-that is, we will attack Cyprus-then we will sit
at the table and impose our will. The Turkish representative
wants more recent statements; there it is, one from 1967.

The meeting was suspended at 10.50 pm., and resumed
at 2.15 a.m. on 25 November.

1.50. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): It has
certainly taken us some time, but I am happy to be able to
inform the Council that we have arrived at a consensus
thanks to the spirit of understanding and co-operation
shown by the members of the Council. I shall read out the
consensus reached.
151. After holding consultations with members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Security Council:

144. The same Foreign Minister and President Sunay, in
messages to several Heads of State today, said in connexion
with the appeal to Turkey to desist from force: “Turkey’s
decision is to solve the problem of Cyprus once and for
all-that is, now, by force.”

“The Council has now acquainted itself with the
position of the parties directly concerned. It is gravely
concerned in view of the tense and dangerous situation
with regard to Cyprus. The Council notes with satisfac.
tion the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-Generalto
help maintain peace in the region and calls upon all the
parties concerned to show the utmost moderation and
restraint and to refrain from any act which rn@t
aggravate the situation in Cyprus and constitute a threat
to the peace. The Security Council further requestsall
concerned urgently to assist and co-operate in keeping tile
peace and arriving at a permament settlement in accord*
ante with Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964.”

145. Those are the matters about which this Council is
concerned and on which we want to hear the representative
of Turkey, but he is voiceless, Iike a fish, when it comes to
this very important issue, whereas he is very vocal on other,
trivial matters of the past.
140. We should like to hear him also in answer to my
challenge to him to express himself concerning the appeals
of the Secretary-General and about desisting from attacking
or invading Cyprus. On those issues and on those matters
we should like to hear him, and I call upon him to express
himself clearly on them,

152. If there is no objection, I shall consider the conseaW
adopted.

147. Even today there has been a report of an overflight,
which reads: “At 15.49 hours on 20 November two Turkish
jet aircraft were identified flying low over UNFICY!?
headquarters in Nicosia.” Two F-104 planes belonging to
Turkey, flying low, and terrorizing the people-creating
tension, causing the very tension he contends they want to
avoid.

It is so decided.

153. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1 call ofi
the representative of Cyprus.
154. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, I wish,On
behalf of my country, to thank you and the other members
of the Council for having given careful attention and Ior
having devoted your efforts to the problem that has arisen
in consequence of the dangerous situation which is threab
ening Cyprus and international peace. I thank YOUalsofor

148. Really, what are we doing here if we are not going to
hear Ambassador Eralp pronounce himself one way or
another? Either he says “We have a right to do these
things; we ignore the Security Council resolutions and the
14

the consensus arrived at with the view to averting the
dangerthat was threatening my country.

the members of the Council will hold themseIves in
readiness to meet again at any moment, should it become
necessary. Subject to this understanding, if I hear no
objection I shall bring the meeting to an end.

155. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
no further speakers on my list and I therefore propose to
adjourn this meeting, on the strict understanding that this
question will remain before the Security Council and that

The meeting rose at 2.20 a.m. on Saturday,
25 November 1967.

15

tiow

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publicotionr.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publiccations
der
d&positairer
du monde
Notions
Unies,
Section

COMO

CONSEGIJIR
de

en todar
pottes
del
Ventar,
Nueva
York

Litho in U.N.

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
ond distributorr
to: United
Nations,
Soles
iection,

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
Unies
sent
entier.
Informez-vous
der ventes,
New York

PL’BLICACIONES

Los publiceciones

PUBLICATIONS

10s Nasioner
munda.
Consulte
o Ginebra.

DES NATIONS

Unidar

UNIES

en vente
danr
ler libroirier
aup&
de volre
libroirie
ou
ou Gen&ve.

DE LAS

NACIONES

est6n

en venfo

o su librera

o dirijore

throughout
New
York

et ler agencer
odresrer-vour
6:

UNIDAS
en librerias

y cows

or Naciones

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

Unidas,

dirtribuidorar
Secci6n

de

355i24nnuary

1971-%1°0
