S/2016/590

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 June 2016
Original: English

Eleventh report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 22 April 2016
(S/2016/372).
2.
Bilateral ties between Iraq and Kuwait continued to strengthen during the
reporting period. On 26 April, my Special Representative for Iraq met in Baghdad
with the Chargé d’affaires of the Embassy of Kuwait in Iraq, Khalid al-Janai. My
Special Representative briefed him on his official visit to Kuwait, held on 6 April,
and on the activities planned by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) to reinvigorate the file of missing Kuwaiti persons and property,
including by reaching out to witnesses and other stakeholders. Mr. Al -Janai
welcomed the UNAMI efforts and expressed the support of Kuwait for the
Government and people of Iraq, in addition to his country’s readiness to continue to
provide assistance on the humanitarian front.
3.
On 14 June, in an effort to enhance bilateral relations between Iraq and
Kuwait, the Iraqi Council of Ministers adopted a decision to lift an order to seize
real estate property owned by Kuwaiti citizens in Iraq, which had been imposed in
1995 by the now-dissolved Office of the Presidency of the Republic. The Council
stipulated that the ban would be lifted provided that no lega l obstacles existed and
would be granted in return for the lifting of the freeze on real estate property owned
by Iraqi citizens in Kuwait.

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
4.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) researcher, who is
engaged in supporting the in-depth scientific review agreed upon during the
Tripartite Commission meeting of October 2015, undertook a two -week visit to
Baghdad from 9 to 21 April to review the archives of the Ministry of Defence. The
information gathered is being entered into a database for review by the forensic
external expert who joined the team on 16 May and has since begun an initial
16-11215 (E)

070716

*1611215*

S/2016/590

assessment of the file. On 11 April, my Special Representative met the President of
ICRC, Peter Maurer, in Geneva. They discussed the activities of UNAMI and the
ICRC activities on the file. Both sides reaffirmed their commitment and pledged to
continue to cooperate on the matter.
5.
On 27 April, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq submitted its plan of action for
2016 to ICRC, outlining its planned excavation work, contacts with witnesses and
other activities relating to the search for the missing and the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. The document has also been shared with
the Kuwaiti National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs.
The plan of action details priorities for the remainder of the year, including field
work on the Khamisiyah and Radwaniyah sites, a review of the information
pertaining to the Karbala’ site, an expansion of the media campaign and follow-up
activities with existing witnesses.
6.
During the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq contacted
witnesses in order to obtain more detailed information in support of the
identification of potential burial sites. On 10 May, at an Iraqi interministerial
meeting, which was held under the chairmanship of the Ministry, issues pertaining
to the witnesses were discussed, and agreement on a way forward was reached.
7.
On 11 May, a field trip was conducted to the Radwaniyah site by the Ministry
of Defence of Iraq in follow-up to previous work, with the technical support of
ICRC forensic experts. A basic archaeological survey was completed, GPS
coordinates were established and excavation sites for future work were identified.
On 13 May, a field visit to the Khamisiyah site was undertaken by the Ministry, also
with support from the ICRC forensic team, to ascertain the facts on the ground and
review the work undertaken to date. The ICRC mission reports from the two field
visits are being finalized and will be submitted to the tripartite mechanism members
during the next reporting period.
8.
Upon the instructions of the Minister of Defence of Iraq, Khalid al-Ubaydi, the
Ministry’s spokesperson requested all citizens holding information on potential
sites, archives and/or Kuwaitis’ personal belongings to come forward. His call was
broadcast on 18 May on 20 Iraqi channels, including satellite television channels.
The video also informed the public that the file on missing Kuwaiti persons had
been transferred to the Ministry and provided contact information to reach the
Ministry’s directorates of human rights and media and moral guidance. Following
the broadcast, a new witness came forward with information on a potential burial
site. The Ministry is currently analysing the information.
9.
On 18 May, as part of his responsibilities under Security Council resolution
2107 (2013), my Deputy Special Representative for Iraq for Political Affairs,
Gyorgy Busztin, met the Undersecretary for Legal Affairs and Multilateral Relations
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Omar Barzanji, and underscored the need
to undertake specific activities to search for the missing Kuwaiti and third -country
nationals. While noting that current priorities, notably the continuing efforts to
combat Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the dire humanitarian
situation, were hampering the Government’s ability to finance extensive activities in
support of the Kuwaiti file, Mr. Barzanji reiterated his Government ’s commitment to
pushing the work forward. He outlined his current engagement with the Ministry of
Defence of Iraq, notably to reach out to new witnesses.

2/5

16-11215

S/2016/590

10. On 18 May and 20 June, during meetings with the head of the ICRC
delegation in Baghdad, Katharina Ritz, my Deputy Special Representative expressed
his expectation that the Ministry of Defence of Iraq would continue to take action
on the file. Ms. Ritz said that ICRC had introduced additional forensic expertise to
assist the Government of Iraq to increase its chances of obtaining a positive
outcome. The parties agreed that the continuation of the work needed to be ensured
and that collaboration through the tripartite mechanism would preserve momentum
and aid the process.
11. On 19 May, my Deputy Special Representative met the Secretary-General of
the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, Vice Admiral Muhammad Jawad al -Abady, a newly
appointed leader of the Ministry’s technical team in charge of the missing Kuwaiti
persons file. My Deputy Special Representative underlined the international
obligation of Iraq to work on the file and the consequent need to show results
through actual work on the ground. He encouraged the technical team to work more
actively through the tripartite mechanism, which served as an instrument of
cooperation and represented the best-placed platform to guide Iraqi efforts.
Mr. Al-Abady assured my Deputy Special Representative that the Minister of
Defence was keen to resolve all outstanding issues with Kuwait and that the file was
being given due importance at and support from the highest government levels. He
emphasized that the technical team was fully engaged, committed hi mself to
undertaking the activities needed to advance the work on the file and welcomed the
continued assistance and cooperation of UNAMI.
12. On 23 May, UNAMI participated in an observer capacity in the ninety -fourth
session of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite mechanism, which was held
in Kuwait. The lack of tangible results notwithstanding, the renewed commitment
and results-oriented approach shown by the Ministry of Defence of Iraq were
praised by the Subcommittee members. Kuwait expressed a ppreciation for the work
of and the momentum established by the Ministry, voicing its readiness to assist the
new team and expressing the hope that there would be fruitful results. The Iraqi
delegation pledged to continue work on the file, the financial ch allenges
notwithstanding, and welcomed Kuwaiti proposals on the 2016 action plan. The
proposals advocated including the Salman Pak site, securing the presence of
witnesses during field visits to possible burial sites, continuing efforts to reach
witnesses and revisiting the ground-penetrating radar initiative for the Khamisiyah
excavation works. The updated 2016 action plan was subsequently adopted by the
members. ICRC reported that the in-depth scientific review project was continuing,
reiterating its gratitude to both Iraq and Kuwait for opening their archives and
trusting that that access would be extended in the future in order to complete the
review.
13. On 24 May in Kuwait, my Deputy Special Representative held a meeting with
the Chair of the National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War
Affairs, Ibrahim al-Shaheen, who welcomed the technical role of the Ministry of
Defence of Iraq on the file and its advantages, especially in terms of its standing,
experience and results-oriented approach. He expressed the hope that efforts would
be further expanded and that a number of Kuwaiti recommendations would be acted
upon in the coming period, namely curbing the length of the transition phase,
building on the previous work and history of the file, giving due attention to the
Khamisiyah site and following up with witnesses in line with the guidelines agreed
upon by the tripartite mechanism members. He recognized the current security

16-11215

3/5

S/2016/590

challenges facing the Ministry and its tremendous responsibilities in efforts to
combat ISIL, conveying his appreciation that priority had also been given to the
Kuwaiti missing persons file. My Deputy Special Representative commended the
Committee on its patience and support during the transition period and assured
Mr. Al-Shaheen that UNAMI would continue to follow up with the Iraqi side to
facilitate the work on the file.
14. A UNAMI delegation, headed by my Deputy Special Representative, attended,
in an observer capacity, the forty-second session of the Tripartite Commission,
which was held on 25 May in Kuwait. A constructive atmosphere prevailed. The
Commission members welcomed the new positive dynamics generated by the
Ministry of Defence of Iraq. The members acknowledged that the solution did not
lie in any single method or technology and agreed to continue to pursue various
approaches in parallel, including field work, outreach to witnesses, the ICRC
scientific review project and the utilization of new technology and scientific
methodologies, where appropriate. The observer status of UNAMI was extended
during the session, with the Kuwaiti delegation welcoming the Mission ’s continued
presence and expressing appreciation for its efforts and use of all resources in
supporting the work of the Government of Iraq. Similar s entiments were echoed by
ICRC, which praised the positive role of UNAMI and its cooperation with the ICRC
delegation in Baghdad.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
15. On 18 May, during his meeting with Mr. Barzanji, my Deputy Special
Representative urged the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq to reinvigorate the
search for the missing Kuwaiti property and suggested approaching second -hand
booksellers in Baghdad that might be in possession of knowledge of the national
archives. Mr. Barzanji took note of the proposal. He informed my Deputy Special
Representative that the Iraqi interministerial committee on the Kuwaiti property
would be reconvened in the coming period to review the work on the file.
16. During the reporting period, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq reached
out to other ministries and government institutions to coordinate the search for the
missing Kuwaiti property. As a result, thousands of Kuwaiti books were located in
the libraries of the Ministry of Higher Education. During a meeting with my Deputy
Special Representative on 20 June, Mr. Barzanji informed him that, together with
the Ministry of Higher Education and the Ministry of Transportation, the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs was cataloguing, itemizing and packaging the inventory received,
in preparation for its official handover to the Government of Kuwait.

IV. Observations
17. I commend the goodwill that continues to prevail between Iraq and Kuwait. I
am confident that the strong support, solidarity and encouragement demonstrated by
Kuwait is providing the impetus required to reach the full normalization of
relations. I call on the Government of Iraq and its citizens to seize this positive
momentum and make the efforts needed to attain progress on the file of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the

4/5

16-11215

S/2016/590

national archives. I urge Iraqi nationals both within and outside Iraq who possess
information on missing Kuwaiti persons and property to come forwa rd.
18. I remain disappointed that no cases of missing Kuwaiti persons have been
solved and no human remains exhumed over the past 11 years. Ascertaining the fate
of missing persons and providing answers to their grieving families depend on
steadfast commitment, action and the adoption of new and innovative ways to push
the file forward. Despite an extremely difficult security environment and political
and financial challenges, the Government of Iraq has renewed its commitment to the
file. I commend the Ministry of Defence for its willingness to fully engage on this
important issue, use the resources at its disposal and undertake concrete action in an
effort to reach results. I am grateful to the Government of Kuwait for its patience,
support and willingness to assist during the transition period.
19. I also applaud the outstanding commitment of the tripartite mechanism
members, under the able leadership of ICRC, which has provided a decades -long,
fruitful and constructive platform to guide the efforts to lo cate and recover missing
persons and has never lost hope or determination. I fully support the implementation
of a parallel approach as a means of achieving tangible results and welcome the
adoption of the 2016 Iraqi plan of action with the inclusion of th e Kuwaiti
recommendations. I encourage the Government of Iraq to continue carrying out field
work, reaching out to witnesses and putting to use new scientific methods. I praise
both States for allowing access to their respective archives in support of the
scientific review project and look forward to its outcome. I am grateful for the
confidence and trust placed in UNAMI through the renewal of its observer status.
UNAMI is committed to continuing to play an integral and supportive role in the
tripartite mechanism.
20. I welcome the revived search for the missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, which has already borne fruit. I encourage the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq to continue its efforts and consider UNAMI proposals, in particu lar
searching the government archives and reaching out to second -hand booksellers. I
remain hopeful that such efforts and renewed commitment will bring to light
information on the national archives.
21. I reiterate the unwavering commitment of UNAMI, as well as of my Special
Representative and my Deputy Special Representative, to play their mandated roles
in this important humanitarian endeavour.

16-11215

5/5
