United Nations

S/PV.6144

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6144th meeting
Wednesday, 17 June 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2009/300)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-37195 (E)

*0937195*

S/PV.6144

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2009/300)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Serbia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Vuk Jeremić
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Skender Hyseni.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them document S/2009/300, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing from Mr. Lamberto Zannier. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Zannier: The report (S/2009/300) members
of the Security Council have before them today details
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) during
the period from 10 March to 31 May 2009.
With the conclusion of UNMIK’s three phases of
reconfiguration, following the report (S/2008/354) of
the Secretary-General of 12 June 2008, UNMIK has
progressively shifted its focus towards an increasingly
diplomatic and political role focused on facilitating
dialogue and external relations and fostering minority
rights. As set out in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2008/692) of 24 November 2008, which was
welcomed by the Council in a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/44), UNMIK’s reconfiguration is both
timely and necessary. Moreover, it has served to
enhance UNMIK’s effectiveness, in view of the
prevailing circumstances on the ground, which have
increasingly limited the scope for performing
administrative functions. The reconfiguration took
place in a transparent manner vis-à-vis all stakeholders.
It was also consonant with the United Nations position
of strict neutrality on the question of Kosovo’s status.
Under the guidance of the Secretariat, UNMIK
has adhered strictly to the guidelines that provided for
reductions in its budget, which took into account the
role of other actors on the ground and the valuable
synergies of the joint international effort. UNMIK’s
role today is different, but no less relevant or vital. The
newly reconfigured UNMIK will continue to perform
its functions under resolution 1244 (1999), with the
overall aim of ensuring peace and stability in Kosovo.
UNMIK’s proposed budget for the upcoming
2009-2010 budget cycle amounts to $47,082,000 and
provides for 507 staff members. This reflects the new

09-37195

S/PV.6144

role taken on by the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in that field, as well as
the continuing role of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in monitoring
respect for human and minority rights through their
extensive field presence. UNMIK’s resources and
skills, combined with those of the other organizations,
provide the full panoply of expertise and staff needed
to implement our mandate while promoting synergies
and avoiding duplication of efforts.
The United Nations remains uniquely situated to
play a useful role for both sides, inter alia by
facilitating the resolution of problems as an
intermediary between parties that are not ready to deal
with each other directly. This may involve mediating
between the communities or facilitating Kosovo’s
engagement in external affairs, which is key to
ensuring the functionality of such regional processes
as, for instance, the Central European Free Trade
Agreement. Our status of neutrality allows us to use
our efforts to nurture the reconciliation of Kosovo’s
communities and foster regional cooperation, for the
benefit of all of Kosovo’s people and for the stability
and development of the region as a whole.
Regrettably, our ability to promote status-neutral
solutions to practical issues is being affected by the
positions taken by the parties in anticipation of the
issuance of the advisory opinion requested by the
General Assembly from the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) on Kosovo’s declaration of independence.
Whether justified or not, Belgrade and Pristina have
been viewing every action they or we take through the
prism of how it may be perceived or interpreted by the
ICJ as potentially either weakening or strengthening
the case of one side or the other.
In spite of those difficulties, UNMIK continues to
engage with the various stakeholders on matters
affecting the lives of all of Kosovo’s communities, as a
facilitator of a process in which opportunities exist for
the sides to engage and resolve differences. While
efforts to address specific problems tend to be
perceived by one side or the other as a potential threat
to its perceived interests, making it often very difficult
to move the process forward, we have found that
engagement at the technical level, such as in the
cultural heritage or in the missing persons areas, is
constructive and produces results. We therefore urge
both Belgrade and Pristina to find more ways to engage
at the technical level to deliver what both clearly

09-37195

advocate, which is a better life for all the people of
Kosovo.
In that regard, the period covered by this latest
report has been marked by some tangible progress in a
number of areas. One such has been progress in finding
a solution for the decade-old problem of electricity
supply to the Kosovo Serb community south of the Ibar
River. After a decade of refusing to pay for the
electricity they consume, for political reasons, and
following targeted blackouts by the electricity
provider, the engagement of the international
community, including that of UNMIK where and when
warranted, and the support of senior representatives of
Serbia’s Ministry for Kosovo and Metohija, have
resulted in at least 98 per cent of the Kosovo Serb
enclaves agreeing to a payment scheme, which has
resulted in their receiving a regular supply of
electricity.
During this period a crisis was also averted north
of the Ibar River, where attempts by Kosovo Albanian
displaced persons, backed by the Kosovo authorities, to
rebuild a number of houses in the northern Mitrovica
suburb of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani, met with opposition
from the Kosovo Serb community, which held daily
protests. With UNMIK’s active engagement, an
agreement was reached in principle between the
communities, to the effect that Kosovo Serbs would be
allowed to build homes on newly acquired land in the
same area without opposition from Kosovo Albanians.
While the issue of reconstruction is inherently linked to
the right of return, the Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo
Serb communities still perceive matters in more
political and strategic terms, and the situation remains
fragile.
Another step forward during this period, on a
technical issue of importance for the peaceful
coexistence of Kosovo’s communities, occurred in the
area of protecting the Serbian cultural heritage in
Kosovo. UNMIK is engaged in strategic cooperation in
that area with other actors, such as the Council of
Europe. In coordination with other key stakeholders,
UNMIK finally succeeded in overcoming a year-long
stalemate, and last month was able to reactivate the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, which
deals with rebuilding Serbian Orthodox Church sites.
The reconstruction of cultural patrimony is one of the
few areas in which representatives of Belgrade and of
Pristina interact directly at the technical level.

3

S/PV.6144

Another such area is that of missing persons,
where Pristina and Belgrade continue to meet, putting
status-related concerns aside. The Pristina and
Belgrade delegations of the Working Group on Missing
Persons met on 3 June at an open session in Belgrade.
Both delegations provided information on potential
sites that could contain the remains of people
considered missing and pledged to do more to address
the problem of missing persons. The Working Group
agreed that the positive momentum achieved must be
continued and developed further, but here too much
remains to be done, and it is key that the issue remain
non-politicized.

status-neutral framework of resolution 1244 (1999). As
noted in the annex to the Secretary-General’s report,
EULEX declared itself to be at full operational
capability on 6 April and now has a staff of 2,569.
EULEX is engaged in monitoring, mentoring and
advising Kosovo’s rule of law institutions and
exercises certain executive functions. EULEX has also
engaged in discussions with the Government of Serbia,
including meetings in Belgrade with the Serbian
Deputy Prime Minister/Minister for the Interior, and
the Ministers for Kosovo and Metohija for Finance and
Justice. UNMIK has remained fully involved in these
consultations.

Further positive steps have been taken over the
past few weeks towards restoring the effectiveness of
the Kosovo Property Agency (KPA). As members may
recall, following the entry into force of the Kosovo
constitution, KPA offices in Serbia that had facilitated
the collection of claims, the gathering and verifying of
information and the delivery of decisions were closed,
thus hampering the process leading to the final
adjudication of a significant number of claims. A
solution has recently been agreed upon by all
stakeholders to request that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
provide for an arrangement that would allow for the
operation of KPA offices in Serbia under the umbrella
of the United Nations. Such a solution would allow for
the constructive engagement of Pristina and Belgrade
to ensure restitution of the property rights of internally
displaced persons within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999). I have therefore asked UNHCR to
consider entering into such an arrangement, and I take
this opportunity to acknowledge the continued
cooperation of UNHCR and its valuable contributions
in ensuring the protection of the rights of the displaced
communities of Kosovo.

With the process of reconfiguring UNMIK nearly
completed, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continues to carry out
its mandated responsibility for comprehensive
monitoring throughout Kosovo through its extensive
field presence. Timely OSCE reporting earlier this year
on the disputed reconstruction of Kosovo Albanian
houses north of the Ibar river and on the electricity cuts
in Serbian enclaves south of the river are just two
examples of how OSCE fulfils this important role.
With its main focus on ensuring that the human rights
of Kosovo’s diverse ethnic communities are protected,
OSCE is well-placed to play an even greater role as a
mediator in disputes between the communities, a role I
have strongly encouraged it to play, as it builds the
capacities of local institutions and fosters democratic
principles and practices.

The number of voluntary returns remains
disappointingly low and, despite repeated calls by the
Kosovo authorities for Serbs to return to Kosovo and
reclaim their homes, the response has been negligible.
To their credit, the Kosovo authorities, supported by
the international community, are making efforts to
ensure that the conditions exist for sustainable returns.

I assumed the duties of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of Mission a year ago.
It has been a year of intense activities, and with the
cooperation of all, we managed to ensure that the
delicate phase of transition did not produce instability
or crisis. However, as I have outlined, much remains to
be done, and this means that we will need to continue
to work towards the resolution of the remaining issues.
Looking ahead, the reconfiguration of UNMIK also
presents us with an opportunity to enhance cooperation
between the various United Nations actors operating in
Kosovo, improving the overall coherence and
effectiveness of United Nations action and promoting
greater interaction in pursuit of our shared objectives.

Throughout the reporting period, UNMIK has
been cooperating closely with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). EULEX
continues to operate throughout Kosovo under the
overall authority of the United Nations and within the

A founding purpose of the United Nations is to
harmonize the actions of nations in the attainment of
peace and the resolution of economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian problems and to promote respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. This goal has

4

09-37195

S/PV.6144

been foremost in our minds during these past three
months, while we completed the reconfiguration of
UNMIK. Our goal, with the support of EULEX, OSCE
and the international military presence, remains to
ensure stability, foster reconciliation and allow for the
return of internally displaced persons. I am confident
that the reconfigured Mission, enhanced by the
significant OSCE field presence and by the EULEX
police and justice components, represents a well-honed
tool for performing these functions on behalf of the
Council and the Secretary-General. My staff and I hope
we can continue to count on the support of the Council.

At the very beginning of my remarks, I would
like to express my country’s deep gratitude to the vast
majority of Member States, which respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia. The
solidarity we have received from all over the globe
encourages us to persevere in our efforts to resolve the
future status of Kosovo in a way that is acceptable to
all responsible stakeholders. It is my sincere hope that
we will continue to work together in defence of the
basic principles of international law, thus strengthening
the universal case for the consensual resolution of
disputes throughout the world.

The President: I thank Mr. Zannier for his
briefing. I now give the floor to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić.

At the same time, we note with deep regret the
dismissal of resolution 1244 (1999) by Pristina. As the
Secretary-General’s report makes plain, the ethnic
Albanian authorities in Kosovo asserted that “they had
no legal obligation to abide by it” (ibid., para. 2).

Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting of the Security Council.
Once again, we are gathered to discuss the
dangerous consequences of the 17 February 2008
unilateral declaration of independence by the ethnic
Albanian authorities of Serbia’s southern province of
Kosovo and Metohija.
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier, and I wish to underline the
Secretary-General’s observation, contained in his most
recent report, that the cooperation, constructive
engagement and “continuing support of the Security
Council and of the broader international community for
a reconfigured UNMIK is of crucial importance”
(S/2009/300, para. 44).
Reconfiguration has been brought to its end-state,
as the report indicates. Therefore, no further reduction
in the resources of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should be
undertaken.
The United Nations remains the overall authority
in Kosovo, as mandated by this Council in resolution
1244 (1999). It must continue to play a vital role in
coordinating all the international organizations that
operate under its umbrella. The capacity of UNMIK to
cooperate effectively with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in particular must
not be constrained. Our amendments to the UNMIK
budget for the coming fiscal year have sought to
reinforce that essential element of its mandate.

09-37195

No one should be permitted to ignore the
decisions of the Security Council. I therefore urge the
Council to insist that all parties uphold the
commitments that arise from resolution 1244 (1999). It
was passed under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, which binds all to respect its provisions in
full. This is our common legal imperative and our
moral obligation.
Serbia will never, under any circumstances,
implicitly or explicitly recognize the unilateral
declaration of independence by the ethnic Albanian
authorities of our southern province. On this issue, we
will not yield, come what may. We will continue to
defend our integrity in a non-confrontational manner,
using all peaceful means at our disposal.
As a result of our measured response to the
unilateral declaration of independence, the unstable
equilibrium on the ground has largely been kept in
check. We have sought to contain flashpoints despite
numerous provocations, such as the targeted power
cuts, pressure to sign loyalty oaths and the construction
of new, unauthorized housing settlements.
Kosovo should not stand outside the rules of the
international system. It is no exception, not a unique
case, nor is it sui generis. As a result of the unilateral
declaration of independence, that declaration has
become a test of global significance. Should it be
allowed to stand, a door would open for challenging
the territorial integrity of any United Nations Member
State.

5

S/PV.6144

On 8 October 2008, the General Assembly
approved, by an overwhelming margin, resolution 63/3
to refer the unilateral declaration of independence issue
to the International Court of Justice (ICJ). The judicial
proceeding has begun, and it marks the first time that
the ICJ has been asked to consider the legality of a
unilateral attempt by an ethnic minority to secede from
a United Nations Member State, in defiance of that
State’s democratic constitution and the will of the
Security Council.
The case has attracted attention across the globe,
as the active presence at the Court of representatives of
countries from all continents to participate in the
unilateral declaration of independence hearings makes
clear. The ICJ conclusions will have far-reaching
consequences for the international system as a whole.
It is therefore vitally important that the legal process be
allowed to run its course, free of political interference.
We should all respect the fact that the Court is
deliberating on the issue. Therefore, new recognitions
of the unilateral declaration of independence should
not be encouraged, and multilateral bodies should
refrain from extending membership to the secessionist
authorities in Pristina. Once the ICJ hands down its
opinion, we will have cause to look again into the
issue, informed by the findings of the Court.
In the meantime, we should find the strength to
put our differences on status to one side for the sake of
peace and stability and for the residents of the
province. This is a time for leadership and working
together, armed with prudence and strategic vision. Let
us not increase the divide. Some countries have
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence.
Others have not. We all have our constraints, and they
should be respected. Let the Court do its work, while
we focus on improving the lives of citizens instead of
making them the victims of our disagreements.
Let us engage with each other so as to rebuild
holy sites, alleviate poverty, create jobs, provide health
care and education, reduce crime and improve public
security. Working at cross purposes should stop. Let us
create new opportunities for achieving practical results
by engaging with one another on a whole host of
questions.
I propose that we begin with the central
humanitarian issue of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), more

6

than 200,000 Kosovo Serb IDPs have not returned to
the province. Last year, only around 500 returned; and,
during the latest reporting period, no more than 30.
That is a failure of monumental proportions. Kosovo
Serb IDPs want to exercise their right of return, and we
must do everything to bring them back home. That
means improving conditions on the ground to make
them feel safe. Few destroyed houses have been
rebuilt, and most remain empty. That is not, however,
where the biggest problem lies. More than 40,000
claims have been filed by Kosovo Serb IDPs for the
return of illegally seized private property, and they
have not had any response. The first step, therefore, is
to make sure that those claims are delivered. Right
now, that is impossible. Sadly, the UNMIKadministered Kosovo Property Agency has ceased to
exist.
We urge the international community to embrace
the initiative of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to get UNHCR to take over the
functions previously performed by the Kosovo
Property Agency. Through its Office in Belgrade and
others in Serbia that United Nations agency can serve
as a focal point of our engagement.
On 6 April, the European Union announced that
EULEX had reached full operational capacity,
following the visit to Belgrade by the head of EULEX,
Mr. Yves de Kermabon. While the United Nations has
not transferred all rule of law functions to the
European Law and Order Mission in Kosovo, it has
adhered to the assumption by EULEX of operational
responsibility within the parameters set out in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2008/692). That report
affirms that EULEX will fully respect resolution 1244
(1999) and operate under the overall authority and
within the status-neutral framework of the United
Nations.
Since that time, the Republic of Serbia has
engaged with EULEX and UNMIK on a whole host of
practical issues of common concern within the
parameters welcomed by the Security Council. The
Secretary-General’s six-point arrangement (S/2008/354,
annex I) must be applied in full. Some progress in that
direction has been achieved, although “comprehensive or
long-term solutions have not yet been agreed”
(S/2008/300, para. 43).
We deeply regret that more has not been
accomplished to date. That is due in part to the

09-37195

S/PV.6144

reluctance of Pristina to accept that the infamous
Ahtisaari Plan was not endorsed by the Security
Council, thanks, in large part, to the principled position
of the Russian Federation.
I turn to a brief discussion of the six points and
related practical issues. Regarding the police, the
question of senior positions for qualified Kosovo Serbs
has not yet been resolved. That has left hundreds of
ethnic Serb officers in the province feeling that they
would return to a hostile work environment. At the
same time, EULEX police and the Serbian Ministry of
the Interior have begun to work successfully together
in addressing a number of technical matters related to
cooperation across the administrative line. Those
include organized crime and smuggling and build upon
the best practices of our long-standing cooperation
with UNMIK police on those matters.
On the courts, some progress has occurred.
Unfortunately, some of the broader issues have not yet
been resolved, including the appointment of local
judges and prosecutors in accordance with procedures
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999). The question of
the territorial jurisdiction of the northern Mitrovica
courthouse remains unanswered, as does the
applicability of UNMIK law only. On the other hand,
partial progress has been achieved. Urgent cases are
being processed. Some trials have been concluded, and
cooperation between EULEX prosecutors and Serbia’s
Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor has been
established.
On customs, preliminary meetings have taken
place, resulting in certain technical progress on that
delicate matter. Resolving it will require enhanced
coordination and a renewed dedication to work
together on achieving acceptable operating modalities,
such as co-location and the distribution of revenues.
That brings me to the Central European FreeTrade Agreement, CEFTA. The success of that
important regional trade agreement depends on the
consistent application of unanimously agreed rules.
UNMIK is a signatory to CEFTA, as the report plainly
states. The introduction of new customs stamps by the
so-called Kosovo Customs Director-General has
regretfully politicized that commercial issue.
We very much hope that, in the months ahead, we
will be able to arrive at a set of practical arrangements
acceptable to responsible stakeholders. It is clear that a
more active role by EULEX, consistent with its

09-37195

mandate, will be required, as will closer coordination
with UNMIK.
I would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to a critically important issue, namely
facilitating the entry of Serbian officials into the
province. That question has, unfortunately, been
accumulating ill will for several months and threatens
to derail constructive efforts on all other fronts. It is
difficult to imagine how we can positively contribute
to developments on the ground if our ability to work
closely with the Kosovo Serb community throughout
the province is hindered. Serbian officials must be able
to visit churches and monasteries, assist in the return of
IDPs to reconstructed homes, provide food and medical
aid, help maintain educational standards and engage on
a whole host of other similar activities.
The assignment of operational responsibility to
EULEX was welcomed on the presupposition that
EULEX would make use of its executive functions
when required. Now is such a time. We demand that all
necessary measures be taken to swiftly resolve this
issue of paramount importance.
Before coming to the end of my remarks, I would
like to acknowledge the useful role played by the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR) in
Kosovo. It had the responsibility to protect our
enclaves and holy sites from potential threats,
incursions and attacks. KFOR’s status-neutral presence
in the province is still required in order to satisfy the
legitimate security needs of the local population,
irrespective of ethnicity. We believe that, under the
present circumstances, a troop reduction would be
counter-productive.
We will continue to be a reliable partner of
KFOR, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and
the Kumanovo Military Technical Agreement. The socalled Kosovo Security Force is an illegal paramilitary
organization. Its existence and activities, present and
future, constitute a direct danger to the consolidation of
peace and stability in the Western Balkans and it must
be disbanded immediately.
Serbia’s democracy is secure, our society has
grown strong and our values are safely entrenched in
law. We strongly believe in the shared destiny of all
European nations. We have demonstrated time and
again, through concrete deeds and under difficult
circumstances, our determination to become a member
of the European Union. This remains our central

7

S/PV.6144

strategic priority. We therefore welcome the
conclusions reached on 15 June by the EU Foreign
Ministers. The decision to commit to placing the
Western Balkans States on the white Schengen List
rescinds at last the final vestiges of the 1990s.

people of Kosovo were, in fact, very honoured the day
before yesterday, to welcome the Nobel Peace Prize
winner, Martti Ahtisaari, in Pristina, to celebrate the
first anniversary of the entry into force of our
Constitution together.

The Security Council must continue to play a key
role in the Kosovo dispute. We believe it would be
beneficial for the Council to visit Serbia: Belgrade,
Pristina, North Kosovo and the enclaves in order to see
first-hand how much work still needs to be done on the
ground, within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999). The only conclusion that I believe could be
drawn is that coming to an agreement is the way
forward. Regretfully, this has not yet been attempted.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has been reconfigured,
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) achieved full operational capability on
6 April. Successful deployment of EULEX throughout
Kosovo has been widely appreciated, and the
Government of Kosovo has been cooperating closely
on all issues. Improvement of the situation in North
Kosovo after deployment of EULEX is obvious. Still,
there is a lot that needs to be done. Otherwise, the
overall security situation in the Republic of Kosovo is
very calm and stable.

A world leader said:
“All of us share this world for but a brief moment
in time. The question is whether we spend that
time focused on what pushes us apart, or whether
we commit ourselves to an effort — a sustained
effort — to find common ground, to focus on the
future we seek for our children and, ... choose the
right path, not just the easy path.”
Taking the right path will not be easy.
Unfortunately, there are those who are not yet ready to
begin the journey towards compromise. But we must
not be discouraged. We must cease pushing each other
apart. We must find that common ground. The Republic
of Serbia has taken the first step. The next one, we
cannot take alone. We wait patiently for a partner to
join us in turning away from the painful past and
towards a hopeful future.
The President: I thank Minister Jeremić for his
statement. I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Skender Hyseni.
Mr. Hyseni: Thank you so much for the
opportunity to brief you, honourable members of the
Council, on the continued accomplishments and steady
progress the Republic of Kosovo has been making in
all areas, with a special focus on the achievements
made since my last statement to the Council in March.
The day before yesterday, we celebrated the first
anniversary of the entry into force of our
Constitution — the Constitution of the Republic of
Kosovo. The new democratic Constitution of my
country is a modern foundational document that
incorporates all of the minority rights protections from
the Ahtisaari comprehensive plan. The leaders and the

8

As I said in my remarks in this forum in March,
for practical and pragmatic reasons we have requested
the conclusion of the mission and mandate of UNMIK.
In light of the continued positive developments in
Kosovo and the widespread deployment of EULEX, I
reiterate that request today. I also reiterate the
commitment expressed in our Declaration of
Independence and in our Constitution to respect
adherence to international law, including binding
resolutions of this body. That commitment has never
wavered.
As the Government of Kosovo has assumed full
responsibility over the organization of elections — that
means over the Central Elections Commission as
well — the new Central Elections Commission
chairperson has been recently appointed. New elections
for municipalities of Kosovo are expected to take place
late this autumn. After lengthy consultations with
political parties, His Excellency Dr. Fatmir Sejdiu,
President of the Republic, has announced 15 November
as the date of the new municipal elections.
Another very important institution has been
recently established. After adoption of the law on the
Constitutional Court, the Parliament of the Republic
has also elected the members of the Constitutional
Court of Kosovo.
State institution-building has also continued,
based on European standards. The build-up of our
security force is progressing. As I said in my March
statement to the Council, the NATO-trained Kosovo
Security Force is a democratic and civilian-controlled

09-37195

S/PV.6144

security force. This multi-ethnic and apolitical force
will be focused primarily on emergency response and
generally on activities to promote development,
regional peace, security and stability.

process, 96 of which approved the decision. It is very
encouraging to note that 41 countries that have not yet
recognized Kosovo voted in favour of Kosovo’s
membership.

In line with the request for an advisory opinion
submitted to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) by
the United Nations General Assembly on the question
of the declaration of independence, the Republic of
Kosovo, in compliance with the set deadlines, has
submitted to the Court its written contribution on
17 April. I have also informed the Court of our
intention to participate in all subsequent proceedings,
including in the hearings due to open on 1 December
2009. The Court has already been notified of Kosovo’s
intention to present an oral contribution.

On 3 June, the voting process for Kosovo’s World
Bank membership ended with 139 member States
participating in the voting and 95 countries approving
Kosovo’s application. The formal accession to both the
IMF and the World Bank will take place on 29 June in
Washington, D.C., when the Republic of Kosovo signs
both Articles of Agreement.

As we continue to take an active part in
presenting our case before the ICJ, I wish to emphasize
our commitment to justice and our trust in justice, and
with that, our trust in ICJ justice. We are therefore
confident that the ICJ’s deliberations and ruling will be
fair and impartial. We strongly believe that our position
will be confirmed.
Recognition of Kosovo as an independent and
sovereign State has continued. Continued recognitions
are a clear testimony of progress and stability in
Kosovo. Free nations of the world continue to
appreciate Kosovo’s contribution to regional peace and
safety.
I wish once again to extend our profound thanks
and appreciation to the peoples and Governments of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Kingdom of Bahrain,
the Republic of the Gambia and the Union of the
Comoros for their recent recognition of the
independence of my country. We urge all the other
nations of the world to support the efforts of the people
of Kosovo to build their future as a free and
independent country. After having endured decades of
unspeakable occupation, terror and slavery, the people
of Kosovo deserve to be free and to join the
community of the free and democratic nations of the
world.
It is with great pleasure that I can speak today
about Kosovo’s membership in two international
financial institutions of special weight and importance
to my country, namely the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank. On 6 May 2009, the IMF
Board of Governors approved Kosovo’s application,
with 138 member States participating in the voting

09-37195

Membership in these two very important financial
institutions is an additional encouragement to the
Government of Kosovo to continue its efforts to fight
crime and corruption, strengthen the rule of law and
maintain macroeconomic stability through fiscal and
budgetary discipline during the current economic
downturn.
The Government of the Republic of Kosovo has
been working very hard on the issues of the economy,
justice and security and safety for all of its citizens.
Integration of minorities and returnees has continued to
be a standing priority of my Government. Prime
Minister Hashim Thaçi has been personally reaching
out to returning Serb families, and Government funds
have been allocated for reconstruction of houses for
returnees. Our Government has continued to seek ways
to improve the conditions in the minority community
areas, especially in the Serb majority areas.
Unfortunately, the Republic of Serbia has
continued to prevent the Serb citizens of Kosovo from
cooperating with the institutions of Kosovo. Belgrade
has also continued to impede our cooperation with
neighbours and the international community by
blocking our participation in regional and wider
international bodies.
Before concluding, I would like to re-emphasize
that in the new Kosovo there should be no room for
hatred and violence. Kosovo’s institutions are
committed to building a multi-ethnic democracy at
peace with its neighbours and contributing to regional
cooperation, peace and safety. The future of all nations
of the Western Balkans is in European integration, and
Kosovo intends to pursue this goal very vigorously. To
achieve those goals, we in the Republic of Kosovo will
continue close cooperation with the European Union,
the United States and NATO.

9

S/PV.6144

In concluding, I would like to re-emphasize
Kosovo’s commitment toward working with all of the
members of the Security Council to promote the shared
goals of international peace and security. Once again, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
present the views of the Republic of Kosovo.

the United Nations position of strict neutrality
regarding Kosovo’s status and in ways that enable
UNMIK to perform its functions, especially those that
enhance
the
continuous
mediation
between
communities and support minority communities
throughout Kosovo.

The President: I now give the floor to members
of the Council.

We therefore call upon all parties concerned to
fully and constructively cooperate with UNMIK in its
areas of responsibility and strengthen confidencebuilding measures in order to achieve a comprehensive
and long-term solution, taking into account the
legitimate interests of all communities. We expect the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to continue
to play a vigorous and proactive role in this endeavour.

Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia, to today’s meeting of the Security Council,
and thank him for sharing his perspectives on the
situation in Kosovo with us. I acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Skender Hyseni at this meeting and
thank him for his statement. I also thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his important briefing.
My delegation is encouraged by the relatively
calm security situation in Kosovo during the reporting
period. We welcome the continued, productive efforts
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to lend its good offices to all
communities residing in the north of Kosovo and in
northern Mitrovica with a view to promoting
sustainable and peaceful solutions based on dialogue
and compromise. We take note of the assumption of
full operational capability by the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in the rule of law
sector, under the overall authority of the United
Nations and within the status-neutral framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). In this regard, we commend
the regular exchange of information and coordination
on issues of mutual concern between UNMIK and
EULEX and hope that such interaction will continue.
However, in the light of a series of incidents that
has occurred in northern Mitrovica, we remained
concerned about the ongoing inter-ethnic violence in
many parts of Kosovo and attempts to conclude
UNMIK’s mission without the green light of the
Security Council. The continued presence of UNMIK
with good faith cooperation from both Belgrade and
Pristina and in close coordination with EULEX and the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR) is key
to maintaining peace and stability on the ground.
We would like to reconfirm our view that the
reconfiguration and downsizing of UNMIK should be
conducted in a transparent manner and in respect for

10

We are also mindful that the number of voluntary
returns in 2009 remains disappointingly low and
continues to lag behind the 2008 figures. It is our view
that the lack of real progress in safeguarding the rights
and ensuring the security of national minorities will
only exacerbate the mistrust and lead to inter-ethnic
tensions. In this context, we call upon all parties
concerned to refrain from any rhetoric or action that
may ignite violence. At the same time, we strongly
urge UNMIK and EULEX to redouble their efforts to
promote the establishment of a safe and stable
environment conducive to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons throughout Kosovo.
Last but not least, we call for even greater efforts
to minimize tensions in and around Kosovo and to
reach negotiated solutions to differences through
peaceful means.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to welcome the
participation of Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo. I
am also pleased with the presence of Foreign Minister
Jeremić of Serbia.
I would like to thank Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier for his very comprehensive briefing
this afternoon. We are very grateful to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative for their
contributions to the gradual improvement of the
situation in Kosovo. We particularly appreciate the
Secretary-General’s initiative of reconfiguring the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which is now approaching its final
stage. The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) is now deployed throughout Kosovo
and reached full operational capabilities in early April.
We commend EULEX and other international

09-37195

S/PV.6144

presences, such as the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
for the stabilization of Kosovo.
We appreciate Serbia’s cooperation with the
EULEX operation. We believe Serbia’s commitment to
the European integration process serves to promote the
stability and prosperity of the entire West Balkan
region, including Kosovo. Therefore, we expect Serbia
to continue to further advance its integration into
Europe, in cooperation with the international
community.
Exactly one year has passed since the entry into
force of the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo.
During this period, Kosovo has made steady progress
in its own nation-building by strengthening various
State agencies. We hope that Kosovo will develop fully
as a democratic, multi-ethnic country that will
contribute to the stabilization of the West Balkan
region.
It is gratifying that the number of countries that
recognize Kosovo has been increasing gradually.
Kosovo’s recent accession to membership in
international financial institutions — the International
Monetary Fund in May and the World Bank this
month — represents a significant opening for its future
development within the global economy. We hope that
Kosovo will continue to play a constructive role as a
responsible member of the international economic
community.
The situation on the ground is generally stable,
but there are occasionally interethnic tensions in
certain areas of Kosovo. I share the concern about the
recent incident in Mitrovica. We wish to see more
efforts made for the effective protection of minorities. I
believe that UNMIK can play a useful role in the
interethnic mediation and the dialogue on the six
points, in close cooperation with other partners,
including KFOR, EULEX and their member States.
Japan has actively supported Kosovo, through the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, in its
efforts towards peaceful coexistence and sustainable
development as a multi-ethnic society, particularly in
the northern part of the country.
Japan will continue to extend its strong support
from a human security perspective to meet the needs of
the people of Kosovo. We remain committed to helping

09-37195

Kosovo develop as a vibrant, multi-ethnic and
democratic country.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and of Kosovo,
Mr. Skender Hyseni. I also duly thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing.
It is with great relief, if not satisfaction, that we
see calm prevailing in Kosovo, although some
incidents have occurred in the northern part of the
country with respect to land and the rebuilding of
homes destroyed during the war. Fortunately, such
incidents were contained thanks to the prompt
intervention of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in
coordination with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the Kosovo Force and
the Kosovo Police, to protect those places and
encourage both communities to find lasting peaceful
solutions to their differences. It is in the interests of the
authorities of Pristina and Belgrade to take all steps
necessary to resolve such incidents peacefully.
Moreover, we hope that the capacities provided by
NATO to the Kosovo Security Force will soon make it
operational, allowing it fully to shoulder its security
responsibilities.
My delegation welcomes, inter alia, the
constructive cooperation extended by the Kosovo
authorities to UNMIK, despite some reticence
concerning the latter’s presence. One thing is clear.
Even reconfigured, UNMIK, which enjoys the support
of the Security Council and the entire international
community, will always have a critical role to play in
building security in Kosovo.
It goes without saying that the issue of the status
of Kosovo remains the key bone of contention between
the parties. However, Serbia’s involvement in technical
discussions on justice, the police and customs is an
encouraging sign. We also welcome the significant
progress made in addressing urgent cases before the
Mitrovica courthouse and the normalization of the
functioning of the legal system in northern Kosovo.
Similarly, progress has been seen in the area of
restoring and protecting the Serbian cultural and
religious heritage in Kosovo. We are also convinced
that the emergence of opportunities for regional

11

S/PV.6144

cooperation in many areas, including the cultural, will
allow the ultimate achievement of rapprochement and
reconciliation.
One key factor in strengthening the reintegration
process is clearly the revival of the economy, the
creation of jobs and the improvement of the living
conditions of the people of Kosovo. We emphasize and
commend UNMIK’s very important contribution in that
regard. It follows that the entire international
community must contribute its share of critical support
in helping Kosovo to build a solid and viable economy.
We commend the effective assumption by
EULEX of an operational role in the rule of law, the
police, justice and customs, although we believe that
UNMIK should continue to shoulder certain
responsibilities in the field of justice. We also wish to
thank UNMIK and all the regional and international
partners for their support on the issue of missing
persons.
Lastly, I wish to commend and encourage all the
players working on the ground for the stability of
Kosovo, and to express our desire to see all parties
demonstrate the resolve and political vision necessary
to pursuing a concerted approach that will ensure peace
and stability throughout the region.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I, too, would
like to join other Security Council colleagues in
welcoming the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Lamberto Zannier; the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni; and the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić, to the Council
Chamber today.
I would also like to express our thanks to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/300) on developments in Kosovo over the
reporting period, and commend the ongoing and
important work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
promote stability and reconciliation in Kosovo. We
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
leadership and hard work.
The Secretary-General’s report illustrates that,
despite
economic
difficulties
and
continuing
intercommunal tensions, Kosovo is making good
progress. There is a growing number of United Nations
Member States — now 60 — that recognize Kosovo,

12

and that growing recognition was evident in the recent
overwhelming
support
shown
for
Kosovo’s
membership of the international financial institutions.
We would also like to recognize the first anniversary of
the adoption of Kosovo’s Constitution on 15 June.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
recent tensions over renewed house-building in
Mitrovica. The response of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) was both
effective and proportionate. We welcome the
reconciliation work undertaken by the Kosovo Force
and UNMIK, which helped to bring about a solution
whereby both communities are now rebuilding their
properties. The United Kingdom is committed to
assisting the Kosovo Property Claims Commission in
its work to restore rightful title to property for
Kosovars of all communities, and we welcome the fact
that displaced people continue to return to Kosovo,
albeit at a low rate.
We welcome the good cooperation that exists
between the United Nations and the European Union
on Kosovo. The role of the EU continues to increase
through EULEX, which achieved full operational
capacity in April and is making important progress in
strengthening the rule of law and re-establishing
customs controls. It is right, therefore, that UNMIK
should continue to draw down and to focus on those
areas where it can play a useful and relevant role, such
as supporting Kosovo’s engagement with external
organizations and promoting returns and reconciliation.
Given global economic difficulties, it is now
more important than ever that United Nations missions
should be no larger than strictly necessary. We note the
view of the Secretary-General that the revised UNMIK
budget meets in full the Mission’s future mandate
requirements. We also call on the Government of
Kosovo to engage constructively with UNMIK in order
to assist its work, which does not diminish Kosovo’s
status.
Promoting the rule of law, implementing the
decentralization process and encouraging the
participation of all Kosovo’s citizens in local
democratic processes remain key to building a better
future for all in Kosovo. UNMIK, EULEX and other
international partners must continue to cooperate
closely to manage new challenges and achieve these
objectives. Local and regional Governments must be
prepared
to
work
pragmatically
with
the

09-37195

S/PV.6144

representatives of the international community. That
will be particularly important to advance the
decentralization process, and that is central to the
creation of viable local government to engage with the
organs of the State for the benefit of its communities,
unlike the unrecognized parallel institutions.

report — in their public statements continue to demand
that the United Nations Mission in Kosovo end its
activities, due to the alleged irrelevance of Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and their being under no legal
obligations to implement it. We believe such behaviour
is unacceptable.

The Kosovo Government must also reach out to
all communities to demonstrate its commitment to
implementing minority rights and must strive to
achieve well-supported free and fair local elections. As
the Secretary-General’s report notes, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe can also play
an important role in capacity-building to assist the
elections.

Once again we would like to recall that resolution
1244 (1999) continues to remain fully in effect. In
accordance with it, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Mission he heads in Kosovo
should continue to carry out their functions, including
assisting and ensuring the rights and security of ethnic
minorities and achieving in the province democratic
standards established by the international community.
A great deal remains to be done in that regard.

Despite its position on Kosovo’s status, the
Government of Serbia should continue to engage with
the European Union and to encourage the active
participation of Kosovo’s Serbian minority in the
decentralization process. Kosovo’s Serbs will benefit
from the rule of law and the opportunity to play a part
in running their own communities. To obtain those
benefits, they will need to participate actively in the
local elections and should be encouraged to do so.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting the efforts of the international community
to promote stability, reconciliation and economic
progress in Kosovo, progress that will enable it to
advance towards an eventual European Union
perspective, in parallel with its neighbours.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo, Mr. Zannier, for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2009/300). The Russian side has
carefully analyzed that document.
We welcome the participation in today’s Council
meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremić. We are grateful for the assessments
he has provided, and we share them. We listened
carefully to the statement by Mr. Hyseni, although one
cannot call it a standard of objectivity.
We are concerned by the fact that despite all the
signals from the Security Council to Pristina on the
need to respect the Council’s decisions, the
representatives of the Kosovo authorities — and this
was clearly referred to in the Secretary-General’s

09-37195

Any independent steps circumventing the
Security Council to substantially alter the geography of
UNMIK’s activities would unequivocally run counter
to resolution 1244 (1999) and the package approach to
reconfiguring UNMIK adopted by this Council in
November 2008. I would recall that in accordance with
that approach, any international presence in the
province, including the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), must operate in a statusneutral framework while complying with the
prerogatives of the United Nations and resolution 1244
(1999).
We note the positive role of UNMIK and the
personal role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, in de-escalating
tensions in the area of the town of Suchodol/Brdjani,
on the outskirts of Kosovska Metrovica in April and
May this year. We believe that responsibilities for what
took place lie, above all, with the Kosovo Albanian
side, who, despite the protests of the local Serbs,
unilaterally began to work on restoring the houses of
the Kosovo Albanian refugees.
Resolving such a complex and sensitive problem
as refugee returns is something that the Kosovo
Albanian authorities essentially turned into a political
act. For the first time in the past ten years, the return of
refugees would take place without the participation of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, but with the support of international
police and military forces. While recognizing the right
of refugees to return to their homes, we are of the view
that this process must be carried out on an equal

13

S/PV.6144

footing, taking into account the views of both the
Albanian and Serb communities in the province.
We welcome the ongoing negotiations between
Belgrade and the United Nations on involving
representatives of EULEX on the six technical issues
for ensuring the well-being of the Serbian community
in the province. This dialogue clearly will be
worthwhile, on the condition that a constructive
position and good will be demonstrated not only by
Belgrade but also by Pristina. So far, as we see in the
Secretary-General’s report, the Kosovo authorities
demonstrate a reluctance to take part in this process.
We believe that it is necessary that the
International Court of Justice consider, objectively and
impartially, the submission of the General Assembly on
whether the unilateral declaration of Kosovo’s
independence is consistent with international law. On
16 April Russia presented to the Court a written report
reflecting Russia’s fundamental position on this issue.
Taking into account that the General Assembly’s
Fifth Committee is currently discussing the UNMIK
budget for 2009-2010, we hope that the resources that
will ultimately be allocated to the Mission in Kosovo
will prove sufficient for it to carry out its mandate and
will take into account the desires of the Serbian side.
We are certain that there is no alternative to
maintaining the Security Council’s leading role in
advancing the Kosovo process. The Council must
continue to serve as the guarantor of compliance with
international law, the United Nations Charter and the
decisions of the Council itself.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Zannier, for his briefing. We appreciate the efforts
he and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have made in
safeguarding peace and security in Kosovo and the
Balkans region.
We listened carefully to the statement by His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Jeremić. We also listened carefully to Mr. Hyseni’s
statement.
Over the last three months the security situation
in Kosovo has in general been calm, but tensions
remain in some areas, particularly in northern
Mitrovica, where a series of incidents occurred. China

14

is concerned about these developments. At the same
time, we are pleased to see that under UNMIK’s
mediation, Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs have
reached initial settlements on issues that include
construction of houses. We hope that all parties will
continue to exercise restraint, enhance their dialogue
and refrain from any rhetoric or actions that may
jeopardize peace and stability.
We have taken note of the gradual increase in the
number of voluntary returns of members of minority
communities in 2009. However, the number still lags
behind that of the same period in 2008. We appeal to
UNMIK to intensify its mediation efforts to improve
relations among ethnic communities. We urge parties
concerned to continue to create and coordinate
enabling conditions for voluntary returns of members
of minority communities.
China believes that all parties must adhere to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council.
They must also respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of countries, including Serbia. China has
always maintained that the best way to resolve the
issue of Kosovo is for the Serbian and Kosovar parties
to arrive at a mutually acceptable settlement plan
through negotiations.
The situation in Kosovo has undergone changes,
but the basis for the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) remains the same. China has taken note of the
references in the report (S/2009/300) of the SecretaryGeneral to the accelerated reconfiguration and
drawdown of UNMIK to bring its functions in line with
the new situation. We believe that the changes in
UNMIK are of a technical nature. They must not
involve the status of Kosovo or change the United
Nations position of neutrality. The issue of Kosovo
remains an important item on the Council’s agenda.
UNMIK
must
continue
to
maintain
close
communication with the parties concerned, as well as
to play a key and constructive role in duly settling the
issue of Kosovo.
We understand the desire of the European Union
to play a role in safeguarding peace and stability in the
Balkan region. We note that the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has pledged to
abide by resolution 1244 (1999) and that it recently
submitted another report on its activities. We hope that
EULEX will continue to operate under the overall

09-37195

S/PV.6144

authority of the United Nations and within the statusneutral framework of resolution 1244 (1999), support
the work of UNMIK and play an active role in
safeguarding peace and stability in the region.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, as well as
Mr. Skender Hyseni. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to thank him and the others for
their briefings.
Despite some isolated incidents and the
differences in the positions of Albanian and Serbian
Kosovars, we are pleased with the overall stability in
the security situation in Kosovo. We pay tribute to the
role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also commend the
coordination and cooperation between UNMIK and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX).
The report (S/2009/300) of the Secretary-General
includes a number of positive elements that can be
built upon to normalize the situation between
communities and achieve lasting stability of Kosovo,
beginning with the rebuilding of homes in the northern
part of Kosovo following an agreement between
Albanian and Serb citizens. Some progress has also
been made in the search for solutions to protect Serbian
heritage in Kosovo, and 26 bodies have been identified
and returned to their families.
We also note with satisfaction the efforts of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to
help returnees and reconstruct homes, including its
promise to rebuild 45 residential units by the end of the
year as part of the UNDP-managed Sustainable
Partnerships for Assistance to Returns in Kosovo. We
would also like to commend UNMIK’s support for the
reconstruction of cultural and religious heritage sites
damaged in the wake of the violence in 2004.
Despite the peaceful and positive developments
taking place in Kosovo, we continue to be concerned
that areas in the North still operate independently from
the rest of Kosovo. We are also concerned about the
ongoing divisions between the northern and other
police forces in Kosovo. In that regard, we believe it
important to encourage all citizens to take part in local
police and administration.

09-37195

UNMIK’s establishment of the Office for
Community Support and Facilitation is an important
step that we should all support. It is also important for
UNMIK to focus on minority affairs, including by
supporting the return process, monitoring human rights
and continuing to mediate among local communities.
We stress the need to increase the effectiveness of
the Human Rights Advisory Panel as a credible
instrument to address claims pertaining to violations of
human rights in the framework of UNMIK.
We hope that all parties will continue to
cooperate with EULEX in coordination with UNMIK,
pursuant to presidential statement S/PRST/2008/44 of
26 November 2008. We also hope that dialogue will
continue between Pristina and Belgrade to enforce the
ad hoc arrangement on the six common points set out
by the Secretary-General in his letter to the President
of Serbia dated 12 June 2008.
In conclusion, we call upon all parties to make
further efforts to keep the channels of constructive
cooperation open with a view to promoting peaceful
coexistence and harmony among all parties and
communities and avoiding confrontation and violence.
We would also like to emphasize the need for all
refugees to return home and to protect all internally
displaced persons and cultural and religious sites. The
issue of missing persons should not be politicized.
There must be common ground if peace and stability in
Kosovo and the Balkans are to be maintained.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome to the Council today
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia. I thank
them for their comments. I would also like to thank
Special Representative Zannier for his comprehensive
briefing and for his excellent leadership of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).
The democratic and multi-ethnic institutions of
the Republic of Kosovo have continued to mature since
Kosovo’s declaration of independence last year. We
welcome the increase in cooperation on practical
matters among Kosovo’s communities, as cited by the
Special Representative. We note the recent
appointment of an ombudsman to ensure that
Government institutions are held accountable to the
public and to guard against any abuse of authority. The
appointment by the President of Kosovo of a

15

S/PV.6144

constitutional
court
that
includes
minority
representatives is another important development, as is
the selection of new members of Kosovo’s Central
Elections Commission in preparation for Kosovo’s
upcoming municipal elections. Those will be the first
elections run by Kosovo since its independence. The
United States offers our support to Kosovo’s efforts to
ensure that they are democratic and transparent.
We also take note of the recent election of
Kosovo to the International Monetary Fund. We await
the results of the vote on Kosovo’s bid to join the
World Bank. Membership in those international
financial institutions will help Kosovo to provide
economic stability and prosperity for all its citizens
and help to integrate Kosovo’s economy into the global
financial system. All of these developments in Kosovo
are consistent with the vision of the Ahtisaari Plan. We
note that 60 States Members of the United Nations
have recognized Kosovo as an independent and
sovereign State.
I would like to address the issue of the Kosovo
Serbs. We encourage the Government of Kosovo to
continue its efforts to reach out to the Serb and other
minority communities. It is positive news that the rate
of returns has at long last begun to increase, but returns
remain at an unacceptably low level. The SecretaryGeneral documents 660 minority families, comprised
of 3,100 individuals, who have expressed interest in
returning home to Kosovo in 2009. We look forward to
realizing that potential this year, and in this regard, we
welcome Prime Minister Thaci’s restatement of
Kosovo’s commitment to returns.
For Kosovo to become a truly multi-ethnic
society, Belgrade’s cooperation is essential. We
welcome the commitment of Belgrade authorities to
cooperating with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which is now fully
deployed throughout Kosovo. We appreciate the firm
response of EULEX and the Kosovo Force to the
recent violence over the reconstruction of ethnic
Albanian homes in northern Kosovo, a response that
helps support freedom of movement, safety and
security for all, regardless of ethnicity.
We encourage Belgrade to support the integration
of Kosovo Serb communities into Kosovo’s
institutions, in particular to create conditions for
Kosovo Serbs to return to their positions in the Kosovo

16

Police, and to support other pragmatic solutions that
will improve the communities’ welfare.
Unfortunately, the Government of Serbia
continues to block goods from Kosovo, even though
UNMIK has certified twice now that Kosovo’s new
customs stamp complies with resolution 1244 (1999).
We encourage Serbia to support intraregional trade, in
keeping with its Central European Free Trade
Agreement commitments.
The
United
States
fully
supports
the
reconfiguration and downsizing of UNMIK, as outlined
in recent reports of the Secretary-General and as
reflected in the Secretary-General’s current budget
proposal. In the light of the positive developments in
Kosovo, we believe that the Secretary-General should
continue to downsize the UNMIK presence to
functions that the Government of Kosovo or
international organizations cannot perform, such as
facilitating Kosovo’s participation in regional
organizations such as the Regional Cooperation
Council and the Central European Free Trade
Agreement. Kosovo’s participation in these forums
promotes regional cooperation and growth, and is in
the entire region’s interest.
The stability of the western Balkans remains a
high priority for the United States. We strongly support
the region’s integration into European institutions and
its full participation in the Euro-Atlantic community.
Kosovo and other Balkan countries still face many
challenges, and the United States will continue to
support their progress and development.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I, too, would like to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, and the Foreign Minister of Kosovo,
Mr. Skender Hyseni, to the Chamber and to thank them
for their statements. We also welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lamberto
Zannier and thank him for his comments and his
tireless work.
Croatia welcomes the continued and steady
progress that Kosovo is making along its path of
creating a stable, secure and democratic society while
simultaneously strengthening both its economic and its
development capacities. Notwithstanding some minor
incidents, Croatia welcomes the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the overall security situation in Kosovo
is stable.

09-37195

S/PV.6144

Croatia would like to commend the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) for — as stated by the Secretary-General —
the effective and useful role it plays in mediating
between communities and promoting practical
arrangements that can benefit both Pristina and
Belgrade. We believe that this fact in itself confirms
the indispensable role that UNMIK plays in Kosovo,
particularly on issues of external relations and
international legal assistance, and we would call on all
parties to continue to cooperate with Special
Representative Zannier and his team in an effective and
efficient manner.
Croatia welcomes the full deployment on 6 April
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, to which Croatia contributes, and would like
to take this opportunity to commend its leadership and
other contributing countries for their efforts.
Finally, we want to acknowledge the efforts made
on the question of the reconstruction of cultural
property and the issue of returns. Further progress in
this field remains a question of critical importance. We
look forward to common success in the development of
a vibrant, pluralistic and democratic society in Kosovo,
strengthened by its commitment to the values of peace,
tolerance, human and minority rights, dialogue and
cooperation.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to
welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia,
and thank him for his statement. I would equally like to
welcome Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, and thank him for his statement. Moreover,
allow me to express our deep appreciation for the work
of Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and for the important contribution
he is making on a daily basis to facilitating dialogue
between all sides.
We note with satisfaction that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has successfully finalized its reconfiguration and
downsizing, as foreseen in the report of the SecretaryGeneral before us today (S/2009/300). We are
convinced that the new structure and strength of the
Mission will enable UNMIK to perform the functions
identified in the Secretary-General’s reports of June
and November 2008 (S/2008/354 and S/2008/692). We
particularly welcome the Mission’s focus on mediation

09-37195

between the communities and on support to minority
communities.
Allow me to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the outstanding performance of the personnel who
have served in UNMIK over the past 10 years.
We are particularly satisfied that the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX)
assumed its full operational capability on 6 April,
allowing the Mission to effectively perform its tasks of
monitoring, advising and mentoring the police,
customs and judiciary of Kosovo, as well as ensuring
effective responses to instances of inter-ethnic violence
or major public disturbances.
The European Union will, as it does for the rest
of Kosovo, implement its mandate in northern Kosovo
in the interests of all communities and will, in that
context, ensure an adequate presence. Austria is
currently providing 26 experts, above all in the fields
of police and the judiciary, to EULEX. Furthermore,
we will also continue to contribute to the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) with approximately 600 troops. We support
the decision by NATO, taken after consultation with
non-NATO troop-contributors to KFOR, including
Austria, to commence preparations for the transition of
KFOR to a determined presence, which also foresees a
reduction in troop numbers in several phases.
For our part, we will maintain, as I have said, our
level more or less at the present level of contribution,
which will continue to make us the biggest non-NATO
contributor to KFOR. We see the step taken by NATO
as recognition of the progress achieved in the
stabilization of Kosovo and as closely linked to the
increasing capabilities of EULEX.
In the light of the downsizing of UNMIK, we
appreciate the valuable role that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continues
to play in Kosovo in areas where UNMIK has
concluded its work or has greatly reduced its activities.
The extensive civilian field presence of the OSCE
throughout all parts of Kosovo is unparalleled and
brings unique continuity and balance to its grassroots
monitoring and capacity-building efforts. The early
warning mechanism that this monitoring provides is
highly valued, in particular at the municipal level. The
local elections foreseen for 15 November will also
highlight the indispensable support the OSCE has
maintained for nearly a decade to the developing
democratic institutions of Kosovo.

17

S/PV.6144

As we have just heard, there have been several
positive developments over the reporting period. We
particularly welcome progress in the ongoing
decentralizing process in Kosovo, which will be key to
addressing minority protection and to strengthening
local governance throughout the country. Successful
implementation clearly benefiting the minority
population, above all the Kosovo Serb community,
will, however, depend on their participation in this
process and, in particular, in the upcoming local
elections.
We are confident that with the necessary
pragmatism, solutions to contentious matters can be
found, thus taking Kosovo closer to the objective of a
multi-ethnic and peaceful society. Despite relative
stability in the past months, tensions and incidents of
violence, as in northern Mitrovica over the
reconstruction of houses by Kosovo Albanian
returnees, continue to have a destabilizing potential.
While we appreciate the well-coordinated reaction of
UNMIK, EULEX and KFOR, we want to reiterate that
lasting and peaceful solutions can only be found if all
communities engage directly both with each other and
with the international presences.
We share the Secretary-General’s observation that
the efforts of all sides, with the support of the
international community, need to continue to further
implement the practical arrangements laid out in his
report, issued in November last year (S/2008/692). We
welcome the increased contribution of EULEX in
discussions in the area of the rule of law. Impasses in
the fields of police, justice, property rights and
customs continue to hinder the normalization of daily
life, with negative impacts for both Kosovo and Serbia.
We therefore encourage both Pristina and Belgrade to
bridge their differences and reach a productive working
relationship. Recent reports warn that, owing to
political, social and economic discrimination against
smaller minorities who have inhabited Kosovo for
centuries, many of their members may be forced to
leave the country, which give us cause for concern.
We hope that the Kosovo authorities, with the
help of the international presence, will increase efforts
to translate their commitments regarding a tolerant and
multi-ethnic society into effective action so as to
facilitate the active participation of all minorities,
including the smaller ones, as I said, in all aspects of
public life. Particular attention should be paid to the
practical application of international human rights law

18

with regard to the entire territory and population.
Equally, we expect the Belgrade authorities to use their
influence in order to ensure a more positive approach
in that regard by the Kosovo Serbs.
While deploring the fact that the overall number
of voluntary minority returns remains disappointingly
low, we are encouraged by news of the recent gradual
increase in numbers. We express our hope that
Kosovo’s project for returns will prove to be effective
in creating conditions conducive to the reintegration of
minority communities.
Austria, as is well known, has consistently
supported a future for all peoples of the Western
Balkans within the European Union. In particular, we
hope that Serbia can rapidly advance on its path
towards European integration, and Belgrade knows that
it can count on the support of the Austrian Government
in that matter.
At the same time, we very much appreciate the
clear commitment by the Government of Kosovo to the
European future and the European perspective of its
country. We are convinced that that shared vision will
clearly benefit all citizens of Serbia and Kosovo and
will help them to look ahead to overcome existing
differences and allow for the necessary progress.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
information that he has shared with us today and
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, for his presence and statement. We also thank
Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement.
We have followed closely the process of
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
full deployment on the ground of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). The cooperation
achieved between UNMIK and EULEX in the areas of
justice, the rule of law and customs shows that there is
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union in promoting regional peace and
stability.
For my delegation, it is particularly important
that the parties cooperate fully with UNMIK in
fulfilling its mandate in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999), respecting the criteria of neutrality. The
obligation to fulfil the provisions of that resolution

09-37195

S/PV.6144

embodies the legal basis for attaining a lasting and
peaceful solution to the Kosovo situation and, in
general, for the stability of the Balkans.
We are concerned that, while the situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively stable, continuing
incidents of tension between Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo
Albanians in the past months demonstrate the fragility
of the regional stability and the need to encourage
inter-community dialogue and confidence-building
measures between the parties.
We believe it necessary to strengthen cooperation
between UNMIK and EULEX in order to agree on
measures to peacefully prevent and contain the
possible outbreak of inter-ethnic violence, particularly
in north Kosovo. Similarly, UNMIK needs to cooperate
more closely with the parties and with EULEX, so as
to promote concrete steps to achieve the participation
of Kosovo Serbs in the Kosovo Police, since that is one
of the issues contributing to tension in the region.
For my delegation, strengthening the rule of law
is of the greatest importance in the current situation.
We encourage UNMIK and EULEX to continue to seek
ways to work together, particularly with regard to the
legal assistance to the local authorities. Likewise, we
call on the parties and UNMIK to support and fully
cooperate with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in order to ensure due process for
the cases under its jurisdiction.
One very important issue in conflict prevention is
the reintegration of minorities, in particular the Kosovo
Serbs. However, the reality does not always help that
reintegration, which is why it is essential to promote a
strategic association among the United Nations
development agencies and programmes, the donor
community, regional organizations and the Government
of Serbia in order to undertake specific measures to
promote lasting socio-economic development in the
region to provide conditions for people’s well-being,
including opportunities for employment, access to
public services and security, while, at the same time,
encouraging the voluntary return of the refugees and
internally displaced persons.
In that regard, we welcome the fact that projects
for the return of Kosovo Serbian families and the
rebuilding of their homes are being implemented with
the help of the United Nations Development
Programme.

09-37195

We believe that inter-ethnic relations are one of
the most pressing challenges that Kosovo is facing.
UNMIK presence is vital to guarantee the protection of
the human, property and housing rights of the
minorities.
In that respect, it is important that, in the
reconfiguration of UNMIK, particular attention be paid
to strengthening the Mission component on human
rights assistance in order to increase the efficient
consideration of alleged human rights violations in the
region, and that the parties work closely with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the parties so as to outline a
comprehensive strategy for strengthening the
protection of human rights in the region.
Finally, my delegation reiterates its position as a
steadfast and consistent promoter of the principles of
justice and international law, enshrined in the Charters
of the United Nations and the International Court of
Justice, which is the top jurisdictional body for
peacefully solving disputes arising from the
interpretation of international law. In that context, we
eagerly await the advisory opinion of the Court on the
case of Kosovo requested by the General Assembly.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We too welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
thank him for his briefing. We also thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and Mr. Skender Hyseni for their briefings.
We welcome the new developments in the region
regarding the reconfiguration and downsizing of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) within the status-neutral framework
of resolution 1244 (1999). Given the challenges in
inter-ethnic relations still being faced by Kosovo, the
structure and strength of the reconfigured Mission for
the 2009 to 2010 period will ensure that the Mission is
better resourced for continuous mediation between the
communities and for increased support to minority
communities throughout Kosovo.
We are encouraged by the level of cooperation
between UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) regarding exchange of
information and coordination on issues of major
concern, and we propose that such cooperation in all
sectors should continue to be strengthened. We are also
pleased to note that EULEX has reached full
operational capacity and that it is continuing to operate

19

S/PV.6144

under the overall authority of the United Nations and
within the status-neutral framework of resolution 1244
(1999).
We acknowledge the increased expertise and
professional role of EULEX in the areas of police,
justice and customs and commend its contribution in
the area of the rule of law. There is need to ensure
proper functioning of the Central European Free Trade
Agreement mechanisms aimed at promoting economic
growth and development in the region. In that regard,
we call upon the authorities in Kosovo and Serbia to
resolve any outstanding issues regarding customs.
Although it appears that the overall security
situation in Kosovo during the reporting period
remained relatively calm, we are particularly
concerned by the series of inter-ethnic incidents of
violence that occurred in the northern Mitrovica
suburbs. We call upon both parties to exercise restraint,
mutual respect and tolerance in order to harmoniously
live together in the interest of peace. We salute the
efforts of UNMIK in coordination with EULEX and
the Kosovo Force that encouraged both sides to find a
sustainable and peaceful solution. We also commend
UNMIK for its continued mediation that eventually
broke the deadlock and brought the two sides together
to agree on a pragmatic solution.
Furthermore, we welcome the important
contribution that UNMIK, together with EULEX and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, is
making in the Working Group on Missing Persons, and
we call upon all concerned to offer continued support.
Finally, we commend UNMIK for its work and
urge the international community to continue to lend
the necessary support to enable it to acceptably execute
its role of maintaining peace and stability on the
ground.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his presence and his briefing. I also welcome Minister
Jeremić and Minister Hyseni and thank them for their
statements.
Costa Rica acknowledges the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/300). It contains important
recommendations on the functions that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) should continue to fulfil in its role as

20

mediator between the parties and in promoting rules to
benefit both communities. That was also made clear in
the reports of June and November 2008 (S/2008/354
and S/2008/692). We urge the authorities of Pristina to
continue working with the United Nations.
Costa Rica recognizes the efforts of UNMIK and
the deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) as positive measures to
strengthen political stability and the implementation
and consolidation of the rule of law to intervene to
protect and ensure respect for human rights, and to
preserve the rich cultural and religious heritage of
Kosovo.
In fully supporting the role of the United Nations
in promoting the political momentum in Kosovo, my
delegation also commends the cooperation between the
United Nations and other regional bodies. We welcome
the efforts of the European Union to advance the
European dimension in the entire Balkan region and
support the efforts to reconfigure UNMIK and
strengthen the functions of EULEX, in particular in the
consolidation of the rule of law. However, Costa Rica
is also aware of the need to adopt preventive measures
and provide the necessary guarantees to ensure that the
process will contribute to lasting regional peace and
political stability.
Costa Rica reiterates its conviction that the
civilian international presence should oversee the
transfer of authority from the provisional to the
permanent institutions of Government. My country
supports the efforts of the Kosovar State, which we
have recognized. We welcome steps to normalize
political, legal and economic relations that will
gradually promote Kosovo’s emergence as a State on
the international stage living in peaceful coexistence
with its neighbours.
In that regard, we urge all parties to cooperate in
implementing practical measures to overcome the
isolation of specific groups caused by ethnic tensions
or other reasons. As it executes its mandate, the
European Union should ensure equal rights for all the
communities of Kosovo, a process in which the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
has an important role to play in the protection of
minorities, in particular the Serbs of Kosovo.
Above and beyond the complex international
financial crisis, Kosovo is facing important challenges.
It must strengthen its young institutions, practise even-

09-37195

S/PV.6144

handedness, moderation and integrity in the application
of the rule of law, in particular — as I said before —
with regard to protecting minority. It must establish the
necessary equilibrium with its neighbours and move
towards the future with the continuing support of
Europe in order to ensure its sustainability as a State.
The European Union, with its presence in the region
and its political vision, should contribute to ensuring
common security and work to ensure commitment to
and acceptance of the new political realities on the part
of all players with direct interests in the region.
Costa Rica urges the European Union and other
international organizations to continue to support the
socio-economic development of Kosovo in order to
facilitate its national consolidation, regional integration
and full participation in the concert of nations.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their presence.
I also wish to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his statement and for the work that he and his team are
doing. We appreciate his work as the head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), in cooperation with the other
international presences, first and foremost, of course,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX).
A year ago almost to the day, Kosovo adopted its
Constitution. At that time, we called on the Kosovo
authorities to rapidly implement all the provisions of
the Constitution, which is exemplary in its adherence
to European standards and values. The new authorities
in Kosovo have honoured their commitments, in
particular by adopting several laws essential to
strengthening the rule of law and to the participation of
minorities. In particular, the Government’s strong
commitment to decentralization is a key decision in
favour of the progressive building of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo. The protection of the rights of minorities is a
priority for the European Union, which will ensure the
fulfilment of the commitments undertaken by the
authorities in that area.
Despite some outbreaks of violence fanned by
extremist elements often linked to criminal groups, the
security situation in Kosovo has been remarkably
stable in recent months. The population and all

09-37195

communities have thereby indicated
dedication to peace and stability.

their

firm

Internationally, 60 States now recognize Kosovo.
We also welcome Kosovo’s accession to membership
of the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank, a move that is essential to the economic
development of the country. Such developments will
contribute to the emergence of a new State on the
international stage and to stability throughout the
Balkans.
The deployment of EULEX was completed on
6 April. As it has progressed, the inhabitants of Kosovo
have come to see that, despite the negative propaganda
spread by certain extremist groups, the European
Mission is acting for the benefit of the entire
population and all communities.
Pursuant to the reconfiguration of the
international presence decided by the SecretaryGeneral and endorsed by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44), EULEX is now responsible for all
operational tasks in the rule of law sector that
previously fell to UNMIK. The reconfiguration is in no
way synonymous with a reduction of the international
presence in Kosovo. On the contrary, it represents a
robust step and testimony to the ongoing commitment
of the international community.
As it does for all United Nations missions, the
Security Council will have to consider the evolution of
UNMIK’s mandate. In that respect, we believe that the
proposals made by Mr. Zannier and by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2009/300) are quite
appropriate.
Acting within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) and under the overall authority of the United
Nations, EULEX works in coordination with the other
components of the international presence, in particular
UNMIK, which continues to play a useful role. I wish
to recall the importance that France attaches to the due
cooperation of the Kosovo authorities with the United
Nations.
The European Union, for its part, has followed
the dialogue launched by the Secretary-General with
all parties concerned on the reconfiguration of the
international presence. The dialogue is key to stability
in the region. We are well aware of the difficulties
involved. The profound differences between the Serb

21

S/PV.6144

and Kosovar authorities will not be settled overnight,
but that should not prevent us from seeking together,
through dialogue, practical solutions to the concrete
problems that affect the lives of all the Kosovo
communities.
We listened carefully to the statements made by
Mr. Jeremić and Mr. Hyseni. We were pleased to note
that, despite their ongoing differences, they have a
shared interest in preserving the conditions for a
common future within Europe. We therefore encourage
Belgrade and Pristina to renew direct dialogue as soon
as possible.
France particularly wishes to tell Mr. Jeremić
that, in supporting the European initiatives to
contribute to stability in the region, he will help to
establish conditions for a common future for the West
Balkans. That was the message that French President
Sarkozy conveyed to President Tadić during the latter’s
recent visit to Paris. At the same time, at a recent
meeting of its General Affairs and External Relations
Council, the European Union took another step forward
by deciding to accelerate the process of visa
liberalization for all the Balkan countries.
To Mr. Hyseni, we naturally wish to reiterate the
support expressed by our President for Prime Minister
Thaci during his visit to Paris, and to convey to him
that it is through tangible progress towards a state of
law and respect for neighbouring minorities and
through an effort to forge bonds of friendship with
Kosovo’s neighbours that his country will advance
down the road to European integration.
The European Union is fully cognizant of its
responsibilities for overcoming obstacles to a stable
and prosperous future for the West Balkans. In that
spirit, we will strive in the months to come to proceed
towards a common future for Serbs and Kosovars in
the framework of the European Union.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.
I should like to extend a warm welcome to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić
and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kosovo,
Mr. Skender Hyseni.
I would also like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
briefing. We appreciate his efforts. We would also like
to acknowledge and express our appreciation for the
past and current role of the United Nations Interim

22

Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
ensuring peace and stability in Kosovo. Of course, the
same goes for the Kosovo Force.
Sixty countries have recognized Kosovo. Turkey
was one of the first to do so. This figure also lends
clear legitimacy to the declaration of independence of
Kosovo. We are pleased to see that the overall situation
in Kosovo is stable and that the Kosovo authorities are
taking the necessary steps to consolidate their State
institutions and system. This is a process that we fully
support and to which we remain ready to further
contribute in any way we can.
In that line, we support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to
reconfigure UNMIK. In this regard, we are pleased to
see that the process is going smoothly and that we are
close to finalization. At the same time, we believe that
UNMIK still has an important role to play in Kosovo,
especially in helping to facilitate the resolution of a
number of practical but serious problems.
We are also pleased to see that there is a good
working relationship and cooperation between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We encourage both Serbia and
Kosovo to cooperate with UNMIK and EULEX.
We attach great importance to security and
stability in the Balkans and see the independence of
Kosovo in the framework of lasting peace, stability and
prosperity in the entire region. That being the case, the
support given to Kosovo in its efforts to integrate into
the international community and institutions should be
further intensified. We will do our part in that regard.
We must also underline that a democratic and
prosperous Serbia at peace with its neighbours is
crucial to regional stability and cooperation. The
international community should continue to encourage
and support Serbia in its efforts to integrate into
European and Euro-Atlantic structures. As for Turkey,
we are determined to carry forward our friendly and
mutually beneficial relations with Serbia.
Being very much a part of the Balkans, we are
committed to working with all our partners towards
ensuring a safe, stable and prosperous future for the
region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

09-37195

S/PV.6144

Mr. Skender Hyseni has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Hyseni: Cognizant of the Security Council’s
time, I wish nevertheless to respond to a number of
points made by Mr. Jeremić in an evident effort to
mislead the Council, especially when he tried to tell the
Council that the independence of Kosovo was declared
by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government —
that is, by Albanians alone.
I wish to inform the members of the Council that
the independence of the Republic of Kosovo was
declared by elected representatives of the people of
Kosovo, including by all elected representatives of
non-Albanian communities except the members of the
Serb community. All the representatives of the
Bosnian, Turkish, Egyptian, Roma and other
communities
voted
in
favour
of
Kosovo’s
independence.
With respect to the returnees, I wish to inform the
Council that the Government of the Republic of
Kosovo is vitally committed to and interested in
returning to their homes every single displaced person
and every single refugee — I emphasize, every single
one. We stand ready to provide, at whatever cost,
conditions for returning every single citizen of ours.
However, I have to point out that the kind of
game that is being played with figures is not helpful.
Two hundred thousand Kosovo Serbs, said Minister
Jeremić, are still displaced. I have to repeat yet again
that according to the last census — which was
conducted by the Serbian-imposed authority in
Kosovo — the largest number of Serbs ever living in
Kosovo was 195,000. Presently, in Kosovo 135,000
Serbs live. I do not know where that 200,000 figure is
found.
I wish to again inform the Council that the
Republic of Serbia — the Government in Belgrade —
is not helping the returns. The Government in Belgrade
is encouraging the refugees from Kosovo in Serbia not
to return so that the Government in Belgrade could
have an alibi to tell to respectable forums such as this
one that Kosovars are not doing what they should be
doing.
We have no reason whatsoever to fear the
returnees — quite the opposite. As I said earlier, my
President, Prime Minister, all members of the
Government and ministers are doing their utmost to

09-37195

make sure that all the conditions are there. Ultimately,
it is impossible to force — and we do not want to
force — any single individual to do what he or she is
not willing to do.
Kosovo is an independent country, and Kosovo
will never again seek authorization from Belgrade to
do anything whatsoever. That should be clear once and
for all. But that should not prevent us from working
together. We are willing to work with Belgrade to
improve the situation of our Kosovo Serbs, if that is
what it takes to have our Kosovo Serbs work with us,
because we are willing to deliver on our commitments
to improve their lives. We are not willing to make use
of unfortunate destinies of individuals in the Serb
community for any sort of political sport, because we
do not need that.
Again, we have an unspeakable game with
figures, close to science fiction — 40,000 claims. The
Kosovo Property Agency is going to consider carefully
every single claim. Property will be restored to every
single citizen, whether Serb or Albanian, or whatever
ethnic background. But I have to just invite the
Council’s attention to the damage that this kind of
game with figures may cause, great damage.
Kosovo is a single customs entity and is going to
remain as such. Kosovo is also a single judicial entity.
Regarding the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the Regional Cooperation Council and other
regional mechanisms, Kosovo is very much interested
in being part of those initiatives. Kosovo is insisting
firmly on being part of regional efforts to fight
organized crime and cross-border criminal activity and
to be part of every single other regional initiative that
would benefit the peoples and States all over the
region.
The Kosovo Security Force is not an illegal
paramilitary institution. It was established on the basis
of recommendations of a Nobel Peace Prize winner,
Marti Ahtisaari. I do not think a Nobel Peace Prize
winner would ever suggest the establishment of an
illegal paramilitary criminal force. I tell Mr. Jeremić
that he should never fear the Kosovo Security Force.
What he should fear is the still-too-many supporters of
Milosević in the military and police structures in
Serbia. That is what Mr. Jeremić should fear, not the
Kosovo Security Force.

23

S/PV.6144

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić to make a further
statement.

any steps towards working with them, probably has to
do with the way they have been treated in the past ten
years.

Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I really want to direct the
attention of the Council briefly to the source of the
figures that were mentioned in the intervention of
Serbia: 206,000 is the official number of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It
is really unbelievable that here in this building
somebody is doubting the official numbers of the
UNHCR. That is the number of this Organization when
it comes to the number of Serb internally displaced
persons; it is not the number of the Serbian
Government.

We do want to help everybody. We want to fight
organized crime. I think that regional efforts should be
made to fight organized crime, first and foremost in the
province of Kosovo. I am really not breaking any news
to anybody here in the Council when I say that Kosovo
is the hub of organized crime, not just for the Western
Balkans but for all of Europe. There is a lot of work to
be done there in order to combat organized crime.
Serbia wants to work with the international community
in order to curb organized crime in the province.

As to the 40,000 unresolved claims for illegally
seized property, that is the official number of the
Kosovo Property Agency during the time it operated
under UNMIK. The 40,000 claims are waiting to be
processed; the people have not heard back. These
numbers are quoted by international sources.
We do really want to find ways of working
together. It is not Serbia that fears this Kosovo Security
Force; it cannot fear the Kosovo Security Force. It is
the citizens of Serbia who live in the province who fear
the Kosovo Security Force; that is their position. So I
believe we need to do more to try to rebuild the trust of
those people who have been living under those
conditions since 1999. The reason why the do not trust
any Pristina institutions, and why they are not taking

24

Having said all that, I want to emphasize our
intention to work constructively together with
everybody in order to find solutions to practical
problems on the ground, for the sake of the citizens of
the province. We stand behind these remarks and look
forward to a more hopeful future — a future in which
all United Nations Member States of the Western
Balkans become member States of the European
Union.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

09-37195
