V. Resolatiom 1dopted on the reports of tbe Second Commlttee

40/211. Operational actlvities for development
The General Assembly,
ReaJfirming the valídity of its resolution 38/ l 71 of 19
December 1983 on the comprebensive po!icy review of
operational activíties for development,
Reaffirming a/so its resolution 39/220 of 18 December
1984 on financing of operational activíties for development, as well as its resolution 32/197 of 20 December
1977 on tbe restructuring of tbe economic and social sectors oftbe United Nations,
Reaffirming further its resolutions 2688 (XXV) of 11
December 1970 on the capacity of the United Nations
development system and 3405 (XXX) of 28 November
1975 on new dimensions in technical co-operation,
Reaffirming the exclusive responsibility of tbe Govemment of the recipient country in formulating its national
development plan, priorities and objectives, as set out in
the consensus contained in the annex to resolution 2688
(XXV), and emphasizing that the integration ofthe operational activíties of the United Nations system with
national programmes would enhance the impact and relevance of those activíties,
ReaJfirming a/so the responsibility of developing
countries to co-ordinate development co-operation, including the determination of local co-ordination arrangements,
Reaffirming further tbe responsibilities of the resident
co-ordinators on behalf of the United Nations system witb
respect to co-ordination of operational activíties carried
out by the United Nations system at the country Ievel in
accordance with their mandate,
Reaffirming the important contribution of operational
activities for development ofthe United Nations system in
support ofthe overa.ll economic and social development of
developing countries,
Reiterating its desire for a coherent and co-ordinated
United Nations system in tbe field ofoperational activities
for .development and for effective leadership by the Director-General for Development and Intemational Economíc
Co-operation in the co-ordination of the various components oftbe United Nations system and in exercising overall co-ordination witbin the system, as set forth in resolution 32/197, as well as its cal! for full co-operation with the
Director-General by all organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system,
Noting the steps being taken by the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Fund for
Population Activíties, tbe United Nations Children's Fund
and the World Food Programme, through the joint consultative group on policy to enhance tbeir collaboration in
programming and implementation,
Welcoming the decisions of the goveming bodies of the
relevant United Nations organizations to strengthen their
efforts in response to the emergency situation in Africa,
and welcoming the co-ordinated response of the United
Nations organizations in support of relief operations in
Africa and tbe co-ordination of such assistance through
the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in
Africa, as well as the related arrangements at the country
leve),
Recognizing, in this regard, the need for additional
financia! resources to meet the urgent development needs
of African countries,
Emphasizing the need for a significant, continuous and
real increase in resources for operational activíties to meet
l 25 See NCONF.132/SR. I to 3 and corrigendum.
126 N40/698 and Corr. 1, annex.

171

the growing requirements for development of the developing countries, in particular the least developed countries,
Expressing its appreciation to those Govemments of
botb developed and developing countries that, at the 1985
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities, 125 announced increased contributíons for operational activities for development for the year 1986, as
well as to tbose Govemments that have consistently maintained their contributions at a high level,
Having examined the report ofthe Director-General for
Development and Intemational Economic Co-operation
on operational activities for development of the United
Nations system, 126
l. Requests the Director-General for Development and
Intemational Economic Co-operation, within a general
framework of broad objectives of operational activities in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/197, to
include tbe following in his report for the 1986 comprehensive policy review, in addition to tbe requests contained in General Assembly resolution 38/ 171 and the
issues identified in paragraph 3 of the report of the Director-General for 1985 126 and to make recommendations, as
appropriate, thereon:
(a) Measures to strengthen tbe existing mechanisms
within the United Nations system, with a view to furthering the coherence and co-ordination of operational activities;
(b) An analysis ofthe relationship between the increasing responsibílities of the United Nations Development
Programme in the area of co-ordination and its essential
role in the provision of technical co-operation;
(e) An analysis of changing requirements for technical
co-operation through multilateral channels and the
responsiveness of the United Nations system to them;
(d) Further analysis of programme delivery and
administrative and support costs;
(e) Developrnents regarding joint technical co-operation needs assessments;
(j) Steps taken by United Nations organizations
engaged in operational activities to promote tbe participation of women in development;
(g) An analysis of the response of the United Nations
system in assisting developing countries in the strengthening oftbeir co-ordination capacity;
(h) Actions taken to increase programme effectiveness
through, ínter alia, evaluation;
(1) Efforts undertaken to expand the geographical distribution of the sources of supply, including in underutilized donor and developing countries, for the operational
activities of the United Nations system;
2. Emphasizes the importance of the round-table
country review process and other mechanisms for co-ordination at the country leve) in facilitating the effective
implementation of the development programmes in the
countries concemed;
3. Takes note of the report of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Development Programme for the
year 1985 127 and the decisions contained therein;
4. Reaffirms the central funding role of the United
Nations Development Programme in the field of tecbnical
co-operation for development;
5. Ca/Is upan ali States to make every effort to attain
tbe planned funding levels for operational activities for
development by the various organizations of the United
Nations system, and urges the successful completion ofthe
127 Official Records ofthe Econornic and Social Cou!IC'il, 1985, Supplement
No. ll{E/1985/32 andCorr.l).

General Assembly-Fortieth Sesslon

172

current negotiations on the repleníshment of the IntemationaL Fund for Agricultural Development to enable it to
maintaín its effective contribution to agricultura! and food
development, as well as the early consideration and completion of the eighth repleníshment of the lnternational
Development Association at an adequate leve!;
6. Expresses its deep concern about the shortfall of
resources of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities and the impact on its ability to carry out its
planned programmes, and urges ali countries to continue
and increase their support for the Fund;
7. Reques1s the Director-General for Development and
Intemational Economic Co-operatíon to report on the
results of the efforts to in crease collaboration between the
Department of Technical Co-operation for Development
and the United Nations Development Programme;
8. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in discharging íts responsibílitíes as defined in the annex to General Assembly resolution 32/ l 97, to assist the Assembly in
establishing overall strategíes, policies and priorities for
the system as a whole in respect of operational activities,
and to formulate suggestions and recommendations at the
time of its consideration of the 1986 comprehensive policy
review;
9. Invites the goveming bodies of the organizations of
the United Nations system, where possible, to provide the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular sessíon
of 1986 and the General Assembly at its forty-first session
at the time of the 1986 comprehensive policy review of
operational actívíties, theír views on the system-wide policy issues affecting operational activities identified by the
Assembly in its resolution 38/17 l and in the present resolution, and also invites the organizations of the United
Nations system to co-operate with the Director-General
for Development and Intemational Economic Co-operation in the preparation of his report for that review.

I 20th p/enary meeting
17 December 1985
40/212. lnternational Volunteer Day for Economic
and Social Development
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme on the United
Natíons Volunteers prog.ramme, 128 and the relevant decision of the Goveming Council, 129
Considering that volunteer service, including that of the
United Nations Volunteers, is making an important contribution to socio-economic development activities,
Recognizing the desirabilíty of stimulating the work of
ali volunteers both in the field and in organizatíons multilateral, bilateral or national, non-govemmental or
govemment-supported - and of giving encouragement to
those volunteers, many ofwhom engage in volunteer service at considerable personal sacrifice,
1. Invites Governments to observe annually, on 5
December, an Intemational Volunteer Day for Economic
and Social Development, and urges them to take measures
to heighten awareness of the important contribution of
volunteer service, thereby stimulating more people in al!
walks of lile to otfer their services as volunteers, both at
home and abroad;
2. Invites also specialízed agencies, other organizations
of the United Natíons system and non-govemmental
128 DP, J 985,44, chap. lJ
1 21 (J{/ic,,1/ Records ojthe Economic and Saeta/ ( ó,mcil,

No I J (FJl985i32 and Corr. l ). anne, l. decision 85/23.

1985, Supp/emem

organizations that provide, are affiliated with or benefit
from volunteer service to undertake and promote activíties to stimulate greater awareness of the contribution to
their work made by volunteers;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote world-wide publicity on the ímportant role ofvolunteer service.

120th p/enary meeting
17 December 1985
40/213. Role of qualified national personnel in the
social and economic development of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolutions 33/135 of 19 December
1978, 35/80 of5 December 1980, 37/228 of20 December
1982 and 39/219 of l 8 December 1984 on the role of
qualified national personnel in the social and economic
development of developing countries,
Reca/lingíts resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VO of
1 May 1974, containíng the Declaration and the Prog.ramme of Action on the Establishment of a New lntemational Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States,
Desiríng to promote ful! implementation of the provisions of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade conceming
the important role of qualified national personnel in the
achievement of the development goals of the developing
countries, 130
Reaffirming the crucial role of human resources in the
socio-economic development process of developing
countries,
Taking into account the increasing importance of
United Nations activities in the field of human resources
development as they are envisaged in future years,
Recognizing that the training of qualified national personnel is an important and integral part of human
resources development,
1. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the role of qualified national personnel in the social and
economic development of developing countries; 131
2. Reajfirms the importance of implementing the provisions of its resolution 37/228;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor the further implementation of its resolution 39/219;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to take into
account the need for an integrated and multidisciplinary
approach to ali aspects of human resources development,
in particular the training of qualified national personnel, in
the prog.rammes of work of the United Nations and the
organizations of íts system;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to contínue his consultations with the Govemments of Member States, in
accordance with paragraph 2 ofresolution 39/219, on the
role of qualified national personnel in the social and economic development of developíng countries, and to submit a progress report, through the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
130 Resolution 35156, annex, para. 47.
IJI A/40/549 and Add.l.
