Re1olutions adopted on the reporta of the Second Committee

2. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
report, to consult Member States, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency and
other international organizations concerned, ancl invites
them to co-operate with the Secretary-General in carrying out the task entrusted to him under the present
resolution ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider the report of the Secretary-General at one of
its 1970 sessions and to transmit the report with its
comments to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth
session.
1751st plenary meeting.
20 December 1968.

2459 (XXIII). The role of the co-operative
movement in economic and 1ocial development
The General Assembl)',
Taking into consideration the necessity of mobilizing
ali means aimed at the economic and social development
of individual countries, and in particular developing
countries,
Recognizing the important role of the co-operative
movement in the development of various fields of production and distribution, including agriculture, animal
husbandry, fisheries, manufacturing, housing, credit
institutions, education and health services,
Recognizing that the promotion of the co-operative
movement in accordance with local needs could contribute to the implementation of the goals of the Second
United Nations Development Decade,
Recognizing also that a lack of skilled and experienced personnel is at present one of the most important
obstacles to the development of the co-operative movement in developing countries,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider. in connexion with the preparatio1ts for the
Seconcl United Nations Development Decacle, the question of the role of the co-operative movement in economic ancl social clevelopment;
2. Invites Member States that have traclitions ancl
experience in that regarcl to provicle increasing help,
including staff teaching, to cleveloping countries which
request it in the fielcl of co-operative movement;
3. Requests the International Labour Organisation,
other specia!ized agencies con cerned ancl the I nternational Co-operative Alliance to render increasecl
assistance within their possihilities in the realization of
the objectives of the present resolution.
1751st plenary •meetino.
20 Deccmber 1968.

2460 (XXIII). Human resources for development
The General Assembly.
RecaJ!ing Economic ancl Social Council resolution
1353 (XLV) of 2 August 1968, in whid1 the Council
recognized the great contribution that the cnthusiasm
and energy of youth everywhere and the¡r concern for
peace ancl justice can make to the realization of the
ideals ancl purposes of the United :t\'ations. in particular
with regard to economic ancl social clevelopment ancl
human rights,

SS

Recalling also Commission far Social Development
resolution 1 (XIX) of 19 February 1968,47 in which
the Commission, inter alia, recommended that high
priority should be given to proposals to promote ways
of enlisting popular participation in development and to
involve more actively ali groups of the population,
Convinced that the Unitecl Nations could respond
imaginatively to the desire of individuals-and in
particular of youth, irrespective of country. class, race,
religion, sex, age, economic leve! ar social status-to
dedícate a certain period of their lives to the cause
of clevelopment, ancl could offer them a positive means
of translating their concern far their fellow-men into an
effective force far economic and social progress throughout the world,
Requests the Economic and Social Council to study
the feasihility of creating an international corps of volunteers far clevelop.ment and to include in its annual
report to the General Assemhly at its twenty-fourth
session, if possible, appropriate conclusions ancl recommenclations cleriving from its stucly.
1751st plenary meeting.
20 December 1968.

2461 (XXIII). lnternational monetary reform
The General Assemóly.
Recalling its resolution 2208 (XXI) of 17 December
1966 entitled "International monetary reform" in which,
ínter alia, it recognized the need for a reform of the
international monetary system that would 11111ke it more
responsive to the requirements of the economic growth
of both clevelopecl and developing countries,
H' clcoming the agreement reached during the 1967
annual meeting of the Board of Governors of the International Monetary Fund on the establishment in the
Fund of a new facility basecl on special drawing rights
to meet the need, as and when it arises. far a supplement to existing reserve assets,
:Voti11g decision 32 (II) taken on 28 :March 1968 by
the l! nited N ations Conference on Tracle and Development at its seconcl session, 48
Ta!:i11ff inln ,,ao1111t the report of the Executive Directors oi t!,
,ternational l\fonetary FuncP 9 containing
the propo.,c ! amenclment of the Fund's Articles of
Agreement, which estahlished the special drawing rights
facility ancl introcluce<l certain changes in thc Fund's
rules and practices,
Calls upo11 the Governments of the States memhers
of the International :'.\Ionetary Funcl to take the necessary steps for the early ratification ancl activation of the
special clrawing rights facility, which is intended to
improve the functioning of the worlcl economy, including. inter afia, the pro\'ision of additional resources to
cleveloping conntries.
1751st plenar>' mectin,(f.
20 Dccrn,lier 1968.
47 See Officia/ Records of the Eco11omic and Social Co1mcil,
Forty-fourth Scssion, S11pp/ement No. 5 (E/4467), para. 51.
4 8 Sce Proceedings of the United Nations C onfcrcnct on
Tmde and Deve/opment, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.l
and Add.1, Report and Annexes (United Natíons publication,

Sales No.: E.68.II.D.14), p. 43.
40 International Monetary Fund, A111111a/ Reporl, 1968 (Washington, D.C.); transmítted by a note of the Secretary-Gcneral
(E/4596).
