S/PV.7500

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7500th meeting

Wednesday, 5 August 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Meek
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2015/576)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-24500 (E)
*1524500*

S/PV.7500

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Council for the month of August, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay special tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Gerard van
Bohemen, Permanent Representative of New Zealand,
for his service as President of the Council for the month
of July. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Van
Bohemen and his delegation for the great diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2015/576)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Babacar Gaye,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
and Mr. Abderrazzak Laassel, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Morocco and representative of the
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/576, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gaye.
Mr. Gaye (spoke in French): I should like to
express my deep respect to the Council and thank it for
its condolences

2/5

05/08/2015

following the demise on 2 August of a Cameroonian
peacekeeper from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
The situation in the Central African Republic has,
since the previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/227), experienced positive developments
marked by the progress we have seen in the political
process, namely with respect to the Bangui Forum.
That political progress, combined with the deployment
of MINUSCA in almost 40 locations, has contributed
to an improvement in the security situation, which
nonetheless remains fragile. This improvement has
allowed for the return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and the resumption of economic activity. These
returns took place in locations where MINUSCA is
deployed. However, many parts of the territory remain
affected by attacks by armed groups. MINUSCA
is frequently informed about actions involving
harassment, racketeering, arbitrary detention and
serious violations of human rights, such as the inhuman
treatment inflicted in cases of suspected witchcraft.
In the western part of the country, the recent
increase in the number of violent incidents on the main
road connecting Bangui to Cameroon is worrisome.
Since the month of May, three peacekeepers have been
injured in that area, one severely, and, on 18 July, armed
men shot at a World Food Programme vehicle that was
being escorted by MINUSCA, killing a Cameroonian
driver.
The strengthening of MINUSCA’s presence
through the deployment of force reserve units and
actions targeted against the alleged perpetrators of
those incidents have made it possible to avert the
strikes envisaged by the transportation union. Also in
the western sector, I welcome the fact that the efforts of
the entire United Nations family in the Central African
Republic have led to the release of 91 Fulani Muslims
who were being held against their will in villages in the
Yaloke region.
In the central sector, intercommunal tensions
among ex-Séléka factions and anti-balaka groups in
the Bambari and Kaga Bandoro areas continue to
pose threats in terms of the protection of the civilian
population. The violence has nevertheless decreased
in the Bambari sector, where the appeals made by the
Head of State of the Transition during her recent visit to
that city should contribute to the further return of IDPs
in certain areas of the city.
15-24500

05/08/2015

The situation in the Central African Republic

(spoke in English)
In the eastern part of the Central African Republic,
ex-Séléka continue to have a significant military
presence. Although they pose only a minor security
threat, MINUSCA is exercising its extension of
State authority mandate to end their illegal taxation
practices. In addition, the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) continues to operate in south-eastern Central
African Republic, extorting food and other means of
survival. MINUSCA is establishing three temporary
operating bases in this LRA-affected area to improve
its protection-of-civilians effort and further limit the
LRA’s ability to operate.
Finally, on 15 June, forces of the Central African
Republic and the Sudan operating under the tripartite
military force arrived unannounced in Birao, an eastern
town with a heavy ex-Séléka presence. Thanks to the
proactive MINUSCA forces on the ground, an armed
clash was averted, notably during the withdrawal of the
tripartite military force elements. It is worth noting that
the tripartite force does not benefit from an exception
under the United Nations sanctions regime for the
Central African Republic.
Security is gradually improving in Bangui, where
signs of normal life lend a sense of confidence and
gradual returns from the airport camp for internally
displaced persons to other areas of the city indicate a
positive but fragile trend. The anti-Balaka stronghold
of Boy-Rabe and the Muslim-dominated PK5 remain
hotspots in the capital city. MINUSCA is using a robust
approach to restore the rule of law in both areas, as
demonstrated by the search-and-arrest operation that
took place in PK5 three days ago.
MINUSCA works closely with humanitarian
actors through its protection-of-civilians strategy and
within the framework of its senior management group
(Protection), where military and police deployment
locations are regularly adjusted to better protect
civilians and support humanitarian action. Despite
the positive steps forward, the humanitarian situation
remains a significant concern. More than 2.7 million
people require assistance, some 450,000 are still
refugees, and close to 400,000 citizens of the Central
African Republic are displaced inside the country.
However, only 30 per cent of the humanitarian appeal
has been funded. Against this background, I urge
Member States to sustain the positive developments in
the country by responding to the humanitarian appeal.

S/PV.7500

At the political level, the main success of the
Bangui Forum — which was remarkably led by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa, Mr. Bathily, and the Central Africans
authorities — is the spirit of dialogue and inclusivity
and the sense that the good of the country eventually
prevailed. Against this background, the recent vote
of the National Transitional Council to deprive the
refugees of their right to vote represents an alarming
step backwards and a reminder that more effort should
be focused on reconciliation.
On 25 May, the Economic Community of Central
African States announced its decision to consider
positively an extension of the political transition in
the Central African Republic until the end of 2015.
Shortly thereafter, the authorities of the Central
African Republic announced the electoral calendar:
a constitutional referendum on 4 October, the first
round of presidential and legislative elections on
18 October, and a second round on 22 November. In the
meantime, 478,000 voters have registered, primarily
in Bangui, and the process is getting under way in the
rest of the country. The restoration of State authority
and the electoral process are being buttressed by the
deployment of all 16 prefects and 71 sub-prefects,
who have benefitted from transport, training and
administrative kits provided by MINUSCA and
international partners. Although the electoral budget
has been reduced by 18 per cent, an $11-million funding
gap remains. I call upon international donors to make
additional commitments to this critical element of the
peace process.
MINUSCA continues to use its urgent temporary
measures mandate to arrest spoilers where the State
lacks the capacity to do so. In that regard, I also welcome
the Transitional Authority’s decision to establish the
Special Criminal Court to investigate serious crimes
committed since 1 January 2003. I call upon donors
to support the Court with financial donations and the
secondment of international magistrates.
Despite the availability of funds and progress
initiating the pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR)of the ex-Séléka in Bangui, we have
yet to regroup and disarm the combatants throughout
the country. Indeed, most of the signatories would like
to respect their commitment under the DDR agreement,
but recent political developments have raised doubts,
in particular among the ex-Séléka. In the meantime,
MINUSCA is working closely with the transitional

15-245003/5

S/PV.7500

The situation in the Central African Republic

authorities to move the process forward in order to
establish a situation conducive to calm and transparent
elections.
(spoke in French)
The Central African Republic is at a crossroads.
The next steps will be difficult because they will
require leaders to surpass themselves, forgiveness from
the people and justice for the benefit of all. I thank the
donors that have supported the process, including those
that made commitments at the Brussels conference on
26 May. I welcome in particular the contribution by the
Peacebuilding Fund $10 million that will be allocated
to priorities identified at the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation.
The international community has fulfilled much of
its moral obligations to the Central African Republic,
including through the deployment of African, French
and European forces and, since September, United
Nations peacekeepers. Today, the stabilization of the
Central African Republic will require a multifaceted
support so as to open a new page of the history of that
country through free and transparent elections open
to all. We have lit the flame of hope; it is our moral
responsibility to prevent it from going out.
The President: I thank Mr. Gaye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Laassel.
Mr. Laassel (spoke in French): I would like
first to thank congratulate you, Madam, on Nigeria’s
accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month, and to thank you for the invitation extended to
Ambassador Omar Hilale, Permanent Representative of
the Kingdom of Morocco and Chairman of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Ambassador Hilale has asked me to
convey his regrets for not being able to attend today’s
briefing. I am honoured to represent him this morning
and to express, on behalf of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
strong commitment of its members to continuing to
work closely with the Council.
I also take this opportunity to greet the Special
Representative of the Secretary General in the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Babacar
Gaye. I convey the warm regards of Ambassador
Omar Hilale, who thanks him once more for his warm

4/5

05/08/2015

welcome to Bangui at his most recent visit. We have
followed with interest Mr. Gaye’s briefing, which
highlights the issues and challenges facing the Central
African Republic at a crucial moment for its future and
its history.
As is pointed out in the report of the Chairman
of the configuration following his visit to Bangui,
which has been transmitted to Council members, the
current period is critical for the country’s future. All
interlocutors expressed their desire to move on and are
aware of the opportunity that is offered to them through
the support of the international community. It is time
for the Central African Republic to enjoy its many
treasures. It is time to silence the guns forever and yo
intensify efforts to build a strong and stable State, with
institutions capable of meeting the basic needs of all its
citizens.
The Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission welcomes the significant
progress that has been made in recent months thanks
to the combined efforts of the transitional authorities,
MINUSCA and the United Nations Development
Programme. Among these improvements, we note the
launch of the electoral process and the redeployment
of State authority. The organization of the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation was also a crucial
step in the political transition process. I pay tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa, Mr. Bathily, for his role in the success
that event. In that regard, we stress the importance
for all active forces of the nation to demonstrate their
continued and absolute commitment to resuming the
path towards reconciliation and peace, in accordance
with the agreements signed at the conclusion of the
Forum.
As the country prepares to vote in a constitutional
referendum and national elections, all political actors
and civil society must ensure that these deadlines are
met place in a free and inclusive manner and in a secure
environment. All these conditions are sine qua non for
the credibility and legitimacy of the process, and so
that the State in all its forms can assert its authority to
the people.
In that regard, the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
solemnly calls on all Central African political actors
to respect the Transitional Charter. Indeed, the country
must take this opportunity to move forward and find

15-24500

05/08/2015

The situation in the Central African Republic

solutions to all its afflictions. It is time to set aside
differences that tear at the social fabric, and to build
the future on a sound basis, characterized by trust and
cooperation. The agreements signed at the Bangui
Forum, including the Republican pact for peace and
the agreement on disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation (DDRR), allow us to see
more clearly the future and give impetus towards the
conclusion of the transitional period.
However, we are all aware that the success of the
transition is not an end in itself. We must now start
thinking about how to identify ways to support the new
authorities so that they can meet the challenges that will
following this period. In a country where more than
half of the population still depends on international
humanitarian aid and where the security situation has
been slow to stabilize, it is unfortunately still difficult
to have a clear picture of the short term.
Once the transition is complete, the configuration is
committed to supporting the new national authorities in
the implementation of a peacebuilding strategy for the
medium and long terms, in close cooperation with all
international partners of the Central African Republic.
Prior to that, it is essential that the preliminary steps be
completed successfully. As highlighted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary General, programmes
related to the DDRR phase will require significant
funding. Also, no meaningful development can be
achieved while the humanitarian and refugee situation
remains precarious and underfunded. The support
of the international community remains essential to
overcome all those challenges.
On his return from Bangui, the Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration began an awarenessraising campaign in New York, mainly about the deficit
in the budget for the elections. In collaboration with
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
partners, the configuration held a meeting to raise
awareness among the members of the configuration
on this matter. The Chair also invited several Member
States not members of the configuration, given their
interest in the issue. To date, nearly $10 million is still
needed to finance the budget for the elections. We hope
that new donations will be announced in the coming
days to ensure that elections can be held in the required
conditions of transparency, inclusiveness and safety.

S/PV.7500

As we heard earlier, the re-establishment of the
judiciary system and the setting up of the Special
Criminal Court remain a priority for the country.
The problem of impunity has been part of all of the
meetings that the Chair of the configuration has held
with the representatives of civil society. In that regard,
following the participation of the Chair in a meeting
with the Minister of Justice organized by the Permanent
Mission of the Central African Republic on 27 May, it
was decided to establish a reference group on the rule of
law and the Special Criminal Court. The group, which
is a flexible and informal arrangement, is intended to
inform all interested delegations on the progress in
strengthening the rule of law and on the preparations
for the establishment of the Special Criminal Court.
I take this opportunity to welcome the holding
of the eighth meeting of the International Contact
Group, which took place on 27 July at Addis Ababa. I
also welcome the meeting’s conclusions, including on
refugee voting and respect for the ineligibility clause.
We would like to pay tribute to the countries and
leaders of the region for their commitment and support,
especially to His Excellency President Denis Sassou
Nguesso, international Nediator for the Central African
crisis, as well as to Gabon, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Chad, which are hosting more 400,000
thousands refugees from the Central African Republic.
The mobilization of the Economic Community of
Central African States has been crucial in ensuring the
region’s ongoing role, which is essentialto supporting
the country. I must also pay tribute to the tireless efforts
of Mr. Gaye and his team, who work assiduously for
the return of peace and stability in the Central African
Republic.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the full readiness
of the configuration to continue working closely with
MINUSCA, the different parts of the Secretariat, the
transitional authorities and all national and international
partners of the Central African Republic in order to get
the country on the road to peace and stability, for the
benefit of all Central Africans.
The President: I thank Mr. Laassel for his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

15-245005/5
