Vil.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Comm_it_te_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of the Territory to the enjoymcnt of
their natural resources by taking effective measures to
ensure their right to own and dispose of those resourccs
and to establish and maintain control oftheir future development;
9. Urges the specialized agencies and othcr organizations of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank. to
take ali the necessary measures to accelerate progress in
the social and economic life of the Cayman !stands;
10. Notes the continuing assistance provided to the
Territory by the United Nations Development Programme;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the Cayman !stands at an appropriatc
time should be kept under review;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the Cayman
Islands atan appropriate time and in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
86th p/enary meeting
7 Decemher 1983

38/46. Question of Montserrat
The General Assemb/y,
Having considered the question of Montserrat,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 17
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling a/so its resolution 37/27 of 23 November
1982 on the question of Montserrat,
Recalling the dispatch, in I 975 and I 982, of United
Nations visiting missions to the Territory,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power, 18 in which he said that the
policy of bis Government was to respect the wishes of the
people ofthe Territory in determining their future political
status,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering
Power for the economic and social development of the
Territory,
Noting that during the period under review the economy
of Montserrat grew in real terms and that in recent years
no budgetary grant-in-aid from the administering Power
has been considered necessary to balance the regular
budget of the Territory,
Noting that an in-service review ofthe organization and
training needs of the public service was undertaken in
1982 and that priority would be given to the establishment
of a civil service training centre,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations to
help the people ofMontserrat to realize their aspirations in
accordance with the objectives set forth in the Declaration,
17 !bid., chaps. llI and XXII.
18 !bid., Thirty-eighth Snsion. Fourth Co1111111/ttc. 11 th meeting, paras. ')16.

227

NotinK the assistancc being rendered by those organizations ofthe United Nations system operating in the Territory.
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtuc of its isolation. small size. limited resources and
lack of infrastructure,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effcctive means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories visited,
1. Approves the chapter of thc report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Montserrat; 14
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people ?f
Montserrat to self-determination and independence m
conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960;
3. Reiteratcs the view that such factors as territorial
size. geographical Iocation, size of population and Iimited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people ofthc Territory oftheir inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to Montserrat;
4. Notes with apprcciation the continued participation
of thc administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee, which enables it to conduct a more meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory with a
view to accelerating the process of decolonization for the
purpose of the full implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reitcrates that it is the responsibility ofthe administering Power to create such conditions in Montserrat as
will enable its people to exercise freely and without interference their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as well as ali other relevant resolutions
of the Assembly;
6. Reafjirms that it is ultimately for the people of
Montserrat themselves to determine their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration and
reiterates its call upon the administering Power to launch.
in co-operation with the territorial Government, programmes of política! education so that the people of Montserrat
may be fully informed of the options available to them in
the exercise of their right to self-determination and inde-pendence;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to continue, in
co-operation with the territorial Government, to
strengthen the economy and to increase its assistance to
programmes of diversification;
8. Takes note of the growth of the manufacturing, construction and tourist industries and urges the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Govemment, to intensify the development of other sectors of the
economy, in particular agriculture, Iivestock and fisheries,
for the benefit of the people of the Territory;
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to continue to take effective
measures to safeguard, guarantee and ensure the rights of
the people of Montserrat to own and dispose of their natural resources and to establish and maintain control oftheir
future development;
14 lhul. Thirt_1•-e1ghth Ses.11011. Supplemenr No . .?3 (A/38/23). chap. XXII.

228

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

10. Also urges the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to
render the assistance necessary for the localization of the
civil service, particularly at senior levels;
11. Takes note of the continued participation of the
Territory in the work of the Caribbean Group for Cooperation and Economic Development, as well as such
regional organizations as the Caribbean Community and
the Caribbean Development Bank, and calls upon the
organizations of the United Nations system, as well as
donor Governments and regional organizations, to intensify their efforts to accelerate progress in the economic and
social life of the Territory;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to
Montserrat at an appropriate time and in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
86th plenary meeting
7 December I 983

38/47. Question of the Turks and Caicos Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question ofthc Turks and Caicos
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resolutions and decisions ofthe United Nations relating to
the Turks and Caicos Islands,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to the Territory, 18 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands in
determining the future constitutional status of the Territory, and bearing in mind the importance of fostering an
awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting with appreciation the participation of the
administering Power in the work of the Special Committee
in regard to the Turks and Caicos Islands, thereby enabling
it to conduct a more meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability and to develop a wider economic base for the Territory,
Recal/ing all relevant resolutions of the United Nations
relating to military bases and installations in colonial and
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the assistance rendered by the United Nations
Development Programme in the development of the Territory and welcoming the attendance of a delegation from
the Turks and Caicos Islands at the Fifth Annual Confer20 l hid.. chaps. 111- V and X XI 11.

ence of the Caribbean Group for Co-operation and Economic Development, held under the auspices ofthe World
Bank,
Noting the arrangements made for university training
abroad and for vocational training in the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the willingness ofthe administering Power to receive visiting missions in the Territories under its administration,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Turks
and Caicos Islands; ~ 1
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Turks and Caicos Islands to self-deterrnination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people ofthe Territory oftheir inalienable right
as set out in the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 15 14 (X V), which fully applies to the Turks
and Caicos lslands;
4. Reiterates that it is the obligation ofthe administering Power to create such conditions in the Turks and Caicos Islands as will enable the people of the Territory to
exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as well
as ali other relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility ofthe administering Power under the Charter of the United Nations to
develop its dependent Territories economically and
socially and urges the administering Power, in consultation with the territorial Government, to take the necessary
measures to promote the economic and social development of the Turks and Caicos Islands and, in particular, to
intensify and expand its programme of assistance in order
to accelerate the development of the economic and social
infrastructure of the Territory;
6. Emphasizes that greater attention should be paid to
diversification of the economy, particularly in the promotion of agriculture and fisheries, for the benefit of the people of the Territory;
7. Recalls that it is the responsibility ofthe administering Power, in accordance with the freely expressed wishes
of the people of the Territory, to safeguard, guarantee and
ensure the inalienable right ofthe people to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures to
guarantee their right to own and dispose ofthose resources
and to establish and maintain control oftheir future development;
8. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
continue to pay special attention to the development needs
of the Turks and Caicos Islands;
9. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the administering Power must ensure that military bases and installations
do not hinder the people of the Territory from exercising
their right to self~determination and independence in conformity with the purposes and principies of the Charter
~I Jl,,d., chap. XXIII
