S/2005/96

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 February 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 11 January 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
You may recall that in his letter dated 18 February 2000 (S/2000/137), the
President of the Security Council conveyed to me the Security Council’s conviction
that those responsible for grave violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights in East Timor in 1999 should be brought to justice. He also underlined
that the United Nations had a role to play in this process. Most recently, the Security
Council, by its resolution 1573 (2004), reaffirmed the need to fight against impunity
and, in this regard, took note of my intention to continue to explore possible ways to
address this issue and make proposals as appropriate. On 21 December 2004, I met
jointly with the Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Timor-Leste in New York, who
conveyed to me the thinking and approach of their respective Governments in this
matter.
I should like to inform the Security Council that I have decided to establish an
independent Commission of Experts. The Commission, consisting of three experts,
would conduct a thorough assessment of the progress made by the Indonesian
judicial process involving the ad hoc Human Rights Tribunal in Jakarta, and the
serious crimes process, involving the Serious Crimes Unit and the Special Panels for
Serious Crimes in Dili.
The Commission of Experts will be tasked, inter alia, with assessing the
effective functioning of the two judicial processes, identifying obstacles and
difficulties encountered and evaluating the extent to which they have been able to
achieve justice and accountability for the crimes committed in East Timor. It will
undertake to recommend further measures and/or mechanisms as appropriate so that
the perpetrators are held accountable, justice is secured for the victims and the
people of Timor-Leste, and reconciliation is promoted. The Commission of Experts
will also be requested to consider ways in which its analysis could be of assistance
to the Truth and Friendship Commission, which Indonesia and Timor-Leste have
agreed to establish.
The composition of the Commission of Experts will be announced in the near
future. However, given the recent tsunami disaster and the emergency situation in
Indonesia, I will adjust the timing of the announcement and the dispatch of the
Commission of Experts to the region as appropriate.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-24359 (E) 180205

*0524359*
