THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

31 OCTOBER

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2045)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . +.

Adoption

of the agenda

. , . .

,. . , . . .

. .

_. . , . . . . . . . , . . .

Page
1

. . . . _

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)
,,...................r
. . . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . .

1

SfPV.2045

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

ZQLESTN MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 31 October 1077, at 3 p.m.
f’rcG~~‘nI: Mr. f<ikhi .IAIPAL (India).
PmWlt:
TllC
representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arub .lamahiriya. Mauritius, Pakistan,
I’iUlXIIZi. Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2045)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 70 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addrcsscd to the Prcsiclcnt of the Security Council
(S/ 17420)

Adoption of the agenda

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations adclresscd to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2420)
1. The PIIESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
by the Council at its earlier meetings, I invite the
lTpK!XlltiltiVCS

of

.Algcria,

13otSwXl:l,

Gllalla,

Guinea,

Guyana, Lesotho, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, the
United Republic of Cameroon and Viet Nam to take the
places rescrvcd for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the in vit[t tion 01‘ the Pre,sidettt, Mr, Bcdjuoui (Algeria),
Mr, 7%)~ (Bo Lswut tu), Mr. Boa tl’tt (Ghatxt ), iMr. Carnara
(Guinea), Mr, ,k(~cksott (Cl/,vattu), Mr. Molapo (Lesotho),
Mr, Kane (Mauritania), Mr. Poisson (Niger). Mr. Garba
(Nigeria), Mr. Barooul,) (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kumara (SeneMr. Husscn
(Somalia),
Mr. Medani (Sudan),
WA
Mr. Kodjovi (Togo), Mr. Mestiri (Tunisin), Mr. Oyono
(United Republic of Cameroon) and Mr. Dinh L&I Thi (Viet
Nam) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I wishto inform the membersof the
Council that I havereceiveda letter dated31 October from

the representativesof Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
andMauritius, which readsasfollows:
“We, the undersigned
members
of the Security Council,
have the honour to requestthat, during its current
meetingsdevoted to considerationof “The questionof
South Africa”, the Councilshouldextend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisionalrules of procedureto
Mr. Elias L. Ntloedibe of the PanAfricanist Congress
of
Azania.“l
3. If I hear no objection, I shalltake it that the Council
agreesto the requestand,at the appropriatemomentin the
Council’sproceedings,I shallinvite Mr. Ntlocdibeto make
ii statement.
It wasso decided.
4. Mr. YOUNG (United Statesof America):Mr. President,
it is with a great dealof both respectand sympathythat I
have admired your presidencyof the Council during this
month. It has been a difficult month for you, but one
duringwhich you havedemonstrated
exceptionalleadership
abilitiesand sensitivity to all the questionsconcernedand,
even though this is the last day of your presidency,I am
afraid that we shallneedthe very bestof your abilitiesfor
the restof this day.
5. The Security Council is today preparingto take an
unprecedentedstep. For the first timein the history of the
Organization,the Councilmayimposemandatorysanctions
againsta MemberState. Because
the decisionbeforeusis so
significant,it is necessaryfor all of us to proceedcarefully
in the light of past actionsof the Council.
6. Weall know that the world community’sconcernover
South Africa’s racial policiesis not new. The Security
Council’s first action on this questioncameon 1 April
1960,when a resolutiondeploringthe Sharpevillemassacre
and calling upon South Africa to abandonits policy of
apartheidwasadopted, declaringthat South Africa’s racial
policiesmight, if continued,endangerinternationalpeace
andsecurity[resolution 134(1960)].
7. Seventeenyears have passed.During the intervening
years,the Organization hasrepeatedlyurgedSouth Africa
to abandonapartheid and to rejoin the internationaleffort
to ensureuniversal respectfor human rights. The VicePresidentof my country spokeon this issueat Vienna on
20 May last when he pointedout that progress
towardsfull
and equal participation by all citizens of South Africa in
the political processwasessential
to a healthy, stableand
secureSouth Africa.
1 Subsequently

circulated

as document

S/12432.

8. Clearly, the repressive measures ann0unced by the
South African authorities on 19 October mark a major
development on the South African scene. In deciding 011
these measures, the South African Government decided not
to move in the direction of full political participation by all
but to break new ground by ending all political expression
by all opponents of apartheid in South Africa-black and
white. One can only conclude that the South African
Government does not understand the dangers for peace in
southern Africa which this policy of denying blacks in
South Africa ail rights of political participation now poses.

of nuclear energy is based on the premise that the
opportunity for co-operation is an important incentive to
keep nuclear facilities underinternational inspection.That
has, of course, been the casewith all of our co-operative
programmes.Finally, 1 amsuremembersof the Council are
aware of the assurances
that Prime Minister Vorster has
given to President Carter concerning his nuclear programme. We take these assurancesseriously and would
respond promptly and vigorously, in concert with others,
shouldit appearthat South Africa did not intend to honour
them.

9. In this inflammatory structure, my Government has
reluctantly but firmly concluded that the international
community must now take steps to ensure that the flow of
arms into South Africa does not add to a level of tension
which is already endangering international peace. It is
therefore prepared to join with other members in supporting Security Council action to establish a mandatory arms
embargo under Chapter VII of the Charter.

13. In part becausemy own Government’spolicieson this
subject have sometimesbeenmisunderstoodor distortedin
South Africa, 1 believe it is essentialthat, aswe take these
major steps,we shouldmakeit clear to South Africa what
we are and what we are not askingit to do. First, we arc
not--as some South African officials contend--askingthat
South African socjety should destroy itself. Without condoningthe philosophicalunderpinningof the South African
State, we must admirethe accomplishments
of the talented
people of South Africa, black and white, in developinga
tnodern industrial economy which could, if its icadersso
desired, bring great benefits not only to the pcopie of
South Africa but to the restof Africa aswell. Secondly, we
lay out no predeterminedformula for the solution of South
Africa’s problems. Thirdly, we do not ask-nor doesany
African spokesman in the Council--that white South
Africans should forsake the country they have helped to
build. What we do challengeis the biankct denial of the
right of the black majority to participate in the shapingof
their destiny, a denial which not only violates the obliga.
tions or the Governmentof South Africa under the Charter,
but which alsoposesgravethreatsto stability and peace.

10. Since 1963, the United States has, consistent with
Security Council resolutions, observed a comprehensive
arms embargo. That voluntary embargo, however, has been
no more successful than the United Nations voluntary
embargo in stopping the flow of arms to South Africa. In
the interest of encouraging South Africa’s leaders to
embark on a new course, President Carter has now
authorized me to state that the United States is prepared to
join with other members of the Council in proposing a
mandatory arms embargo on South Africa, under Chapter
VII of the Charter, which will require ail States to cut off
all saies or transfers of arms, spare parts for previously
delivered equipment, paramilitary police equipment and
materiaf for the maintenance and production of’ arms and
munitions.

14. We hope that white South Africans can understand
that the aim of my Government and, I believe, of the
Organization, has been and remainsto help South Africa
embark on a new course,a courseaimed at ending racial
discrimination and the establishmentof a more just social
andeconomicorder.

11. In addition, we are undertaking a thorough review of
relations with South Africa in all arcas, including that of
nuclear co-operation. The possibility that South Africa
might explode a nuclear device and develop nuclear
weapons capability has been of gravest concern to my
Government, as it has to all members of the international
community. Such a step would be a serious blow to the
security situation in Africa and also to global efforts to
prevent the further protiferation of nuclear weapons. Since
my Government has no priorities which it takes more
seriously than these, we have given the most serious
consideration to the steps wllich might be taken indivjdually or in concert with others to keep nuclear weapons
from the African continent,

15. The outside world can help, but the answerto South
Africa’s problems must be found by South Africans
themselves. A dialogue must be started among all the
peoplesof South Africa with a view to achievinga more
just and stable society. Failing that, we can see only
heightened danger and a continuing threat to the security
of all in the region.
16. I wish to underscorethat the purposeof our policy is
not to exclude South Africa or to isolateit from the restof
the world. We are anxiousto seethe kind of changewithin
South Africa that will permit it to play the role in the
international community that it deserves;yet by their
policies of increasingracial oppression,the South African
leadersare succeedingin progressivelyisolatingtheir country from the rest of the world, That process,if allowedto
continue, will lead to a situation in which co-operatioll
between South Africa and the rest of the world in any area
will be increasinglydifficult if not impossible.

12. I should like to share wjth the Council our thoughts
on a practical and effective approach to this goal. First, as
President Carter reiterated at the Organizjng Conference of
the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation at Washington on 19 October, the United States supports the
concept of nuclear-weapon-free zones. We strongly believe
that Africa should remain free of nuclear weapons. Secondly, we are urging South Africa as well as others who
have not yet signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 0f
Nuclear Weapons to do so promptly and to put all their
nuclear facilities
under full international safeguards,
Thirdly, our co-operation with ail nations in peaceful uses

17. Looking back over the 17 years sinceSharpeviIie,one
is tempted to be pessimistic.
South Africa’s responseto the
callsof the United Nations,individual Member nationsand
2

its own citizens to change its course has been consistently
to press ahead with policies that increase tension instead of
reducing it. Yet my own Government, notwithstanding the
profound disappointment it feels as the result of the 19
October measures, remains hopeful for South Africa, in
part because of the voices it hears from the South African
people themselves.

Those are the voices South Africa has refiised to hear,
banning two and killing a third for daring to state these
most merciful and visionary ideals. But as Donald Woods,
another banned voice, has previously warned:

18. 1 should like to quote from some of South Africa’s
own native sons, some that South Africa itself refuses to
listen to. Mr. Percy Ooboza said:

“They think the enemy is words, but the enemy is
thoughts. You can’t legislate against thoughts. You can’t
detain them or ban them, or restrict them and that is why
the present rulers of South Africa cannot survive, The
thoughts of many arc against them and ultimately they
themselves arc too few.”

“Yet 1 still have faith that we have not reached the
point of no return. I am optimistic and convinced that we
can still turn frustration into hope. We can still douse the
flames of anger and bitterness that rage through Soweto
and other parts of South Africa and replace them with
genuine brotherhood and understanding.

19. The ideas of men like those will prevail, for though
they may be silenced, the power of these ideals has been
implanted in the hearts of men and women by their
Creator. Repression only serves as a motivation which
demands that those ideas should be expressed even at the
price of death.

“It is never too late to do the right thing, It is never too
late to transform the might of South Africa into the
might of justice and dignity for all. It is never too late to
build a South Africa where people of all races can live
together in mutual respect and tolerance.”

20, Racial justice will come to South Africa, My Government will continue to extend the hand of co-operation to
all the people of South Africa in their efforts to build a
just, free, secure and prosperous nation where all can work
together for mutual benefit. I ask the international community to join us in such a pledge, for WC cannot win the
progress we want without holding out some hope for
reconciliation in return.

Dr. Beyers Naude, of The Christian Institute of Southern
Africa, said:
“It is my clear conviction that, despite all efforts that
the Government might currently or in the near future
undertake to establish independent States, black majority
rule for South Africa is inevitable either in a unified or in
a federated State. Continued determined opposition to
this development, although initially successful because of
the tremendous political, military and economic power
which the white minority still wields in South Africa,
cannot but fail in the long run, and the sooner the white
minority realizes this and starts making the necessary
concessions to ensure a meaningful sharing of political
power, economic wealth and land ownership, the more
peacefully this period of transition will proceed.

21. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, I wish to
express to you personally my gratitude for your leadership
and wisdom in guiding the meetings of the Security Council
during the past month. The issues which we confront now,
and particularly the issues of South Africa, are of paramount importance for peace in the world. We can truly
consider ourselves fortunate that we have had the benefit of
your diplomatic skills, energy and endurance in such
historic times. And 1 think I can safely say that whatever
the outcome of our endeavours you will have made your
mark on history-if
only for the quiet yet so positive role
which you have played here. It gives me particular pleasure,
of course, to pay you this small tribute as the ties between
our two countries have been and remain so close. India and
Mauritius have always had a very special relationship. This
relationship has been further cemented since my country
became independent. We look forward to the development
of even closer ties of brotherhood and co-operation in the
future.

“The next two to three years will be the crucial period
of decision making in this regard, as I believe that white
South Africa has only another five to six years to put its
house in order. And even if this estimate is wrong and the
period extends to 10 or 12 years, it is imperative that
steps should be taken immediately by the white minority
group to bring about the fundamental peaceful change so
urgently required in our country.”

22. I should like to call particular attention at this
moment to the significance of your presidency in this
crucial period. India and its traditions of non-violent
revolution were truly the inspiration of the movement for
decolonisation all over the world in the period after the
Second World War. It was India which brought the question
of apartheid before the United Nations when this Organization was born. And it was one of India’s greatest men,
Mahatma Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, who helped in
the initial stages of the struggle against apartheid in South
Africa itself. He brought to that country the method of
non-violent struggle which had such an important influence
in shaping the campaigns through which the majority in
South Africa first sought to achieve their rights.

.?‘helate Steve Biko said:
“We are looking forward to a non-racial, just and
egalitarian society in which colour, creed and race shall
form no paint of reference. We have deliberately chosen
to operate openly because we have believed for a very
long time that, through a process of organized bargaining,
we can penetrate even the deafest of white cars and get
the message to register that no lie can live for ever.
“111 doing this. we rely not only on our strength but
also on the belief that the rest of the world views the
oppression and blatant exploitation of the black majority
by a minority as an unforgivable sin that cannot be
pardoned by civiltied societies.”

23. For all those reasons it is most fitting that we should
reach such a decisive and important stage in our dclibera3

that reason,my delegationwill vote in favour of it. But the
other three drafts constitute proposals for action on a
variety of fronts and, in the case of draft resolution
123lO/Rev.l, the basisfor future action. As I said,these
draft resolutions have been valuable in focusing the
discussionsand consideration which have taken place
within and between the African and WesternGroups,and
indeedwith other MemberStates,sincelast March.

tions on the question of South Africa under the presidency
of an Indian statesman of such distinction and acumen.
24. You are no doubt aware, Mr. President and bclovcd
brother, that before proceeding to Moscow to attend the
celebrations of the sixtieth anniversary of the October
Revolution, my 7%year-young globe-trotting Prime Minister, the Right l-Honourable Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam,
has gone to New Delhi--indeed he landed there only a
moment ago-to start a five-day official visit. I feel certain
that this first visit by a head of Government to your great
country under a new Administration will prove to be very
fruitful for all concerned.

33. As Council membersknow, the five Westernmembers
of the Council put forward an informal proposal for
consideration,outlining different elementsof action which
we felt could bc acceptableby consensus
to all members.
I
think that this proposalwasimportant in that, if adopted,
it would have establishedthe first specific action to be
taken by the Council on the questionunder ChapterVII of
the Charter against a Member State, Our proposalsought
not to set an end to the processof international cooperative action but, rather, to establisha beginning.It is
with great regret that we find ourselves,apparently, in the
position that the desireof someto pressfor further action
at the present time inhibits the Council from makingthe
progressthat is within our reach.

25. Regarding the subject under consideration, I wonder
whether there is anything left for me to say after everything
1 have been saying here since 1969. Members will recall that
I made a statement here on 21 March this year /198&h
mecrirzg/ in which 1 analysed the economic and military
situation in South Africa. On 29 March. I introduced four
draft resolutionson behalf of the three African membersof
the Council. namely, Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and my own country, Mauritius. I do not believe I have
anything to add, but 1 do reiterate everything I have been
sayingin the Council over the years.

34. In my statement last March /IYY8th meeting/, I
stressedthat international actions and the basisfor those
actions could not be effective only if they are carried out
by all Member States, and in particular those maintaining
economic and/or diplomatic relations with South Africa.
Draft resolutions S/1231O/Rev.1, S/ 12311/Rev. 1 and
S/l 3312/Rev.l will not be effective becausethey cannotat
presentdraw that internationalconsensus.

26. Steve Biko is not dead. He lives in the spirit of every
decent 4frican. Truth and justice will prevail,
27. The PIIESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Mauritius for the very generouswords he hasaddressedto
me and to my country. May I say that I warmly reciprocate
the friendly sentimentsexpressedby him.

35. It is well known that the CanadianGovernmentmatly
years ago took the substantiveaction stipulated in draft
resolution 12311/Rev.11that is, the armsembargo.Furthcrmore, in my statementon Friday I indicated our intention
to support a call for a review by Member Stales of their
economic relations with South Africa. But this notwith.
standing, WCfeel that the action-oriented nature of these
draft resolutions requiresus to speakclearly, with either iI
“yes” or a “no”. In view of our belief that our actionswill
be successfulonly if suchaction-oriented draft resolutions
are adopted unanimously-and as these three cannot bewe shall be forced to vote againsteachof them.

28. There arc no other nameson the list of speakers.The
sponsorsof the four draft resolutions /S/IZ3119/Rcl~.1,
S/1231O/Rev.l, S/123Il/R~~.l and Sf12312fR~v.l/ have
requestedthat those drafts should be put to the vote,
29. The representative of Canadahasaskedto be allowed
to make a statement before we proceed to the vote and I
now call on him.
30. Mr. BARTON (Canada): In my statementlast Friday
/2043rcl nzccting/, I stressedthat the implicationsof our
actions here in the Security Council were far reachingand
should be rccognizcd assuch. I further suggestedthat if we
were able to reach agreementon a united determinationin
favour, in particular, of a mandatory armsembargounder
Chapter VII of the Charter, we would have senta very clear
message
to the Government of South Africa.

36. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): I Walt to
associatemyself with the remarksof the representativeof
the CanadianGovernment.

31. II is with regret and concern, thercforc, that I find
that we apparently arc approachinga decisionto put to the
vote all four of the draft resolutionssubmitted last March
[S/1230!, to S/I 23121.

37. On Friday, the United States, in informal consultations with a number of African and other delegations,
indicated how it would vote if the four draft resolutions
before the Council were put to a vote. l want to confirm
what we said in this regardconcerning our inability to
support three of thesedrafts.

32. I expressregret not becausethesedraft resolutionsare
without merit; they present a spectrum of possibilitiesfor
action and the fact that they were submitted in March has
served a valuable function. The first draft is, 01‘course,a
straight expression of opinion of the Council on the
continuing oppre-ssiveactions of the Government of South
Africa. It wos valid then and it is even more valid now. For

38. We believe that the Security Council should pronounce itself on thosemeasures
that can unite us,not those
that would divide us. I would point with pride to the
actions of the Council in working together throughout this
entire year and our attempts to arrive at a dcchrdtion
which, while it did not reacha vote, neverthelessdid bind
LISin a working consensus
that was followed up by a very
4

effective Conference at Maputo* in which all the members
of the Council and some 90 States Members of the
Organization were represented. We continued our work at
the Conference at Lagos,3 which was an even bigger display
against the philosophies and policies of uparthcid,
and I
think that we have been willing to take a step, in fact
several steps, that have heretofore been impossible for us.

43. I hope that following this vote, or even before it, if
you see fit, Mr. President, we might have preliminary
discussionsthat would enable us to come to someconsensusthat would not deny the suffering people of South
Africa. It is very easyfor peopleoutside South Africa, who
are not suffering, to say “We have suffered long enough”.
WC have not suffered here at the United Nations, And the
messagewe are sendingis not to delegatesof the United
Nations. The messagewe are sendingis to the peopleof
South Africa, who are suffering and for whom one
additional day of suffering makesall the difference in the
world. I think we are being rather callousand insensitivein
not paying attention to the sufferingsof South Africa and
not sending an undivided messageto the South African
Government and John Vorster by dealing with the problemsin the way in which we have dealt with them this day.

39. I believe one of the reasons we are able to take thcsc
steps, though, is that we Western members of the Council
have been able to work together, and part of the approach
that seeks to put these four draft resolutions to the vote is
an attempt to divide us. I am afraid that that is just not
tactically wise and, from the point of view of my
Government, it does not really help for us to vote fool
something that WC might be able to enforce only to have an
American-owned subsidiary in another country do the same
thing we prohibited in this country. There are very practical
reasons for our working together. Those reasons for
working together are in the interest of advancing our
approaches to the problems in southern Africa.

44. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): I shouldlike
to state for the record that it is not “some” amonguswho
desire to press for a vote. It is, rather, the clear,
unambiguousand unanimousdecisionof the African Group
to pressfor a vote on the four draft resolutionsproposed
by the three African membersof the Council.

40. I should also like to say that one of the things I have
struggled against in this country, and one of the things that
is also a problem in South Africa, is that people write laws
for other people that do not apply to themselves. Unfortunately, because we happen to bc the guilty parties
involved with South Africa, I think that my laws or any
guidelinesor resolutions affecting our actions must be
written and taken into considerationin keeping with the
laws of our lands, which are the laws under which they
would be enforced. It would be quite inappropriate for me
to bc writing laws about what OPEC /&,,arzizatir.m oj’
PetroleumExporting C~~untries/
should be doing in regard
to South Africa. I would certainly be glad to write some
lawsfor OPEC,becauseit doesnot affect my country at all.
And yet we have not heard anything about that. We have
peoplewriting resolutionsfor the West, and those resolutions are not, thank God, going to affect a singleAfrican
country.

45. My comment on what AmbassadorYoung hassaidis
the following. As representative of Libya, a memberof
OPEC, I shaI1be happy to vote for any law preparedor
written by Ambassador Young concerning the OPEC
countries, especially if those laws include the American
multinationals which have almost a monopoly on the
marketing of oil in the world.
46. Mr. ISOYA (Benin) (ir~terpr-etationfrom French): I
should like to associatemyself with the statementof the
representativeof Libya and say that it is the African Group
as a whole that asksthe Council to take decisionson the
four draft resolutioiis----notsimply a few . membersbut
rather the Group asa whole.

41. As we have struggledwith the problems of our own
country, and aswe have struggledwitb the problemsof our
country’s relationship with the Government of South
Africa. 1 think everybody aroundthis Council table knows
that there hasnever beenan Administration in the United
States that has struggledmore determinedly against the
policies of upurthcid. Our resolve remains undiminished;
our commitment will not be affected one way or another
by what the Council decides.Wehave madeour judgement
in regardto southernAfrica.
42. The only questionis this. Do we have the united voice
of the Council that will enable us to enforce those
mandatesagainstMember and non-memberStates alike?
Can we in fact closeup the loopholesthat have existed in
an armsembargo’?I think that someaction by the Council
is called for, but action that would help us to appronch
positively the problem in South Africa is not likely to be
fulfilled by our attempts to pursuethese draft resolutions.
2 International Confcrcncc in Supportof the I’eoplcsof‘ Zirnbabwc and Nunibia, held at Maputo t’rom 1G to 21 May 1977.
3 World Conference for Action against Apatheid.
Ilold at Lagos
from22 to 26 August 1977.

47. I should also like to say a few words concerningthe
statement of the representativeof Canada,who believesthe
African Croup’s proposals tend towards preventing the
Council from achievingunanimity on the questionof South
Africa. That is certainly not so. As far asthe African Group
is concerned, we are unanimousin sayingit is thusthat we
must solve the South African question.
48. We therefore requestthe President to proceedto put
the four draft resolutionsto the vote.
49. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I have listened very
attentively to my colleagueand friend AmbassadorYoung
of the United States. We Africans do appreciate the
difficulties of the five WesternPowers,We only askthemto
appreciate our own difficulties. The position of the three
African membersof the Council is the common, collective
position of 49 African States and the African liberation
movements, and we are bound by decisions of the
Organization of African Unity. We take our cue from the
recognizedrepresentativesof the peopleof South Africa.
50. We are sonear, yet so far.
51. The PRESIDENT: Since the three sponsorsof the
draft resolutionshave requestedthat they sho’uldbeput to

5

Theresult of the vote was10 in Jhvour, 5 against.

the vote, I am obliged to proceed accordingly. I therefore
propose that the Council should proceed immediately to
the vote.

The druft resolutionwasnot adopted, oneoj’the negative
votes beingthat oJ‘apermanentmemberof’the Council.

52. I shall first put to the vote the draft resolution in
document S/l 2309/Rev. 1, sponsored by Benin, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius.

56. The PRESIDENT: We have now voted on all the draft
resolutions.At this stageI wishto proposethat the meeting
shouldbe suspendedfor approximately one hour.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The meeting wassuspended
at 4.15 p.m.
7.15p. 171.

The draft resolutioiz was adopted unarzim0usl.v. 4
53. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution in document S/123lO/Rev.l, sponsored by
Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius.

57. The PRESIDENT: I suspendedthe meetingbecause
I
wished to salvagethe situation following the rejectionof
the three draft resolutions sponsored by the African
membersof the Council. I felt encouragedonce againto
seek a consensusbecauseI detected from the statemeats
madehere a fairly widespreadmeasureof agreementon the
limited question of a mandatory arms embargoas a first
step. 1 therefore took the initiative, asthe representativeof
India, to circulate informally a new draft resolution for
considerationas the basisof a consensus.
My intention has
always been to seek a consensus,and it was with that
objective in view that I took the trouble to draft an
alternative resolution. I placed it before the Council
membersat an informal meeting. The African members
wanted more time to study it; the Westernmembersalso
wanted more time to examinethe new draft.

A vote was taken bl) show o/‘har?ds.
112favour: Benin, China, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Venezuela.
Against: Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic of,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
The result of the vote was 10 it? Juvour, 5 ugaimt.
The druft resolution was not adopted, one qf the negative
votes being that oj’a permanent member 01 the Council.

58. As a result of those consultations, a draft resolution
sponsoredby Canadaandthe FederalRepublicof Germany
hasbeen circulated in document S/12433, a draft resolution which to me is strangelyfamiliar. Since1neverhad any
intention of submitting the Indian draft formally, it was of
course open to the more enterprisingmembersto do SO.
Now the Council has before it this new draft resolution.
Some members have asked for more time-at least 24
hours-to obtain instructions. In my opinion that is a
reasonablerequest. I have no option but to leaveit to my
successorto schedulethe next meeting after consultations.

54. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution in docufment S/ 123 I l/Rev. 1, sponsored
by Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius.
A vote wastaken bv show oj’hands.
1n favour: Benin, China, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics,Venezuela.
Against: Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republicof,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

59. 1 shall now call on representativeswho wish to speak
in explanation of votescastearlier.
60. Mr. TROYANOVSKY [Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)(interpretation ,from Russian):The Soviet delegation would like to explain its vote on the draft
resolutionsput beforethe Council by the African countries.

The result of the vote was10 ijz jbvour, 3 against.
.:

arld resumedor

The dra.ft resolution wasnot adopted, me of the negative
votes being that ofa permanent memberof the Council.

61. As wasstressedby the Soviet delegationat the Council
meeting of 26 October /2039th meeting/, past Council
decisionsin regard to the racistrkgimeof South Africa ant1
its criminal activities will give positive resultsonly if tllCy
are backed by other decisionsproviding for the imposition
of certain mandatory sanctionsagainstthat rbgime.

55. The PRESIDENT: 1 shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution in document S/123 12/Rev.l,, sponsoredby
Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.
Itz favour: Benin, China, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Venezuela.

62. Judging from the latest reports, Pretoriais completely
ignoring the reaction of the world community to the crimes
it hascommitted. It is ignoring the reaction of the United
Nations to the latest events in the country. This is all a
direct consequenceof the many years of connivancewith
the South African racistson the part of certain Western
countries, without whosesupport the policy of apartlleiu’
inside the country itself would havecollapsed,aswould the

Agaimt: Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic of,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
4 SWresoIution4 17 (1977).

6

acts of aggression against other African States. It is not
enough to condemn the racist rdgime for its repressive and
terrorist acts against the indigenous population. It is
essential that the countries supporting the rBgime should
desist from affording it political, diplomatic, economic and
military assistance and support.
63. The delegation of the Soviet Union, from the very
outset, has endorsed the demand of the African countries
for the introduction of an embargo on arms shipments to
South Africa and the adoption of economic and other
sanctions, since the Soviet Union is prepared, not in words
but in deeds, to adopt the most effective measures aimed at
decisively and irreversibly putting an end to the policies of
apartheid in all its manifestations.
G4. It is a matter for regret that the negative vote of the
Western Powers has raised an obstacle in the path of the
application of the sanctions proposed in the draft rcsolutions put forward by the three African countries. It is
perfectly clear who is responsible for the fact that even
today the Security Council has been unable to take the
decision that was expected of it by world opinion and
which was required by the very situation in southern Africa
created by the criminal policies of the racist rdgime.
65. Mr. von WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President, my delegation shares your assessment of the
debate of the past few days on the question of South
Africa. We, too, believe that this debate has shown a wide
margin of agreement, if not consensus, that all 15 members
of this Council favour mandatory action with regard to an
immediate and cffcctive arms embargo against South Africa
under Chapter VII of the Chhrter. The Council is called
upon to take a decision. In order to facilitate suc11 action,
Canadaand the Federal Republic of Germany have put
before you a draft resolutionwhich has the support of all
five Western membersof the Council. The two sponsors
hope that this proposal will gain the approval of all the
Council membersand that we can reach the desirable
consensus
on it.

will want to move amendmentsto the draft. Therefore, we
shall require time, and we shall not be able to vote on it
today.
69. I also propose that the next meeting of the Council
shouldbe fixed by the new President,the Presidentfor the
month of November, after due consultationswith members
of the Council.
70. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to the specific proposal tnade by the
representativeof Canada,under rule 33 of the provisional
rulesof procedure,which states:
“The following motions shall have precedencein the
order named over all principal motions and draft resolutions relative to the subjectbefore the meeting:
“1. To suspendthe meeting;
“2. To adjourn the meeting;
“3. To adjourn the meeting to a certain day or
hour.”
71. The representative of Canada has proposed the adjournmcnt ol’ the meetinguntil tomorrow afternoon, I shall
put that motion to the vote, unless it is agreed upon
generally.
73. Mr. KIKIHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): We should
vote on two points, first. the principle of adjournmentand
then the date of the next meeting, because, as my
colleague,the representativeof Mauritius, said, we needto
have more consultations, as African members. Also,
Mr. President, you know that we presentedthe four draft
resolutions in the name of the African mernbers;it wasa
unanimous decision by the African Group. We have to go
back to the African Group to seekadvice.We shallnot have
sufficient time for that by tomorrow afternoon.
73. I proposethat we should have two votes, one for the
principle of adjournment and the other for the date of the
next meeting.

66. Mr. BARTON (Canada):As the precedingspeakerhas
said,we have put forward a proposalwhich we hope will
enlist the co-operation and support of all the membersof
the Council. WC are anxious to have it adopted expeditiously. If it were possible,we should like to do it
tonight, but I appreciate the point that YOU made,
Mr, President,;I minute ago, that a number of delegations
haveexpressedthe desireto have sometime to consult their
Governments.Therefore, I would propose,under rule 33 of
the provisionalrulesof procedure,that WCshould ad.joum
the meetinguntil tomorrow afternoon at 3 o’clock.

74. Before I finish, I should like to say that it is the
practice in the Council that this kind of procedure is
discussedin informal meetings. I hope that our colleague,
the representativeof Canada,will nol insist.

67. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President,first of all I
should like to thank you for the initiative you took, as
representativeof India, in attempting to find a formula. 1
alsowishto expressto you my sympathy in that your draft
washijackedandsomewhatdisfigured.

76. I call on the representativeof the United Kingdomon
a point of order.

68. My delegation.and I think 1 speakalsoon behalf of
my two African colleagues,will need time to study the
draft which has beencirculated asdocument S/12433. It is
very likely that the African members,after studying this,

75. The PRESIDENT: I think that both the representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the representativeof
Mauritius have proposed the adjournment of the meeting,
which proposal would have precedenceover the Canadian
proposal under the terms of rule 33 of the provisionalrules
of procedure.

77. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): With great respect,
since they have proposedthe adjournrncnt of the meeting,
it is only because,contrary to the rtilcs, the two representatives were allowed to speakon the draft submitted by the
representative of Canada. I do not want to be difficult
about this, but, under the rules, any motion, I think, hasto
be decidedquite quickly, doesit not?

this matter in terms of votes and counter-votes and
proposalsand counter-proposals.In any case, 1 bclicvc
those proposalsstand withdrawn becauseof the fact that
they were not put immediatelyto the vote and a discussion
hasdeveloped. The proposalmade by our colleaguefrom
Panamais a wise one and I am sure the Presidentfor the
month of Novemberwill bearit in mind.

78. The PRESIDENT: The provisional rules of procedure
say: “Any motion for the . . . simple adjournment of the
meeting shall be decided without debate.”
79. I think one could interpret that there has in fact been
no debate on the motion, but a counter-proposal. However,
I was going to say something quite different. I think we are
wasting time discussing points of procedure. I hope my
colleague from Canada would agree that what is called for
in the present situation at this late hour is a simple
adjournment; let us leave it to the next President to fix the
date of the next meeting, after due consultations with all
members.

X4. Mr. BARTON (Canada):1 think that what I have said
and what hasbeen saidby my colleaguesdemonstratesthe
urgency we attach to getting an immediatedecision.I am
certainly not interested in provoking procedural fights at
this hour of the night and if we can reach an informal
understandingthat we will have a meetingor the Council
tomorrow for consultations with the expectation of an
early formal meeting then I shouldbe preparedto withdraw
my motion.

80. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): I understand
that the hour is late and we have waited a long time to get
to where we are now, but I should just like to remind the
Council, and particularly the African members, that we
have been talking in terms of a decision under Chapter VII
of the Charter, banning the sale of arms, spare parts and
paramilitary supplies to the Government of South Africa
and we are not divided on substance at all. It seems to mc
that the African Group particularly would bc very anxious
to work out any procedural problems as rapidly as possible.
I would not be so concerned, except that this is perhaps the
second time. In March we had essentiallyan agreementon
substance and could not agree on certain details of
procedure. Now again in October, after two weeks of
debate, we haved a substantiveagreementand I shouldhate
to see the Council not function becauseof the complications of decision making. I think it important in this
situation to presson asrapidly aspossible,becauseI do noL
think anybody is ashappy about this delay asJohn Vurstcr.

85. The PRESIDENT: Is it the Council’s wish that we
hold informal consultations tomorrow’? As I hear no
objection, it is so decided.
86. The next speakeris the representativeof Tunisia. 1
invite him to take a placeat the Council table and to make
hisstatement.
87. Mr. MESTIRI (Tunisia)(itrretptvtatiotz jivrtz fk~tdt):
At the request of a numberof African States,I have simply
conic to cxprcss the deep disappointmentand the disenchantment of the African Group at the completely negative
attitude of the WesternPowersto the African initiatives.
88. You will recall that the discussionhasalready bee11
going on for a week I~OW, although we askedfor the debate
to be held as a matter of urgency. Wethought that WChad
given every chance for a constructive dialoguewith those
who in my last statement I described as the “countries
which have been the most indulgent towards the qxzrtlfcitl
rfgimc” /.X?iith
meeting,pcrtn.131.

81. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (irltcrpmtntiott j~oti7
Spatrish): The practice of the Council hasalways beento
fix the dates for meetingsduring informal consultations,as
just stated by Ambassador Kikhia of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya who will take over the functions of the
presidencytomorrow.

:

82. Obviously, as has been stated by some of the
members,there are sufficient elementsto allow usto reach
a consensus.That is why it seemsto me that the Council
should not divide itself on procedural matters‘and that we
could in harmony arrive at an understandingin conformity
with the usual practice of the Council. Since Ambassador
Kikhia mentioned informal consultationsand sincehe will
be the President of the Council from tomorrow, 1 should
like to suggest that a gentlemen’sagreement should be
reachedto the effect that AmbassadorKikhia shouldcall an
informal meeting for consuhations for tomorrow in order
to fix a date for the next meeting.
83. Mr. AKNUND (Pakistan): I wasjust goingto makethe
point that we have had a long and frustrating day and the
tedious &bate that usually develops around procedural
issueswill succeed only in creating more frustration. The
practice has always beenfor the Presidentof‘ the Council to
hold consultations and to fix a meeting where there
happens to be a difference of opinion about when one
should meet. Since there quite evidently is no agreementon
exactly when WCshould meet, I think WCriced not pursue

89. We have endeavoured.until the last minute. to find :I
formula which would m&c it possibleto avoid what has
beencalled the divisionof the Council. If thereis a division
in the Council, the world knows hat the fault is not ours;
the cntirc world knows whosethe fault is.
90. We regret what hashappened,but thal will not impail
our determination to pursueour efforts. Weshallcncleavoul
to be more positive and more constructive vis-h-vis the
sponsorsor the recent draft resolution than they were
towards us. It remainsto be hoped that they will agreeto
improvementsin their text in order to make it acceptable
to Africa.
91. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakerson 1%
list, Before I adjourn this meeting, 1 shouldlike to thank
every memberof the Council for his unfailing co-operation
and courtesy to me. The debate has been exciting and.
though it has been inconclusive. I feel that we arc now
nearer a consensusthan before, I wish my successorbettel
luck.

The tncctitzg ~‘o~c
at 7.40 prti.
8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unilc I Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las prlbliraciones
de las Naciones
Unides e&in
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consnlte
Uniclas. Secci6n de Ventns, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

from
bookstores
and distribut,ors
or write to: tJnited
Nntions,
Sales

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias y ceea~ distria .su librero
o dirijase a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
