VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
--- - --

--

--

2. Invites those Member States which have not yet
done so to submit their comments and suggestions on
the draft Code;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider the draft Code at its first regular session of
1981, taking into account the comments and recommendations submitted, with a view to presenting it to
the General Assembly for adoption at the thirty-sixth
session;
4. Invites Member States to take an active part in the
future deliberations on the draft Code;
5. Decides to consider again the question of the draft
Code of Medical Ethics at its thirty-sixth session under
the item entitled "Torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment".

96th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
35/180.

Assistance to refugees in Somalia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/61 of 29 November 1979
on the situation of African refugees, by which it requested the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to make every effort to mobilize additional resources to meet the needs of refugees in Africa,
Having heard the statement of the High Commissioner100 on the situation of refugees in Somalia,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/9 of 28 April 1980, by which the Council, inter
alia:
(a) Took note of the report of the interagency mission which visited Somalia from 10 to 16 December 1979
to study the refugee situation in that country and to
draw up a programme of assistance to deal with the
urgent humanitarian needs there, 101
(b) Endorsed the appeal of the Secretary-General of
11 February 1980, as well as the appeals launched by the
High Commissioner, the Director-General of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, for urgent international assistance to help
the Government of Somalia to provide the necessary
care and attention to the refugees,
(c) Recognized the heavy burden placed on the
Government of Somalia in caring for the refugees and
the need for international assistance to share that burden,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council
resolution 1980/53 of 24 July 1980, by which the Council, inter alia:
(a) Noted with concern the dramatic increase in the
refugee population in Somalia,
(b) Requested the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to consider the necessity
of dispatching a review mission to Somalia to assess current developments in the refugee situation, as a followup to the earlier report of the interagency mission,
Recofnizing the heavy burden placed on the Government o Somalia in caring for the refugees and the need
for international assistance to share that burden,
100
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifih Session.
Third Committee, 51st meeting, paras. 1-8.
IOI E/ 1980/44.

199

- -- -

Mindful that Somalia is classified as a least developed
country and that its meagre resources and inadequate
infrastructure are not capable of coping with the refugee situation alone, without jeopardy to its social and
economic development and without endangering the
general well-being of the population,
Expressing deep appreciation for the assistance which
has been rendered by several Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
Somalia in support of the refugee programmes,
Deeply concerned, however, that the response of the
international community to date has not been commensurate with the needs of the refugees, as described in the
report of the interagency mission,
l. Commends the Secretary-General for taking steps
to promote continued and concerted international action to assist the Government of Somalia to provide relief aid for the refugees;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts undertaken by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to provide humanitarian assistance to the refugees in Somalia;
3. Takes note of the measures which the Government of Somalia is taking in order to provide shelter,
food and other services to the refugees in Somalia;
4. Endorses the appeal of the Secretary-General of
11 February 1980 and the appeals launched by the High
Commissioner, the United Nations Children's Fund and
the World Food Programme for urgent international assistance to help the Government of Somalia to provide
the necessary care and attention to the refugees;
5. Endorses also the appeal of the Economic and
Social Council to all Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and all
voluntary agencies to increase further their assistance to
the Government of Somalia and to the various refugee
programmes sponsored by the Office of the High Commissioner so as to ensure the adequate and continuous
provision of emergency relief and humanitarian assistance to refugees in Somalia;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to dispatch a mission to
Somalia to make a comprehensive review of the refugee situatitm in that country in the light of developments since the publication of the report of the interagency mission which visited Somalia in December
1979:
7. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the High Commissioner, to arrange for
the report of the review mission to be circulated as soon
as it is published, so that the international community
may have an updated report on the condition of the refugees in Somalia and an assessment of their over-all
needs, including measures for strengthening the social
and economic infrastructure of the country;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner to continue their efforts to mobilize humanitarian assistance for the relief and rehabilitation of
the refugees in Somalia:
9. Urges Member States, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and intergovernmental and financial institutions to assist
Somalia in strengthening its social and economic
infrastructure so that essential services and facilities can
be strengthened and expanded:
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General. in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to submit the report of the

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

200

- -

proposed review mission on the current refugee situation in Somalia to the Economic and Social Council at
its first regular session of 1981;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the High Commissioner, to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/181.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/10 of 28 April 1980 and 1980/45 of 23 July 1980,
by which the Council requested the Secretary-General,
in co-operation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to send an interagency mission to
the Sudan to assess the needs and the magnitude of assistance required for the financing of the programmes
for the relief and settlement of refugees and to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session,
Having heard the statement of the High Commissioner100 concerning the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the visit of the interagency mission to the
Sudan from 12 to 22 June 1980, 102
Noting with appreciation that the Government of the
Sudan, with the help of the High Commissioner and the
international community, held an important and wellattended conference at Khartoum from 20 to 22 June
1980, entitled "International Conference on Refugees in
the Sudan",
Deeply concerned that the assistance rendered to the
Sudan falls far short of today's needs required to set in
motion the process of rehabilitation, settlement and
community development, together with the strengthening of national services to cope with the significant addition to the population caused by the continuing massive influx of refugees,
Recognizing the need for continued financial and
material support from the international community to
the refugees in the Sudan,
Recognizing further that the presence of large numbers
of refugees in the Sudan and the continued influx of
more refugees put grave pressures and strains on that
country's limited resources,
I. Commends the Secretary-General for sending an
interagency mission to the Sudan and for the comprehensive report prepared by the mission on the needs
and the magnitude of assistance required for refugees in
the Sudan; 103
2. Takes note with appreciation of the assistance that
has been rendered for refugees in the Sudan by several
Member States, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations;
3. Endorses the report of the interagency mission to
the Sudan 103 and the recommendations contained therein;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
report to Member States, international organizations
and voluntary agencies and to appeal to them, in close
10
'

0

'
'

A/35/4 IO.
Ibid., annex.

-- -

co-ordination with the High Commissioner, to provide
generous contributions to the refugees in the Sudan on
the basis of the report of the mission;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to send, as a matter of urgency, follow-up missions to carry out feasibility studies with a view to strengthening the capacity of the
Government of the Sudan to pursue cost-effective
strategies and to plan and locate new settlements as an
integral part of over-all rural and urban development,
on the basis of the recommendations of the mission;
6. Appeals to Member States, the High Commissioner, the United Nations organizations concerned
and voluntary agencies to render maximum financial
and material assistance to the Government of the Sudan
in its efforts to provide shelter, food and other services
to the growing number of refugees in that country;
7. Commends the initiative and endeavours of the
Sudan in convening at Khartoum the International
Conference on Refugees in the Sudan to draw the attention of the international community to the plight of
473,000 refugees and to the magnitude and complexity
of their situation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980
35/182.

Humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 100
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General, 104 the annex to which contains the
report on the assessment of the needs of the refugees in
DJibouti, as prepared by the interagency mission which
visited Djibouti from 5 to 11 June 1980,
Noting with satisfaction the oral report of the High
Commissioner with respect to assistance to the refugees
in Djibouti,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/11 of28 April 198Oand 1980/44 of23 July 1980on
assistance to the refugees in Djibouti,
A ware of the consequences of the social and economic
burden placed on the Government and people of
Djibouti as a result of the influx of refugees and the subsequent impact on the national development and infrastructure of that country,
Noting with appreciation the concern and continued
efforts of the Office of the High Commissioner, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization,
the World Food Programme and the non-governmental
organizations which have worked closely with the
Government of Djibouti on the relief and rehabilitation
programme for the refugees in that country,
l. Appreciates the action taken by the SecretaryGeneral in arranging and dispatching the interagency
mission to Djibouti to assess the needs of the refugees;
"" A/35/409.
