S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6603rd meeting
Friday, 26 August 2011, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Durmić
Mr. Vargas
Mr. Zhang Changwei
Mr. Buitrago
Mr. Jaillon
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Ms. Sommer
Mr. Khachab
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Demin
Mr. Govender
Mrs. Weekley
Mr. Banks

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Peacekeeping: taking stock and preparing for the future
Letter dated 5 August 2011 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/496)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-48209 (E)

*1148209*

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.35 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Azerbaijan. In accordance with rule
37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representative to participate in this meeting.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I shall now give the floor to the representative of
Australia.
Ms. King (Australia): At the outset, I would like
to join the others who have spoken today in expressing
Australia’s condemnation of the attack on the United
Nations compound in Abuja overnight. This is the
starkest reminder of the risks faced by United Nations
personnel working in the cause of peace, stability and
development. Any attack on the United Nations is an
attack on all of us. I would like to express our deep
sympathies to the families, friends and colleagues of
those affected, and of course to the Government and
people of Nigeria.
Australia welcomes the opportunity to address the
Council on the topic of peacekeeping operations, and
we thank India for convening this debate.
Peacekeeping remains at the core of the United
Nations. It is the most critical and highly visible
measure by which the Organization is judged. We
would like to limit our remarks to three issues.

Group on Timor-Leste, which continues to provide
suggestions regarding support to the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste and to serve as a
useful forum for consultation with stakeholders.
Secondly, it is important that peacekeeping
missions are provided with the necessary resources and
capabilities to take forward their complex roles.
Today’s missions need the resources and capabilities to
deal with twenty-first century challenges and
mandates. We need further analysis of different
capabilities that can improve missions’ effectiveness.
Critical enablers, such as communication tools and
analytical capabilities, can improve situational
awareness, assist with the development of earlywarning capacities and act as force multipliers.
Aviation assets can provide critical mobility, along
with firepower, but are often in short supply. We
welcome work under way to examine helicopter force
generation challenges.
Of course, the most valuable resource a
peacekeeping mission has is its people and their skills.
Efforts underway within the United Nations to develop
baseline capability standards for infantry battalions,
staff officers and medical support units are an
important step towards ensuring that peacekeepers are
better prepared and equipped. Timely information on
existing capability gaps would assist in ensuring there
is a coordinated and targeted approach to capacitybuilding. We look forward to the outcomes of the
impact assessment of the capability gap lists.

First,
regular
consultations
with
troopcontributing
countries
and
police-contributing
countries are an important mechanism to ensure that
peacekeeping mandates are informed by concrete
knowledge of ground realities and that expectations are
realistic and well understood. Consultative meetings
need to be structured, with advance notice of their
scheduling. We welcome the initiatives outlined in
today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/17) to
improve those processes.

Many speakers this morning emphasized the
important linkages between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Australia’s own recent experience with
peace and security operations in our own region —
including in Timor-Leste and Solomon Islands — has
placed a premium on the early transition to
peacebuilding, which we all recognize is the only way
to prevent societies coming out of conflict from sliding
quickly back into conflict. Early peacebuilding efforts
require the early deployment of qualified civilian
personnel. We look forward to the forthcoming report
of the Secretary-General on the civilian capacity
review.

We also believe it is critical that a range of
stakeholders are consulted in the development of
mandates and throughout the life cycle of a mission.
Informal mission-specific groups can play an important
role. Australia has been pleased to be a part of the Core

Bilateral and multilateral partnerships are an
important part of capacity-building for peacekeepers.
Australia seeks to share its peacekeeping experiences
through capacity-building and training. Our civilians,
police and armed forces work with our neighbours and

2

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

our partners, including our partners in the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands, to build
police and military peacekeeping skills.
Our final point relates to providing clarity in
relation to expectations of peacekeepers’ roles on the
ground. Peacekeepers are faced with tough decisions,
particularly when it comes to carrying out mandates to
protect civilians. For this reason, Australia has been a
strong advocate for specific protection-of-civilians
training and guidance. The development of
pre-deployment training modules, which include
scenario-based training tools, is a welcome step toward
addressing some of the uncertainties that peacekeepers
face in undertaking their duties. We encourage the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to deliver
those training modules to Member States and the field
as soon as possible.
We believe these tools can be further supported
through guidance for uniformed personnel on the
protection of civilians.
Military personnel in particular can have
important responsibilities when it comes to the
physical protection of civilians and other peacekeeping
personnel, which can require them to use force. We
look forward to the development of guidance on the
use of force, and have been pleased to support regional
conferences on that issue.
Australia believes that it is only through
consultation and burden-sharing on the part of all
parties that the peacekeeping partnership can retain its
strength and ability to address new challenges.
In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge
once again the service of the men and women deployed
to peace operations who are taking forward the vital
work of maintaining peace and security on the ground
for communities affected by conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Let me begin by
expressing Pakistan’s condemnation of the dastardly
terrorist act in Abuja. We offer our deepest condolences
and commiseration to the bereaved families, the
Government and people of Nigeria and all members of
our United Nations family.
The Pakistan delegation congratulates you,
Mr. President, on your able steering of the work of the

11-48209

Security Council this month and for convening this
very important open debate today. Your concept paper
(S/2011/496, annex) has flagged important issues
relevant to the subject and set precise parameters for a
productive debate.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Morocco on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Unlike any other mechanism for maintaining
international peace and security, United Nations
peacekeeping enjoys universal acclaim, costeffectiveness
and
professional
precision. An
indispensable tool in the hands of the Organization for
maintaining international peace, peacekeeping offers us
hope amid violence and conflict.
The success of United Nations peacekeeping in
recent years is the fruit of the concerted interplay
between the Member States, with their faith in and
commitment to peacekeeping; the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), with their provision of specialized
and trained manpower for areas of conflict and war;
and the United Nations Secretariat, with its overall
coordination and field support. Our collective interests
would be best served by building synergy.
The success of United Nations peacekeeping has
raised expectations for maintaining the trajectory of
past achievements in the face of ever-changing
political, operational and security environments.
Consequently,
increasingly
complex
and
multidimensional peacekeeping mandates are being
laid down to address diverse and volatile conflict
situations. At least 13 peacekeeping missions are
currently undertaking complex and multidimensional
peacekeeping mandates, and the number is set to grow.
Complex peacekeeping mandates are now a norm,
not an exception, and implementing them is
challenging, due to at least three underlying factors.
First, they involve important legal questions,
particularly on varying interpretations of the United
Nations Charter, State sovereignty, international
humanitarian law, and so forth. Secondly, the
operational challenges of peacekeeping have been
exacerbated by the prevailing financial and resource
constraints felt by the entire peacekeeping architecture.
Thirdly, an agreed narrative has yet to develop on
achieving a seamless transition from a peacekeeping
environment to an exit phase, focusing on, among other

3

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

aspects, the settlement of disputes and peacebuilding
strategies.
Pakistan believes that the guiding principle for
meeting those challenges and ensuring the long-term
success of peacekeeping operations must be adherence
to the United Nations Charter and the concept of
collective security. The Charter gives legitimacy to
United Nations peacekeeping. Respect for the Charter
and judicious interpretation of its provisions are
essential for maintaining the credibility and neutrality
of peacekeeping operations. This cannot and must not
be compromised on the altar of political expediency.
Recent events have proved that peace operations
conducted unilaterally or by different coalitions are
poor and costly substitutes for United Nations
peacekeeping.
The question of resource gaps is also a central
challenge for existing and future missions alike.
Despite their scope and extent, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are largely underfunded and
underresourced. In many missions, the scarcity of
troops and vital resources remains a critical issue,
threatening the Organization’s ability to operate
effectively and safely. While expenses and
remuneration for other United Nations activities are
adjusted for inflation and cost-of-living fluctuations,
peacekeepers are expected to work at fixed and archaic
rates.
It is no longer sustainable for TCCs to subsidize
United Nations peacekeeping, and the recent report of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/65/19) highlights this sustainability factor. In that
regard, the progress made by the Fifth Committee in
the last session will remain a temporary, stop-gap
measure if it is not backed by an institutional
mechanism for regular review of troop costs.
The third major challenge, concerning exit
strategies and seamless transitions to long-term
peacebuilding, also merits close consideration. We
believe that it is essential to dovetail such strategies
with the broader objectives of a peacekeeping mission.
Early investment in national institution-building,
together with the peaceful settlement of underlying
disputes, can only facilitate sustainable peace and
avoid relapses into conflict.
The role of peacekeepers in the early stages of
peacebuilding is crucial, especially in the areas of
combating organized crime, supporting local law

4

enforcement, medical outreach, epidemic control,
managing refugees and assisting humanitarian relief
efforts. However, the delicate and multidimensional
peacebuilding process requires civil expertise and a
focus on improving local capacity, political dialogue
and
institution-building.
The
Peacebuilding
Commission, with its unique composition, is better
placed to contribute to developing such cross-sectional
synergies.
For clear, realistic and achievable mandates,
greater understanding is required between the sanitized
confines of the Security Council, where mandates are
written, and the dusty fields of the conflict zones,
where those mandates are implemented. It warrants
regular consultations among the Security Council, the
TCCs, and the Secretariat. Such consultations with
TCCs can be held informally and more frequently, not
just within the Council’s Working Group on
Peacekeeping.
Greater emphasis on inclusiveness is essential at
all stages of peacekeeping missions, including in the
formulation and review of peacekeeping mandates.
Similarly, the evolution of United Nations
peacekeeping from its traditional form to more
complex mandates is driving the discourse on
peacekeeping reforms, which, like other aspects of
peacekeeping, must also remain transparent and
unpoliticized.
We hope that today’s open debate will enrich the
discourse on modern-day peacekeeping and its future
challenges with the objectivity that the subject
deserves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers and the Secretary-General in
condemning the heinous act of terror on the United
Nations building in Abuja. We wish to express our
solidarity and sympathy with the people and
Government of Nigeria, and we extend our sincere
condolences to the victims and their families.
My
delegation
wishes
to
thank
you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting, as well as
for the excellent non-paper (S/2011/496, annex)
reflecting many of the vital challenges that face United
Nations peacekeeping. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable remarks.

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

Indonesia associates itself with the statement
delivered by Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
We do indeed take comfort in witnessing the
cessation of conflict in some countries and their
progress in steady rebuilding and reconstruction. The
role and contribution of the United Nations and the
international community in their progress are
exceptional, and the Security Council has been
determined and decisive in that regard.
The experience of all those conflicts reaffirms the
critical importance of peacekeeping operations in
fulfilling the Council’s primary responsibility for
saving humankind from the scourge of war. We believe
that the continuing importance of peacekeeping
missions should be duly recognized. We therefore
reiterate our full support for the Council’s increased
recognition of United Nations peacekeeping as a global
partnership that draws on the contributions of troopand police-contributing countries, the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Secretariat, not to
mention the host country.
As this is a collective endeavour, all stakeholders
need to be on the same page with a sense of common
purpose in order to effectively address the challenges.
United Nations peacekeeping must also continue to be
clearly and firmly based on three basic principles,
namely, the interests of the parties concerned;
impartiality; and the non-use of force except in selfdefence and in defence of the Security Council
mandate.
As
missions
have
become
increasingly
multidimensional, complex and highly risky in some
theatres, our responsibility to provide explicitly clear
guidelines to Blue Helmets, along with the necessary
equipment, training and resources, has also become
more pronounced.
The political, human, financial, logistic and
information resources necessary to achieve the
mission’s mandate can be mobilized and sustained only
through continuous efforts to strengthen consultation
and coordination among our stakeholders. In this
regard, the views of troop- and police-contributing
countries are critical, and they, along with the host
country, should be more frequently and meaningfully
consulted.

11-48209

The question of resources, as highlighted in the
concept paper (S/2011/496, annex), indeed remains
vital. A lack of required resources could not only
impinge on the safety and security of peacekeepers, but
could also affect peacekeepers’ mandated capacities to
safeguard populations. To undertake the noble goal of
the protection of civilians, which my delegation fully
supports, adequate capabilities must be provided, along
with clear mission goals, in order to enhance the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
However, peacekeeping alone will remain
insufficient if our goal is to achieve sustainable peace.
A comprehensive approach that includes tackling root
causes and conducting peacemaking is often the key to
sustainable peace. Post-conflict peacebuilding is
therefore vital to helping war-torn societies transition
to durable peace. In that regard, the role of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
is
of
paramount
importance. In that context, we commend the Security
Council’s focus over the past two years on the nexus
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Furthermore,
it is important that skilled and culturally aware civilian
experts, especially from the global South, be deployed
in a timely manner in areas in which expertise is
required by the host countries.
Peacekeeping is one of the important elements of
Indonesia’s foreign policy. Indonesia has participated
actively in United Nations peacekeeping operations
since 1956, and is presently contributing to six
peacekeeping operations around the world. Indonesia
will continue its contribution and increase its
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Let me conclude by reiterating the importance for
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
and the international community to not only ensure the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, but also to
tackle the root causes of disputes and conflicts at the
earliest stage in a well-planned, coherent, coordinated
and comprehensive manner, in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): We were
dismayed to learn of the cowardly attack on the United
Nations office in Abuja, Nigeria, which has led to
numerous deaths. In this sorrowful context, I should

5

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

like, on behalf of the Government of Senegal, to
condemn this indescribable act, whoever was
responsible and whatever their motives may have been.
I convey my sincere condolences to the families of the
victims, to the people and the Government of Nigeria,
and to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. This
horrendous event serves as a reminder — if one were
necessary — of the need for the international
community to fight without concession against all
manners of extremism.
Mr. President, your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council is a cause of genuine
satisfaction for my delegation because of both your
personal qualities and the excellent relations between
your country and mine. Allow me, therefore, to extend
my warmest congratulations to you and to express my
sincere gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wittig, Permanent Representative of Germany, for his
valuable work last month.
For my country, peacekeeping remains one of the
most important and sensitive tasks of the United
Nations. It is an integral part of the collective
obligation of the international community under the
Charter of the United Nations, which confers upon the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Overall, peacekeeping operations have rewarded us
with significant results, and today more than ever the
world has a great need for these men and women —
soldiers, paramilitary and civilians — who serve the
most worthwhile cause: the cause of peace. My country
therefore pays a glowing tribute to the professionalism
and remarkable courage of the United Nations Blue
Helmets and to salute the memory of those who have
fallen over the past 60 years in the service of peace.
Senegal has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1960 and has certainly
paid a heavy price, in particular in terms of human
lives. Like other peace-loving nations, my country has
nevertheless accepted that consequence as proof of its
unwavering commitment to the ideals of the United
Nations.
That is why we are convinced that the launching
of a peacekeeping operation must follow a number of
parameters, starting with a clear and precise definition
of the mandate, its objectives and the tasks to be
undertaken. Furthermore, good planning is needed that
includes regular dialogue among the Security Council,

6

the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries,
along with an effective awareness-raising campaign on
the desired objectives.
The success of a peacekeeping operation also
involves the use of qualified, integrated and wellequipped personnel who are willing to respect the
traditions and customs of the area of operation. The
provision of the necessary equipment and adequate and
predictable funding are two other major challenges.
However, given that the financial problems faced by
the United Nations are essentially due to the
non-payment of contributions by Member States, it is
necessary to consider more predictable funding
sources, along with the critical financial involvement
of voluntary contributors, especially from the
developed countries.
The United Nations must continue its
peacekeeping
capacity-building
activities
by
coordinating the needs and resources of the United
Nations standby arrangements system as part of a
partnership among the troop-contributing Member
States and those countries that are able to provide the
appropriate equipment to deter belligerent forces. In
the same vein, the establishment at Member State level
of specialized peacekeeping reserve forces would
enable a rapid and effective deployment whenever it is
needed, especially in situations with a high risk of
violence, thereby undoubtedly preventing tragedy or
genocide.
Likewise,
strengthened
collaboration
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations would be desirable to
consolidate their conflict resolution mechanisms.
In this regard, my delegation stresses the need to
strengthen quantitatively and qualitatively the conflict
prevention, mediation and peacekeeping capacities of
the African Union. Moreover, the establishment of a
strengthened partnership with the African Union could
improve the planning, deployment and management of
African peacekeeping operations and contribute to
peace and security on our continent.
The difficulties that characterize peacekeeping
operations highlight the need to address the root causes
of current crises in order to limit their number and
consequences. To do that, we need a coherent, planned,
coordinated and comprehensive action able to
implement all the policy, social and development tools
intended to reduce tensions, many of which stem

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

directly from the rivalry among human groups for
survival.
Along the same lines, in some fragile States,
following a peacekeeping operation it would be wise to
emphasize the need to promptly implement coherent
development policies in order to support the
democratic processes under way and to create
propitious conditions for a world order based on a
spirit of partnership and solidarity. In that regard we
should finally integrate preventive diplomacy, which
through the institution of early warning systems could
be of great interest in neutralizing some conflicts at the
first signs.
Ultimately, if we want greater satisfaction in
future we must, while addressing the root causes of
some conflicts, combine diligence in the management
of peacekeeping operations with the rigor required by
preventive diplomacy and developmental tasks. The
task is heavy, but our will and determination are
equally strong.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): Before delivering my
statement, I too want to join previous speakers by
extending Japan’s deepest condolences and sympathies
to the victims of the outrageous bombing of the United
Nations building in the Nigerian capital and to their
bereaved families. Japan condemns in the strongest
terms such heinous acts, particularly directed against
those brave men and women.
At the outset, I would like to welcome your
initiative, Sir, to convene this open debate on the
critical issue of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Japan shares the views presented and
concerns raised in the concept paper prepared by the
Indian presidency (S/2011/496, annex). Japan has
worked vigorously on many issues pertaining to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in its capacity as
Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations for the terms 2005-2006 and 2009-2010. It
is our view that triangular cooperation among the
Council, the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries
(TCCs), police-contributing countries (PCCs) and other
stakeholders is the fundamental key to the success of
current peacekeeping operations, which have become
more complex and multidimensional in recent years.

11-48209

Throughout the course of its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, Japan
made efforts to establish a customary practice of the
Council to hold consultations with TCCs, PCCs and
other stakeholders at the time of the creation,
modification or extension of a peacekeeping mandate,
at least one week prior to the mandate’s adoption. In
parallel with this, the Working Group devoted several
meetings to and had serious discussions on the issue of
capability gaps, including the critical shortage of
military utility helicopters in several peacekeeping
missions. I would like to make my statement based on
these experiences.
With regard to the capability gap, Japan concurs
with the view set out in the concept paper that this
issue is an inevitable difficulty arising when the
Security Council translates its will into deeds on the
ground. It goes without saying that we must try to
minimize the gap, but the challenge is always how to
do so.
While the international community cannot
abandon its responsibility to protect civilians in need,
no matter how difficult the task may be, the resources
needed to fulfil such mandates are not likely to become
immediately available. Japan highly appreciates, in this
regard, the continuing efforts of the Secretariat to
develop, disseminate and update the gap list, which
have greatly helped us to recognize and understand the
existence of gaps. With that as a foundation, it is now
high time for us all to take further steps to elaborate on
the causes of gaps and the difficulty we have in filling
them.
As regards the triangular cooperation among the
Council, the Secretariat, TCCs, PCCs and other
stakeholders, Japan would like to reiterate its
importance not only for the purpose of improving the
quality of United Nations peacekeeping operations, but
also from the point of view of the transparency of the
activities of the Council. We have made significant
progress by holding dialogues with the force
commanders of various missions in the Council as well
as in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34).
The meetings with TCCs, PCCs and other
stakeholders are intended to enhance the understanding
of the Council through the first-hand views of TCCs,
PCCs and other stakeholders, so that peacekeeping
mandates may appropriately reflect the reality on the

7

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

ground in the form of a resolution. It is perfectly
reasonable that such meetings be held at least one week
before the adoption of the relevant Council resolution,
which was not the normal practice several years ago.
As to the quality of the discussion in those meetings,
however, it must be said that it is not necessarily
action-oriented. The meetings generally take the form
of briefings from the Secretariat followed by a few
questions and answers. Japan strongly recommends
that TCC and PCC meetings be aimed at solving
concrete problems through practical and concrete
discussions.
To that end, Japan calls for the Council, TCCs,
PCCs and other stakeholders to act. The responsibility
in this regard lies first and foremost with the Council.
The Council is the only body with the power and
responsibility, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, to adopt resolutions and
apply force to realize its intention to maintain
international peace and security.
Over the past two decades, the Council has been
successful in adjusting to a drastically changing world
by transforming peacekeeping operations appropriately.
However, some of the critical shortfalls currently
occurring in missions have the potential to cause
serious damage to the credibility of the Council. In
order to avoid such an outcome and fulfil its duty more
proactively, the Council should clarify and explain
what exactly are the issues and points to be amended in
the mandate, so that peacekeepers on the ground may
conduct their work more efficiently and effectively.
Japan would like to stress the important role and
responsibility of the Council, and therefore
recommends that agendas and points of discussion of
the meetings be clearly set sufficiently in advance of
the meeting date.
Security Council obligations notwithstanding,
responsibility for this issue does not rest with the
Council alone. The TCCs, PCCs and other stakeholders
should be strongly encouraged to share their first-hand
experience and awareness to the problems on the
ground. In this regard, Japan also concurs with the
proposal in the concept note. At the same time, my
delegation intends to continue its outreach regarding
this important issue in the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and the C34.
In conclusion, Japan would like to highlight the
fact that United Nations peacekeeping operations have

8

come to entail increasingly complex and interlinked
situations. Thus, further cooperation and coordination
among the Council, the General Assembly, the Member
States and the Secretariat are required. It is now time
for all United Nations peacekeeping actors to enhance
their efforts in order to respond to the high
expectations of the international community.
The President: I call on the representative of
Uruguay.
Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to convey the sincerest condolences of my country to
the people and Government of Nigeria and the United
Nations family for the reprehensible attack suffered in
Abuja.
We thank the presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this open debate and the
Secretary-General for his introductory remarks.
Peacekeeping operations have become a
fundamental and distinctive component of one of the
noblest tasks carried out by this Organization — the
maintenance of peace in the world. Keeping the peace
is a joint undertaking of the membership as a whole,
but, without prejudice to the efforts of any party, it is
primarily a task carried out by the troops and police of
contributing countries, which, in keeping with their
commitment to the principles and values enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, make their police
and armed forces available.
In this sense, we must not underestimate the
importance of broad-based support among all Member
States for the mandates adopted by the Council, in
particular taking into account the characteristics of the
complex tasks that it has begun to mandate, such as the
protection of civilians in immediate physical danger.
This would not only lend greater legitimacy and reduce
resistance to the implementation of these activities, but
also generate greater commitment among all
stakeholders involved in implementation.
With regard to cooperation with troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries, over the past two years we have seen
positive signs in several areas. These include greater
consultation between the Security Council and troopand police-contributing countries; greater interaction
between the Secretariat and the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations; and the active involvement
of TCCs in various consultation forums both at

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

Headquarters and in the field, demonstrating great
flexibility to adapt to the complex scenarios and tasks
assigned.
While all of this represents progress compared to
the situation a little more than one year ago, it is not
sufficient for the global alliance that is required to
provide comprehensive and effective responses to the
challenges facing peacekeeping to be solid and
sustainable. A genuine spirit of involvement cannot be
built simply by endorsing or rejecting ideas without
discussion; it must also include improved participation
in the building of agreements.
In this regard, we welcome the deepening and
strengthening of activities such as the holding of timely
meetings with TCCs prior to the renewal of mandates,
pursuant to resolution 1353 (2001). We see ample room
for improvement in this area, both in New York and in
the missions.

and material resources available to the United Nations.
That issue particularly affects developing countries,
which provide the great majority of troops, since it
influences the viability of their participation in
peacekeeping operations.
To conclude, I would like to state that this year
we are seeing tough and extensive negotiations within
the framework of the Working Group on ContingentOwned Equipment and in the second resumed session
of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly in
order to approve the budget for peacekeeping
operations. We must express our satisfaction that in
both cases an increase was ultimately achieved, which,
while modest, will certainly be preserved, extended
and periodically updated, even if through General
Assembly resolution 63/285, by a working group or
another mechanism, so as not to put at risk the
participation of TCCs in the important undertaking of
maintaining peace in the world.

Our experience has shown that informal
mechanisms have been much more productive. First of
all, we underscore the case of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in which the existence
of an active informal coalition of countries that are
closely involved with and committed to the success of
the Mission makes a decisive contribution to ensuring
that the leading TCCs on the ground can participate
directly and substantively in the most relevant
discussions on the development of this peacekeeping
operation, including on mandate extension.

Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): At the outset, I would
like to join others and express my Government’s strong
condemnation of today’s heinous attacks on United
Nations House in Abuja. We would like to convey our
deepest sympathies and sincere condolences to the
people and Government of Nigeria, the whole United
Nations family and, in particular, the families and
friends of the victims.

Secondly, we find the triangular exchanges
among the TCCs, the Council and the Secretariat in the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to be
extremely useful from a practical point of view. I take
this opportunity to commend the efforts of the
delegation of Nigeria as Chair of the Working Group,
not to mention our gratitude to Japan for the enormous
work it carried out in 2009 and 2010. Such interaction
is valuable if carried out in a frank and open way —
not as an opportunity to express dissatisfaction but as a
constructive exercise to avert threats, correct
weaknesses, promote strengths and take advantage of
opportunities.

Slovenia would like to express its appreciation to
the Indian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s open debate on the issue of
peacekeeping and to commend it for the invaluable role
that India plays as one of the leading troop contributors
in this respect. We would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-Moon for his remarks. At the same
time, we also wish to take this opportunity to thank
former Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his
vision, courage and determination during a period of
extraordinary challenges for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), which he has led so
skilfully over the past three years.

Turning to the issue of capacities, we believe that
missions as complex as those demanding our greatest
attention today cannot be sustainable without serious
consideration of the resources needed for their
adequate functioning and without updating the
conditions offered by the system for making human

Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union.

11-48209

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.

Peacekeeping, which was not foreseen in the
Charter of the United Nations — as the useful concept
note (S/2011/496, annex) that India drafted for this

9

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

meeting reminds us — has developed into a flagship
activity of the United Nations. Over the past decades,
we have witnessed the changing character of
peacekeeping.
Today, peacekeepers work in extremely difficult
conditions, often risking their lives. At times they have
a nearly impossible mission, trying to maintain peace
between warring factions with no peace agreement in
place, without adequate numbers, with insufficient
training and inadequate equipment, and lacking the
quality of leadership and civilian expertise that they
require.
Yet we should give United Nations forces great
credit for providing security to war-torn countries and
for assisting people whose livelihoods have been
washed away by floods or ruined by deadly
earthquakes. The presence of the United Nations on the
ground helps to prevent the escalation of
confrontations and paves the way for the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Peacekeepers save and protect
the lives of millions of civilians and provide muchneeded order, stability and hope.
Peacekeeping operations are the expression of a
global partnership and the international community’s
commitment. We strongly commend the dedication of
the United Nations soldiers, police officers and civilian
and aid workers who do the hard work, facing danger
around the world. As we mark the eighth anniversary
of the Canal Hotel bombing, we should pay tribute and
never forget the sacrifice of those who gave their lives
to help save others.
As the complexity of peacekeeping operations
has increased over the years, we must all join forces to
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping adapts and
adjusts to meet new and emerging challenges. At the
same time, it is expected that the demands of
individual United Nations peacekeeping missions will
further grow. Building on the progress achieved by the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), launched 11 years ago,
and the recent New Horizon Initiative, we need to
pursue reforms that will make current and future
operations more effective.
Peacekeeping missions require clear mandates.
Peacekeepers deserve practical and updated guidance
based on lessons learned. Such guidance would enable
them to implement their mandates to protect civilians
effectively and would provide better support to host
Governments, which bear the primary responsibility

10

for protecting their citizens. Such clear guidance will
also help them to use appropriate tactics when facing
various threats and challenges on the ground.
However, that is the task of all mission
components, not uniformed personnel alone. Therefore,
closer interaction among the military, police and
civilian dimensions of missions is essential, as it could
facilitate efficient strategies for the essential
peacebuilding role that peacekeepers play in
contemporary operations. Peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding are tools that should be deployed in
an integrated fashion. We must continue to evolve
towards a more flexible architecture of response that
allows us to customize our assistance to the immediate
and real needs on the ground.
Slovenia would like to emphasize the significance
of the civilian capacity review and its wide-ranging
recommendations aimed at strengthening international
civilian support for post-conflict countries. We have to
make better use of the capacity of regional and
subregional organizations and further strengthen the
United Nations partnership with them. We must seize
the political momentum generated by the 2010
Peacebuilding Commission review (S/2010/393,
annex), empower the Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund, and promote greater coherence
among the many components of the United Nations
system that make up the peacebuilding mosaic.
The
challenging
mandates
assigned
to
peacekeeping missions require appropriate resources
and adequate equipment to be implemented effectively.
As regards the planning and monitoring of
peacekeeping missions, we believe there is still room
for the further strengthening of the planning and
assessment process, particularly by increasing the
involvement of those countries contributing their
forces.
Slovenia welcomes regular communication
among the Security Council, the troop- and policecontributing countries, the Secretariat and other
stakeholders and encourages even more cooperation.
Likewise, we support the proposal of even more
frequent briefings by Force Commanders.
In implementing the global field support strategy,
which was designed to provide more predictable,
secure and flexible logistic support to contingents on
the ground, we must take into account the advice of our
women and men serving in the missions. That becomes

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

increasingly important in the wake of the global
financial and economic crisis, which constraints all
national budgets.
The Blue Helmets have recorded many
achievements in the past and recently, and United
Nations peacekeepers deserve greater recognition for
their service in Liberia, East Timor, Haiti, Lebanon, the
Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire, to mention just a few
examples. In Côte d’Ivoire, without the presence of the
United Nations operation, the post-election violence
earlier this year would have been much worse. In the
Sudan, the United Nations mission played a crucial
role in making the peaceful referendum on the selfdetermination of South Sudan possible. However,
disturbing reports from Southern Kordofan, especially
regarding the deliberate attacks and other gross
violations against the innocent Nuba people, should be
of strong concern to the international community.
Slovenia celebrated the twentieth anniversary of
its independence two months ago. Next May, two
decades will have passed since our country of 2 million
people became a United Nations Member. Recognizing
the importance of peacekeeping, Slovenia began
contributing servicemen to United Nations operations
immediately after joining the Organization. Since then,
more than 5,000 Slovenian peacekeepers have been
deployed to United Nations peacekeeping operations
around the world as a demonstration of our unwavering
commitment to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
My delegation would also like to highlight the
important role of women in peace and security. The
integration of the gender perspective in all stages and
sectors of peacekeeping and peace-related activities is
of vital importance to the successful outcome of
peacekeeping efforts. We commend the DPKO and
contributing Member States for their dedication to
gender mainstreaming and we encourage them to
continue to promote the cause of women. Those efforts
must be accompanied by increased protection of the
most vulnerable — girls and women — especially from
sexual violence. Slovenia strongly supports the
measures taken to establish and implement a zerotolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse. We
call on all peacekeeping personnel to act in full
compliance with that policy.
Let me close by saying that we must also expand
our work on conflict prevention, in particular to

11-48209

improve our ability to read the warning signs and
trigger early action. We believe that, in an increasingly
interdependent and complex world, every country has
to bear its share of global responsibility. Slovenia
stands ready to assume its share and to engage even
more in the maintenance of international peace and
security, fully, fairly and without delay.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to take a few moments to share the communiqué
just issued by the Peruvian Foreign Office regarding
the recent events in Nigeria. It indicates that Peru
firmly condemns the car-bomb attack on the United
Nations facility in Abuja, Nigeria. Criminal acts like
that of today, which caused the deaths of nearly 20
people, cannot be tolerated, particularly when they
target United Nations staff, working devotedly day-in
and day-out for international peace and development.
Expressing its solidarity with the victims, their families
and the United Nations, the Government of Peru urges
the relevant authorities to do everything in their power
to bring to justice those responsible for such a heinous
crime.
Regarding the matter before us today, my
delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened and organized this debate, offering us the
opportunity to speak on a matter to which Peru is
deeply committed. We are also grateful for the concept
paper from the President of the Council (S/2011/496,
annex). We also join in the thanks expressed to the
Secretary-General for his contribution to today’s
debate.
As indicated in the concept paper prepared by the
delegation of India, peacekeeping operations have
become a core instrument of the Organization in
fulfilling its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. These are
multidimensional operations involving military,
civilian and police personnel. We have accordingly
seen an increase in their number, in the diversity of the
tasks assigned to them, and in the risks they face. Yet
the resources allocated to them have not increased
proportionately to their tasks and the risks they face.
That is why this debate is important to preparing for
the future of peacekeeping operations.
That involves not just the provision of
appropriate human, logistic and financial resources, but

11

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

also the harmonization of operational concepts to
establish clear guidelines and procedures. Such
preparation is of the greatest importance, and my
delegation believes that we are very far behind in
providing for the needs of the peacekeeping operations.
I believe it is important to emphasize the
participation of the troop- and police-contributing
countries. Peru is of the opinion that we need close
interaction and greater understanding among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troopcontributing countries so that clear, realistic and
achievable mandates can be drawn up and available
resources used most efficiently. As recommended by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in
its most recent report (A/65/19), there must be full
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries so that they can participate from the outset in
all aspects and stages of peacekeeping operations,
especially when changes are made to the mandates of
missions. That is important in allowing lessons learned
to be assimilated and the experience and technical
knowledge of the troop- and police-contributing
countries to be brought to bear on the planning and
organizing of the missions through a triangular
cooperation.
As early as 2000, the Brahimo report
(S/2000/809) identified the most pressing challenges to
be faced and noted that the keys to the success of a
multidimensional mission are the commitment and
political support of the parties involved, rapid and
effective deployment with enhanced capacity, and a
peacebuilding strategy. Although we have made
progress on those elements, much still remains to be
done, particularly given the changing international
context and the fact that mandates are increasingly
complex and sensitive, as are the basic principles of
action for peacekeeping operations.
We have to ask whether we are meeting these
requirements when we draw up the mandates for
peacekeeping operations — for example, when they are
entrusted with the task of protecting civilians — or
when a full assessment is made of the circumstances
and capacity to deter and respond in legitimate selfdefence or in defence of the mandate.
In resolution 1894 (2009), the Security Council
reaffirmed its practice of drawing up reference
parameters to evaluate the progress of the
implementation of peacekeeping mission mandates,

12

including protection of civilians mandates. Such
parameters, along with the guidelines and strategic
frameworks being drawn up in various areas, are
important elements, and we must work still harder to
achieve a consensus that can be reflected in operations
in the field.
It is similarly important to recall that the majority
of peacekeeping operations carry out the earliest
peacebuilding operations. In September 2010, 10 of the
16 peacekeeping operations had mandates covering a
wide variety of peacebuilding operations, including the
direct implementation of such tasks by mission
personnel. That reveals the links and interactive
dynamic among achieving, maintaining and building
peace. Those aspects must therefore be provided for in
the mandates and resources allocated to peacekeeping
operations.
In concluding, I wish to underscore the
importance Peru attributes to preventive diplomacy in
peacekeeping operations and in the Peacebuilding
Commission. It is of the greatest importance that we
develop and implement measures that will permit us to
prevent conflict and reduce the risk of conflict flaring
up or recurring. The Secretary-General has reiterated
that point on many occasions, as did the Brahimi
report; the presidency of the Council reiterated it in
July. There remains an urgent need to establish
strategies and an effective system for conflict
prevention in the long term. That will require a holistic
approach, taking into account the relational dynamic
between security and development — an integrated,
coherent approach to the work of achieving, keeping
and building peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
debate today. It comes at a time when the United
Nations is facing multiple challenges in its
peacekeeping operations all over the world.
My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his participation in and
contribution to this debate.
Malaysia joins other delegations in condemning
the terrorist attack on the United Nations office in

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

Abuja, Nigeria, this morning, and wishes to offer our
condolences to the families of the victims.
Malaysia’s involvement in United Nations
peacekeeping operations began as early as 1960, only
three years after we became independent, with our
participation in the United Nations Operation in the
Congo. To date, Malaysia has participated in 24 United
Nations peacekeeping operations around the world, and
in NATO-led operations. That record clearly reflects
Malaysia’s firm commitment to and belief in the
central role of the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security, and its conviction that
United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
indispensable instrument that has contributed
immensely to the resolution of many armed conflicts,
both within and among States.
It is for those reasons that Malaysia currently has
a total of 1,151 military and police personnel serving in
various capacities in seven peacekeeping missions. We
also recognize the significant on-the-job experience
gained by Malaysian Armed Forces personnel through
their participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The opportunity to operate in an
international environment with forces from other
Member States, exposed to different doctrines and
geographic terrain, provides valuable lessons for
Malaysia’s troops. That international exposure has
contributed to enhancing the professionalism of
Malaysian Armed Forces personnel.
In that connection, my delegation fully supports
the various initiatives of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support aimed at further improving the quality,
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations and the well-being of United Nations
peacekeepers and staff members. Nevertheless, there is
still room for improvement, including by enhancing
transparency in the work of these two important
Departments.
In light of the many challenges confronting
United Nations peacekeeping operations, we see the
importance of being clear on the mandate concerning
the protection of civilians in regions affected by armed
conflict. That mandate is necessary in order to prevent
the unnecessary loss of innocent lives. But the
international community must be reminded that the
principal responsibility to protect civilians still lies
with national Governments. More importantly, United

11-48209

Nations peacekeepers mandated to protect civilians in
regions affected by armed conflict must be guided by
the principle of impartiality in discharging their duties.
In that regard, Malaysia is concerned about the
gaps in implementing mandates for the protection of
civilians — a concern that has recently been echoed by
some force commanders. Malaysia therefore reiterates
that the Security Council should ensure that mandates
on the protection of civilians must be clear and precise,
and that missions must also be provided with the
required key enablers in order to implement the
mandated tasks effectively and efficiently.
My delegation is also aware that there are
resource gaps in peacekeeping missions. I urge that the
funds represented by an annual budget of $8 billion be
utilized in a more efficient and transparent manner, and
that countries with the ability to contribute more not
shy away from providing more resources. While the
Secretariat has launched the global field support
strategy in order to address these issues, my delegation
appeals to those countries that have the means to
continue to contribute generously to the much-needed
key enablers in order to allow peacekeepers to conduct
their work successfully.
By the same token, we also wish to express our
concern about the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers globally, given the rising
numbers of casualties in recent months. We are also
concerned about delays in the evacuation of wounded
peacekeepers, as witnessed recently. Such delays can
lead to the loss of precious lives. My delegation
therefore urges the relevant authorities to facilitate
quick and uninterrupted medical evacuation and access
to medical care for wounded peacekeepers, who have
made sacrifices to bring peace and stability to the
world.
Malaysia is encouraged by the important role that
peacekeeping missions play in the process of
peacebuilding. Time and again, peacekeepers are
referred to as “early peacebuilders”. In that regard,
Malaysia will continue to uphold its commitment to the
attainment of global peace and stability, which will
enable countries to focus their resources on the pursuit
of economic and social development for the well-being
of their peoples.
With that in mind, all of our personnel deployed
in any United Nations peacekeeping mission will
always try to reach out to win the hearts and minds of

13

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

the local populace through quick-impact projects. At
the national level, Malaysia has always provided
assistance to countries in need through Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme initiatives, with the
aim of contributing to nation-building in affected
countries. In addition, Malaysia has always encouraged
its business community to invest in developing
countries, helping to provide more jobs and wealth
creation, particularly in countries affected by conflict.
In order to ensure that our peacekeepers are well
trained and ready to perform the duties required of
them, the Malaysian Government established its own
Peacekeeping Training Centre in 1996. The Centre not
only provides training for Malaysians but is also open
to foreign participants. In January 2010, it hosted the
eleventh United Nations Senior Mission Leaders
course, in which 24 participants from 20 countries,
representing military, police and civilian institutions,
attended a 14-day course. We will continue to upgrade
the Centre’s facilities, as well as the quality of the
training provided, based on United Nations best
practices and the experience that we have gained over
the past 51 years in United Nations peacekeeping
missions.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Malaysia’s
firm and continuing support for peacekeeping activities
under the umbrella of the United Nations, and that the
United Nations can continue to count on Malaysia’s
direct contribution in this important area in future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Kyrgyzstan shares
the sentiments of the Secretary-General and others and
expresses its deep condolences to the victims and
families of the United Nations workers in Nigeria, and
to the people and Government of Nigeria. Kyrgyzstan
strongly condemns the attacks there today.
Let me thank you, Sir, for having organized this
open debate on the topical subject of United Nations
peacekeeping activities. Representatives of the Kyrgyz
Republic began participating in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in 1998 as military observers
and civilian police. Every year since then, we have sent
about 30 servicemen and officers from our lawenforcement organizations to peacekeeping missions,
mainly in the States of the African continent. Given
that almost three-quarters of United Nations
peacekeeping personnel and budget allotments are used

14

in that region, Kyrgyzstan supports the proposal to
strengthen the peacekeeping capacity of the African
Union.
In recent years, along with its experience
participating in peacekeeping missions, Kyrgyzstan has
gained invaluable experience in the fields of preventive
diplomacy,
peacebuilding
and
post-conflict
reconstruction during its two people’s revolutions,
particularly in the fight against terrorism and in
combating drug trafficking. As a country ever striving
for greater democracy, we are therefore ready to
expand our participation in peacekeeping activities in
their current forms and within the broad mandate of
contributing to the maintenance of peace and security.
Today, the potential of United Nations
peacekeeping activity has significantly increased both
quantitatively and qualitatively, and thus demands a
comprehensive approach to peacebuilding and to
strengthening the partnership between the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Secretariat, the
countries that send peacekeepers, and host States. It is
important that we have an organic system of military,
diplomatic and other measures for resolving conflicts.
And this will undoubtedly need additional measures in
order to develop and implement better mechanisms for
mobilizing the resources that peacekeeping operations
require. Only then can we expect to see improved
effectiveness in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities.
The significant growth in the role and scope of
peacekeeping operations and their expanded functions
require the enhanced effectiveness of regional and
subregional organizations. Given the experience of last
year’s tragic events in Kyrgyzstan, we believe it is
important that, along with traditional partners like the
African Union and the European Union, the United
Nations foster increased cooperation with other
regional organizations. In particular, we refer to the
Collective Security Treaty Organization in order to
enhance the effectiveness of mediation and the
peaceful settlement of possible disputes in the region.
One of the important lessons which Kyrgyzstan
has learned concerns the need to clarify the legal
framework for international cooperation, including in
the mandates of regional organizations and in
non-standard situations. On the other hand, measures
taken at the national level must serve as a necessary
component. For example, Kyrgyzstan will make

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

additional efforts towards the legislative regulation of
peacekeeping activity at the national level. Currently, a
draft law on principles and modalities for the
participation of the Kyrgyz Republic in the activities of
maintaining international peace and security is being
elaborated. The law defines certain basic concepts for
the first time, including the components of
peacekeeping activity of the Kyrgyz Republic, and the
order of formation and deployment of peacekeepers
outside the country. It eliminates legal gaps and creates
the necessary legal mechanisms.
Kyrgyzstan is also in favour of improving the
planning system and expanding programmes on the
targeted training of peacekeeping personnel, especially
relating to promoting women to relevant positions in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We see that as
another reserve for strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping capacity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Before I deliver
my statement, I wish to state that the Philippines joins
other Member States in strongly condemning the
bombing of the United Nations office in Abuja, and
expresses its deep condolences over the United Nations
personnel and Nigerian citizens who perished, as well
as those who were seriously injured in that horrific
attack.
The Philippine delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this timely
and important open debate on the present and future of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As a country
committed to committing troops and police to various
United Nations peacekeeping missions, the Philippines
highly values this opportunity to engage the Security
Council in meaningful discussion on the challenges we
face and ways to collectively resolve them.
The Philippines aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Kingdom of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. My delegation likewise expresses its
appreciation for the briefing by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, which set the tone of our debate today.
We also welcome the heightened interaction and
dialogue among other key stakeholders of the global
peacekeeping agenda, including the Secretariat, the
General Assembly and troop- and police-contributing

11-48209

countries. One concrete example of such productive
interaction has been the recently held informal meeting
between the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the heads of military components.
As we listened intently to the Force Commanders
of 16 United Nations peacekeeping missions, we
derived relevant and useful insights, learned critical
lessons and figured out ways on how best to move
forward. We thank the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for having organized the meeting, and look
forward to further interactions with our men and
women in the field and to seeing the recommendations
generated during those interactions transformed into
concrete action.
Philippine participation in peacekeeping missions
dates back 48 years to the deployment of a 40-man Air
Force squadron to the Congo. Since then, the
Philippines has modestly contributed to various
peacekeeping missions in fulfilment of its international
commitment to maintaining international peace and
security. Despite its limited resources, the Philippines
strives to find ways and means to assist the United
Nations by contributing troops and police officers to
existing and emerging missions.
I am pleased to highlight that my country is
playing an active part in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, under the leadership
of our very own Major General Natalio Ecarma III, in
which a 344-strong Filipino contingent is deployed. At
present, the Philippines is strengthening its own
peacekeeping mechanisms and charting a new road
map to allow it to increase the number of its
peacekeepers and expand its participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in the near future.
Today, the Philippines has the modest number of
893 military and police personnel serving in seven
peacekeeping operations around the world. I wish to
highlight that 10 per cent of our peacekeepers are
women — a figure which will surely increase in the
years ahead. The Philippines is a strong partner of the
United Nations in the promotion of women’s active
involvement and participation in peacekeeping. We
fully support the idea of integrating the gender
perspective in the deployment of peacekeeping
personnel, and continue to play our part in putting that
into practice.
The
Philippines
strongly
advocates
the
continuous training and development of peacekeepers

15

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

to strengthen the effectiveness and success of their
missions. To this end, the Philippines successfully
hosted the first training of trainers in the Asian region
in June in Manila. Participants from 13 countries were
trained to present the new United Nations police
standardized training curriculum on preventing and
investigating sexual and gender-based crimes to police
officers, in preparation for their deployment to a field
mission. The training-of-trainers course is specifically
designed for the post-conflict environment and ensures
that United Nations police officers will have the
required knowledge of procedure and the skills
necessary to assist their counterparts in the host State
in preventing and investigating sexual crimes and
gender-based violence throughout the investigation,
prosecution and trial processes.
The Philippines is satisfied with the achievements
made by the United Nations thus far, and would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the courageous
and dedicated men and women serving under the blue
and white flag of the United Nations. The Philippines
is especially mindful of the sacrifices made by our
peacekeepers, especially those who are deployed under
harsh and hostile conditions, and salutes all those who
have given their lives to the cause of peace.
At the same time, the Philippines acknowledges
and appreciates the continued efforts made by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support to keep us abreast of
developments in the field of peacekeeping and to fully
address the increasing demand for peacekeepers
worldwide,
despite
countless
challenges
and
difficulties.
Based on its experience as an active troop- and
police-contributing country, the Philippines notes that
the surge in and increased demand for peacekeepers are
not often matched by the capabilities and resources
necessary to meet our peacekeeping commitments.
This is not only a budgetary problem, but also involves
the careful and methodical planning and effective
execution of the mandates conferred by the Security
Council. It is imperative that we continue to find ways
and means to ensure the safety and protection of our
peacekeepers. Hence, we must ensure that they are
adequately armed and equipped to enhance their
capacity to protect themselves in high-risk areas.
The Philippines believes that the solution to the
challenges lies in our collective will and action. As we

16

implement the peacekeeping reform agenda, the
extensive experiences we have gained on the ground
could enrich discussions on vital areas such as policy
and capability development, global field support
strategies, and planning and oversight. There is no
silver bullet that will solve the complicated and risky
operation of peacekeeping, but through hard work,
perseverance and wise decisions we can always
improve the utilization of our scarce resources and
apply our collective experiences to ensuring the
successful deployment of peacekeepers and the
completion of their mission.
In closing, let me reiterate my country’s full
cooperation with the Security Council, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support, and once again manifest our unwavering
commitment to helping maintain international peace
and security and to preventing the escalation of conflict
at various points across the globe.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to contribute to the
Council’s deliberations on the challenges facing
contemporary United Nations peacekeeping operations.
For Canada, this is an issue of primary importance.
Let me first acknowledge the sacrifices of those
who serve in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including the men and women who have lost their lives
in the cause of peace this past year. United Nations
personnel continually rise to meet new challenges with
professionalism and dedication amid difficult and often
dangerous conditions. Today’s bomb attack outside the
main United Nations office in Abuja reminded us again
of the sacrifices made and challenges faced by the
brave women and men who work for peace and
security. We condemn this terrorist attack on the United
Nations and we extend our sincerest condolences to the
families of the victims and to the Government and
people of Nigeria.
Indeed, the United Nations efforts have
contributed to a number of key successes over the past
year. These include the peaceful conduct of the
referendum on the future status of Southern Sudan and
the re-establishment of public services and security in
Haiti after the earthquake, followed by the peaceful
conclusion of Haiti’s presidential elections.

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

This said, United Nations personnel continue to
be tested by the complex operational environments in
which they work. These environments are often
characterized by multidimensional challenges and
asymmetric threats requiring an agile response from
our personnel. There remain a number of critical issues
facing contemporary peace operations. I would like to
focus my remarks today on three issues of particular
relevance to the Security Council: responding to the
gap in expectations, generating capabilities, and
building a comprehensive doctrinal framework.
First, let me address the issue of expectations.
Peacekeeping forces are called upon time and again to
perform a wide range of mandated tasks, from
protecting civilians in the lingering violence of
post-conflict settings to monitoring elections and
capacity-building of national security elements. Such
tasks require mandates and forces designed for
flexibility, responsiveness and mobility — in short,
military, police and civilian personnel fully able to
adapt to changing conditions on the ground.
Unfortunately, complex mandates are often not
matched with either sufficient or the most appropriate
capacities. We must also acknowledge that there will
always be limits to the sources of personnel and funds
needed to meet all of the needs that we believe should
be addressed. The Council must wisely balance the
expectations laid out in its mandates with the realities
of what can be readily achieved with the capabilities
available. The Council must also recognize that the
complex challenges typical of these environments
require solutions that cannot be realized in the shortterm.
Complex mandates therefore demand personnel
who are well trained and well equipped, are devoted to
missions, and have the full flexibility to be employed
across the spectrum of tasks and the breadth of the
field of operations, as the mission leadership requires.
We should note the recommendations contained in the
report (S/2011/85) of the Senior Advisory Group on
civilian capacities appointed by the Secretary General,
which lays out some proposals for the recruitment,
training, deployment and coordination of expertise
across United Nations missions.
In order for personnel to achieve the agility
required to carry out ever more complex mandates, all
Member States must assume responsibility for the
expectations these mandates create. This includes host

11-48209

Governments, which must bear their share of
responsibility for ensuring that the mission achieves
the results that the population needs. These
expectations can only be managed effectively if the
Security Council ensures that, from the earliest
planning stages, there is a meaningful dialogue
between the Council, Member States — in particular
troop- and police-contributing countries and host
Governments — and the Secretariat.
(spoke in French)
Secondly, producing the desired effect within
multidimensional
missions
demands
adequate
capabilities. The New Horizon initiative rightly focuses
on improving capabilities, streamlining and increasing
effectiveness at the level of Headquarters and in the
field. These two elements are complementary. Member
States also need to ensure that the achievement of the
major objectives of the New Horizon initiative is
maintained so that, in the mid-term, the United Nations
can effectively generate the capabilities needed to
deliver the more complex and diverse responsibilities
within existing budgetary capacities.
Thirdly, progress has been made in developing
policy doctrine and norms for peacekeeping personnel,
but much work still lies ahead to build a solid doctrinal
framework for all personnel. Without this, effective
recruitment standards and pre-deployment training and
the matching of capabilities with assignments cannot
follow. The international community can ill afford to
fail in sustaining efforts to standardize practices,
streamline management, deepen expertise and clarify
roles and responsibilities within the United Nations
system and with partners. Achieving sustainability in
operations depends upon such accountability.
Moreover, the challenges facing peacekeeping missions
continue to evolve. Without the revised framework for
peacekeeping that New Horizon proposes, there is a
danger of a widening disconnect between the Council’s
response to emerging, unexpected challenges, and the
tools and capabilities available.
In closing let me underscore that we, the States
Members of the United Nations, must find common
approaches to strengthen all facets of peace operations.
Canada remains committed to this end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.

17

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): Like other delegations,
Uganda condemns the attack today on the United
Nations building in Abuja, Nigeria. We express our
deep sympathy and condolences to the victims, their
families, and the people and Government of Nigeria
and, through the Secretary General, to the United
Nations family.
I thank you, Sir, for organizing this important
debate and the concept note (S/2011/496, annex)
prepared to help steer today’s discussions. We thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing this
morning. This debate comes at a time when United
Nations peacekeeping is being put to the test by new
challenges to global peace and security. Addressing
these challenges requires a more concerted and
comprehensive approach at all levels if the United
Nations is to meet the present and future challenges.
Uganda
acknowledges
the
important
contributions that peacekeeping operations have
continued to make to the cardinal role of the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security. The United Nations has attained successes in
many areas, but there have also been a number of
setbacks. That is why it is crucial for the Council to
continuously evaluate and reflect on whether its
peacekeeping approach to conflict situations and the
prescribed solutions are correct.
I would like to make five points. First, it is
important to recognize that an ineffective United
Nations peacekeeping capability anywhere around the
world greatly hurts the Organization, particularly in the
eyes of an affected population. As aptly put in the
concept paper, the United Nations needs to address the
current mismatch between resources and mandates to
address the performance deficit.
It is difficult for missions in hostile and
dangerous situations to effectively carry out their
mandates without the requisite capabilities. It is
therefore essential that United Nations peacekeeping be
adaptable and effective enough to deal with new
challenges. In recent years, we have seen a welcome
shift
towards
more
robust
United
Nations
peacekeeping, such as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. However, that very Mission has until
recently lacked vital resources, such as air assets, to
fulfil its mandate.

18

Secondly, we are convinced that if peacekeeping
operations are to achieve their intended purpose, the
root causes of conflicts need to be carefully identified
and appropriately addressed at the planning stage. This
requires a clear understanding of the situation on the
ground. United Nations peacekeeping efforts should
support the political resolution of conflict, respect the
sovereignty of States, remain impartial and work with
all parties to overcome their problems.
Thirdly, the relationship between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries is particularly
crucial. It is crucial because the political objectives and
peacekeeping mandates of missions need to be clear
and credible. The mandates of peacekeeping operations
should include a range of measurable benchmarks. A
stronger understanding between contributing countries
and the Council as to what is expected of peacekeeping
missions to fulfil these objectives can greatly facilitate
the achievement of mission objectives. Uganda
therefore welcomes and supports efforts to strengthen
cooperation and interaction among all stakeholders in
peacekeeping operations.
Fourthly, the challenges of modern-day
peacekeeping attest to the fact that not even the United
Nations on its own is capable of dealing with the new
challenges. Given the capabilities demonstrated by
regional organizations, such as the African Union and
its subregional organizations, the United Nations
should take maximum advantage of their strengths and
the roles that they can play. This will require the
strengthening of strategic relationships with such
organizations, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. This will improve the capacity of these
organizations to contribute to the efforts of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. In this regard, Uganda welcomes the support
given to the African Union Mission in Somalia in
working the stabilization of that country. However, my
delegation underscores the importance and urgency of
the Security Council providing the Mission with
predictable, reliable and timely resources and force
enablers in order to fulfil its mandate.
Fifthly, the early inclusion of some aspects of
peacebuilding, especially socio-economic reconstruction
activities, in peacekeeping operations is vital to
durable recovery and success. It is important to ensure
that people afflicted by conflict get tangible peace
dividends through the provision of such basic services
as health care, education, shelter and improvement of

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

their standards of living. In this regard, my delegation
calls on the United Nations system to ensure greater
coherence
in
peacemaking,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development activities.
Finally, Uganda pays tribute to the men and
women of the United Nations, many of whom serve in
some of the most dangerous places on Earth. We
especially remember and honour those who have paid
the ultimate sacrifice in the service of peace.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the President
of the Security Council for having convened this
important meeting. Venezuela expresses its disgust at
the acts of terrorism carried out against United Nations
facilities in Nigeria and the regrettable loss of human
life.
Our delegation aligns itself with the declaration
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by
the Permanent Representative of Morocco.
Peacekeeping operations are valuable tools within
the various political resources available to the United
Nations to assist in the resolution of conflicts within
the framework of its efforts to strengthen international
peace and security. The nature of their mandates has
recently been subject to an important transformation
process. These operations have increased over the past
two decades, both in the number of field missions and
in the number of troops deployed.
Some political and military Powers call for
strengthening the persuasive capacity of peacekeeping
missions, but what they really want is to undermine the
full exercise of sovereignty of the countries involved.
The doctrines that certain Powers seek to introduce
violate the basic principles of peacekeeping operations,
namely, the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence.
Given the current climate of rampant
imperialism, which seeks to maintain or regain
political and military dominance over developing
countries, it is more necessary than ever to safeguard
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of nations. In the light of recent experiences, it is
imperative to ensure that peacekeeping operations
fulfil the noble purpose for which they were created. It
is therefore imperative that, in implementing mission

11-48209

mandates, no threat be posed to their legitimacy and
the complex relationship of trust that they must
maintain with the countries in which they are deployed.
On this basis rests, in large measure, any political
process that seeks to achieve a just and lasting peace.
The increase in peacekeeping operations is
evidence of the growing tensions and conflicts in the
world. Conflict situations will continue to proliferate
so long as the structural situations of poverty, injustice,
oppression, exploitation and foreign domination
promoted by neo-colonial ambitions persist.
Since we are talking today about peacekeeping
and conflict resolution, we would like to refer to the
assault perpetrated against the accredited embassy and
diplomatic residency of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela in Libya on 23 August by an armed and
violent mob, causing extensive damage to its facilities
and endangering the lives of the people who were
there. As they publicly proclaimed, the irrational
assailants had planned to assassinate the accredited
Venezuelan Ambassador, Mr. Afif Tajeldine.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela deplores
the fact that those responsible for these criminal
actions answer to the self-styled National Transitional
Council which, with irrational stubbornness, has
criticized Venezuela’s firm position in defence of
international law, expressed by its respect for the
sovereignty and self-determination of the Libyan
people.
It is well known that the National Transitional
Council is protected by the United States of America
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela denounces these
countries for seeking to seize the invaluable water
resources, hydrocarbon reserves and international
assets of the Libyan people, which amount to some
$200 billion dollars.
Following the destruction of one of the best
infrastructures on the African continent, built for the
welfare of the Libyan people, the aggressor Powers
have begun to redistribute among themselves, through
acts of pillage, the lucrative contracts for the
reconstruction of that country, thus turning the
destruction of a developing country into an immoral
business transaction.
Resolution 1973 (2011) established that the
sovereignty and territorial unity and integrity of Libya

19

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

must be respected. Who authorized the killing of
thousands of civilians in Libya in the name of
defending civilians? Who authorized the destruction of
civilian facilities, such as schools, hospitals and
universities, in that country? The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela declares that arming, training and
supporting internal subversive groups in Libya,
promoting and financing a regime change, ordering the
assassination of the leader of a sovereign nation, and
attacking the territorial integrity and political
independence of Libya are clear and systematic
violations of the now unspeakable resolution 1973
(2011) and the Charter of the United Nations,
undermining the fundamental principles and norms of
international law.
At this tragic, historic time when international
peace and security are threatened, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela reiterates its call on all the
parties to the conflict in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
establish an immediate ceasefire that allows for
negotiations towards reaching a political solution in
order to avoid further bloodshed and that lays the
foundations for a lasting peace in that sister nation,
under the good offices that the African Union has
proposed since the beginning of the conflict.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
that it recognizes only the Government led by
Muammar Al-Qadhafi and that it will not recognize
any Government set up in Libya as a result of that
interventionist imperialist aggression.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
requested the Secretary-General to condemn the
violation of the sovereignty of the homeland of the
liberator Simón Bolívar and to reiterate the
international obligation to guarantee the inviolability
of diplomatic missions accredited to the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and the

20

Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
declaration.
We were deeply saddened by the loss of life in
the brutal attack on the United Nations building in
Abuja today. We extend our heartfelt sympathies to the
families and friends of the victims, the SecretaryGeneral, our United Nations colleagues and the
Government and the people of Nigeria. The European
Union strongly condemns that senseless act of violence
towards the United Nations and its personnel.
The answer to the question of whether
peacekeeping works is a clear and resounding “yes”.
That is the conclusion of one of the many studies in the
recent past to have sung the praises of peacekeeping.
Bringing in peacekeepers reduces the risk of war
recurring by no less than 84 per cent, according to
factual evidence cited in that particular study. It is
definitely a fact that we cannot take such a success rate
for granted. Peacekeeping needs to keep up with a
world constantly changing and the partnership
underpinning it needs constant nurturing. That is why
the EU would like to thank Council President India, a
major troop-contributing country, for having organized
today’s debate. It represents an important opportunity
to take stock and prepare for the future, to paraphrase
the useful concept note before us (S/2011/496, annex).
In the future, the United Nations can continue to
count on the EU’s unwavering support for
peacekeeping. The United Nations and the EU see eye
to eye on crisis management, with a vision of all
instruments — political, civilian and military — being
mobilized in the interest of peace. Aside from the
considerable direct support of the EU and its member
States, our own EU missions buttress the United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, depending on the
strategic context and situation. Such EU missions come
in different shapes and sizes, for example stand-alone,
bridging and stand-by operations.
Peacekeeping stands or fails by the partnership
among the Security Council, General Assembly bodies,
contributing countries, host parties, regional and other
partners and the Secretariat. To act in the spirit of
partnership means, for example, that the Security
Council involves contributing countries as early and as
much as possible. It means that we all work to preserve
a culture of consensus decision-making, where it
exists, and the commitment of all partners to the

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

objective of financially realistic and field-driven
peacekeeping.
I say “field-driven” because our men and women
on the ground are often a few steps ahead of us, as we
saw during last month’s useful meetings of the Security
Council (see S/PV.6592) and Committee of Thirty Four
(C-34) with Force Commanders. Whether we are
talking about robust peacekeeping, the protection of
civilians, early peacebuilding, implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, or the better use
of intelligence for early warning, they know what it
takes to get the job done. The EU supports the proposal
of more regular contact with Force Commanders via
video link. Such contact offers all of us at the
Headquarters level a chance to learn how we can adapt,
for example, peacekeeping doctrine, policy documents
and training modules, including on the implementation
of protection mandates, to make for a better fit with the
field.
Aside from taking stock, we would like mostly to
use today’s debate to prepare for the future. Allow me
to briefly touch upon a number of current challenges.
First of all, we must further clarify and concretize
the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus. Now that, after
years of expansion, peacekeeping seems headed
towards a consolidation phase, this is a policy area that
demands our attention. Last year’s New Horizon
progress report rightly highlighted that. Peacekeeping
operations can help national authorities and other
partners to set peacebuilding priorities, facilitate their
implementation by providing security, and take on
some early peacebuilding tasks themselves.
However, as the C-34 stressed this year, we need
clarity and our peacekeepers need clarity. From the
earliest stages of planning onward, they need to know
exactly what is expected of them in that field and what
is not. The EU hopes that the upcoming strategy for
critical early peacebuilding tasks undertaken by
peacekeeping operations will contribute to that. Of
course, we also look to the Peacebuilding Commission
to continue to play its role in further clarifying and
concretizing the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus.
A closely related challenge is the implementation
of the recommendations of the comprehensive review
of international civilian capacities (S/2011/85).
Civilian aspects of peacekeeping operations, such as
election monitoring, police reform and support for the
promotion and protection of human rights, have proven

11-48209

to be instrumental to mission performance. Recruiting
civilian specialists for those newer peacekeeping tasks
was identified as a particular challenge in the New
Horizon report, and the comprehensive review came up
with many ways in which we could rise to that
challenge. Quite a few of the recommendations could
be implemented without delay, and the EU encourages
the Secretariat to do so. Other recommendations may
require further elaboration, and we look forward to the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General to flesh them
out. The EU has ample experience in that field through
our Common Security Defence Policy operations, and
we are ready to share it, while systematically seeking
synergies with the United Nations.
Besides civilian capacities, we also need to
secure military capabilities, including critical
equipment. That is the third and last challenge that the
EU would like to briefly highlight today. These days, a
peacekeeper needs more than a blue helmet. As we can
read in the New Horizon report, “new peacekeeping
tasks demand new equipment, from night vision and
modern communication equipment to naval vessels”. In
that regard, we know that there is a pressing need for
military helicopters, especially where the area of
operations is vast and the infrastructure limited. The
urgency of the matter at hand calls for pragmatic and
swift solutions, and the EU looks forward to studying
and discussing the Secretariat’s forthcoming proposals.
More generally, whether it concerns civilian
capacities or military capabilities, the EU continues to
support the Secretariat’s ongoing efforts to put in place
a comprehensive, capability-driven approach to
peacekeeping. Of course, making peacekeeping more
effective is about more than ensuring that the different
pieces of the puzzle are on the table. They also have to
fit together. In other words, we need to work hard on
close cooperation among the civilian, military and
police components of a mission, including through
clear doctrine and comprehensive strategic and
operational planning.
Before I close, the EU would like to pay tribute
to our men and women on the ground, serving in
peacekeeping missions around the world, some of
whom have paid the ultimate price in the pursuit of
peace. Earlier this month, we sadly lost four
peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei. We hope that the results of the
ongoing investigation into the circumstances of their
deaths will soon be considered.

21

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

Finally, the EU wants to thank former UnderSecretary-General Le Roy for his dedication and
determination. It wishes him all the best as he sets
sights on new horizons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
joining other colleagues in condemning in the strongest
possible terms this morning’s deadly attack on the
United Nations building in Abuja. The people and
Government of Bangladesh stand by the people and
Government of Nigeria, as well as the members of the
United Nations family, at this difficult time.
My
delegation
expresses
its
heartiest
congratulations to the Indian delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. I also take this opportunity to thank the
presidency for focusing this debate on the theme
“Peacekeeping: taking stock and preparing for the
future” and for sharing with us a thought-provoking
concept note (S/2011/496, annex). It amply delineates
the priority and importance attached to the cause of
international peace, security and stability by the
Security Council. Our appreciation is also owed to the
Secretary-General and other speakers for their
statements.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Kingdom of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
It hardly requires reiterating that United Nations
peacekeeping is a unique and flagship activity of the
Organization. The presence of Blue Helmets in the
field provides hope of sustainable peace to the victims
of conflict, buttresses efforts to achieve peace among
world communities, reinvigorates related activities for
making peace sustainable, and compels conflicting
parties to resort to a peaceful solution.
In that regard, we convey our heartfelt gratitude
to those who have made the ultimate sacrifice while
working under the United Nations umbrella. However,
their sacrifice was not in vain. Mediation and
peacekeeping have contributed to an 80 per cent
decline in the total number of armed conflicts since the
end of the cold war. As the study suggests, 87 per cent
of United Nations peacekeeping operations have been
successful, as compared to the 50 per cent success rate
of other peace operations. Furthermore, United Nations

22

peacekeeping is the most cost effective vis-à-vis that of
others. Above all, the opportunity cost of peacekeeping
is immeasurable in terms of any financial or other
resource standard. It means that United Nations
peacekeeping is a must, and that we must ensure proper
and effective support services to peacekeeping
missions for the effective implementation of their
mandates.
Peacekeeping has turned out to be a more
multidimensional and complex task compared to what
it was a few years ago. The future success of a
peacekeeping mission will therefore largely depend on
the political support that it receives and on the
adequate and timely provision of financial, logistical
and human resources, as well as the involvement of
stakeholders on the ground. In that regard, we reiterate
the importance of closer and active involvement with
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and policecontributing countries when deciding on new
peacekeeping missions or extending or amending the
mandates of current missions. We emphasize the
following specific measures for building an effective
partnership throughout the whole process, especially at
both the decision-making and the implementation
levels, for the successful operation of peacekeeping
missions in the future.
There must be a broader political partnership
between the United Nations and the host Government
to ensure political support for peacekeeping operations.
Effective and inclusive consultation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs must be
ensured. The views of TCCs must be reflected when
deciding mission start-up and in effecting any change
in the mandate of existing missions. The initial
mandate must be crafted carefully and fully reflect
potential TCCs.
A specific timeline must be stipulated, in
consultation with the TCCs, in finalizing the
memorandum of understanding. Any change in
operations must be in compliance with the views of
those who work in the field. Fair representation of
TCCs in the decision-making process within the
Secretariat, as well as in the process of
implementation, must be ensured. The representational
issue of TCCs in the relevant department, such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, must be ensured, as
repeatedly requested by the General Assembly. The
mandates of peacekeepers must be clear, specific and

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

well defined, supported by adequate resources, with
sufficient safety and security, as well as the provision
of training.
At the operational level, partnership should
include the following: ensuring the minimum peace to
be kept by the peacekeepers; creating workable
conditions for the peacekeepers to operate in; ensuring
the
necessary
coordination
among
relevant
stakeholders and among the United Nations and other
bilateral and regional stakeholders; and concerted
efforts among the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and the Bretton Woods institutions in the
field.
For our part, Bangladesh has played a cardinal
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security, for which we take a modicum of pride. In that
context, I refer to the statement of the Honourable
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in the general debate of
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, in
which she said:
“Bangladesh is proud of its outstanding role
as a major troop-contributing country serving the
United Nations in maintaining peace and security
worldwide.” (A/64/PV.9, p. 24)
We have had to brave poor odds and many
difficulties and to endure many sacrifices in the
process of fulfilling the commitment to international
peace and security, as enshrined in our Constitution,
which has been a constant source of our motivation and
dedication. Since 1988, Bangladesh has been involved
in 36 United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
approximately 100,000 personnel. Today, Bangladesh
is ranked first in the field.
With a mix of pride and gratitude, I say that over
the years some 103 of our valiant peacekeepers have
laid down their invaluable lives for the cause of United
Nations-sponsored peace. On this occasion, we pay
homage to all peacekeepers from Bangladesh and other
TCCs who have made the supreme sacrifice for the
noble cause of international peace and prosperity. We
also reiterate our firm commitment to continuing our
partnership with the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.

11-48209

Mr. António (African Union) (spoke in French):
Like representatives who have spoken before us, we,
too, would like to convey our condolences to Nigeria
and to the United Nations following the attack that
took place in the historic African city of Abuja. Nigeria
is dear to us, including in the area of peacekeeping.
This is also an opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having organized this debate, and to
underscore the fact that India is an exemplary reference
point in the area of peacekeeping. We pay tribute to the
sacrifices made by your fellow citizens in the field,
including in Africa.
We particularly welcome the fact that in your
concept note (S/2011/496, annex), you place special
emphasis on the issue of partnership and on the need to
enhance the capacities of the African Union. Indeed, in
parallel to the efforts that we have made within the
African Union to bolster its peace and security
architecture, we have also been involved in various
consultations within the United Nations that have led
to the issuance of relevant documents, Security
Council presidential statements and reports, such as
that of the joint African Union-United Nations panel
(S/2008/813).
Here, it is especially important to underscore the
excellent relations that we have developed between the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat,
which
have
strengthened
certain
consultation mechanisms, such as the Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security, launched by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and African Union Chairman Jean Ping
on 25 September 2010. As Council members will be
aware, we have also strengthened consultations
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council. In that regard, we could
further build upon these consultations and strengthen
cooperation mechanisms between the two bodies.
We are also active in other areas, such as
humanitarian assistance, which is a new area of activity
for the African Union, thanks to cooperation with
United Nations bodies such as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. It is of note that
the African Union recently organized a donors’
conference for Somalia, the preparations for which
benefited greatly from the capacities we have begun to
develop in the area of humanitarian assistance.
The African Union organized a retreat last year in
Cairo that brought together representatives of the

23

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

United Nations, the African Union and other countries
and organizations, with the aim of achieving more
effective coordination and harmonization at the
strategic and operational levels. We intend to hold
another such event next month in Cairo to continue
strengthening the mechanisms for cooperation among
the various stakeholders involved in peacekeeping.
Initiatives are also under way to build African
Union capacities in the area of civilian capacity. As the
Council knows, this is an area in which we and the
international system have certain weaknesses. We
believe that the African Union will, in the near future,
have an asset base in the form of a pool of human
resources, from which civilian capacity can be
deployed on the ground when necessary.
On the ground, we have developed a number of
practical and innovative approaches to meet peace and
security challenges. It is important to emphasize in
particular the initial support units and reinforcements
authorized by the Security Council. Members will no
doubt recall the United Nations Mission in Angola, but
we would like to focus on ongoing operations: the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
With regard to AMISOM, we would like first to
thank all the partners who have contributed so far to
this peacekeeping operation. We would like especially
to take this opportunity to reiterate the need for
predictable funding in order to effectively carry out the
work of that African Union Mission on the ground.
In the light of recent developments on the ground,
the African Union has been taking stock of the
situation. We held a workshop on 17 and 18 August in
Addis Ababa to consider how to improve our work,
given the tangible results being achieved by African
Union forces in Somalia.
In the coming months, AMISOM will therefore
focus its efforts on securing Mogadishu in order to
create conditions for reconciliation and to facilitate the
free movement of international personnel; the
implementation, within its limited resources and in a
gradual manner, of phase II of the concept of
operations; and above all the extension of the authority
of the Transitional Federal Government, thereby
creating the conditions not only for reconciliation but
also for the distribution of humanitarian aid, which is,
of course, difficult to do in conditions of insecurity.

24

I would like to focus on the recommendations
that emerged from the workshop, to which I would like
to draw the attention of the members of the Security
Council. First, the deployment of additional troops by
contributing countries should be accelerated in order to
attain as soon as possible the force level of 12,000
personnel and thereby safeguard the gains made in
recent months on the ground. The strengthening of
United Nations support is also of great importance, as
is the deployment of police to maintain law and order
in Mogadishu.
Secondly, it was proposed to establish, as an
integral part of AMISOM, a guard force to facilitate
the deployment of civilian personnel and to ensure the
protection of the African Union and United Nations
staff in Mogadishu. The personnel of such a force
should not be included within the 12,000 personnel
authorized by the Security Council. This, in our view,
is another aspect which it is important to bear in mind.
It is important that any evaluation of progress
achieved in peacekeeping to date be accompanied by
an analysis of the progress made in the coordination
and harmonization, depending on the case, of the
decisions taken by our political bodies. In practice, we
are all pursuing the same goal: a return to peace and
the creation of conditions for lasting security in
countries in conflict where peacekeeping operations are
deployed.
With regard to UNAMID, the African Union
closely followed the process that led to the adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 2003 (2011), which,
among other things, renewed UNAMID’s mandate. The
Council’s adoption of that resolution followed the
adoption on 19 July 2011 by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union of a decision whereby it
not only requested the renewal of the UNAMID
mandate but also underlined the need to launch the
Darfur political process on the basis of the progress
made in light of the Doha document for peace in
Darfur as a means of supporting the progress achieved
and ensuring that Darfur take effective ownership of
the quest for peace, justice and reconciliation in the
region.
The African Union is of the view that the
questions which arose following our efforts for the
resumption of the Darfur process make it clear that
there is a need to consider the importance to be
attached to the positions of the African Union on the

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

situation in Darfur, as articulated by the relevant
political bodies, in particular the Peace and Security
Council. Those issues raised by certain members of the
Security Council also strengthen the need to bolster
mechanisms for coordination in the context of the
strategic United Nations-African Union partnership on
the peace and security challenges in Africa, of which
the African Union remains continuously seized.
The African Union therefore calls on all parties
concerned to demonstrate their ongoing commitment to
respecting the hybrid nature of UNAMID and the
implementation of its mandate under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the decisions of
the African Union Peace and Security Council. In
practice, we see respect for the hybrid nature of
UNAMID as a prerequisite for the effective
implementation of the Mission’s mandate, which will
be a source of inspiration for future endeavours of this
sort.
As I said at the outset, your delegation, Sir, was
correct to underscore that peacekeeping is above all a
partnership. I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
commitment of the African Union to continuing to
work with the Security Council, the entire United
Nations family, Member States and international
partners, including non-governmental organizations,
which also make great sacrifices on the ground,
including in Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Fiji.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Fiji joins those who have
spoken before us in condemning the Abuja bombing
and in offering our condolences to the victims and their
families.
The Fiji delegation would like to thank you, Sir,
for having chosen the subject of this thematic debate. It
displays a keen sense of relevance and foresight on the
part of the Indian presidency.
For a country like Fiji, which places United
Nations peacekeeping at the centre of its foreign
policy, better mutual understanding on this central
aspect of the United Nations work is critical. The
remarks that follow come from a Pacific small island
developing
country
whose
servicemen
and
servicewomen have for the past three decades worn the
blue helmet in United Nations peacekeeping missions
in more than 15 troubled countries.

11-48209

In terms of taking stock, it is no secret that
peacekeeping is a loss-making undertaking for many
troop-contributing countries. For a country like Fiji,
the cost of the fair wages we pay our soldiers serving
on United Nations peacekeeping missions does not
equate to what the United Nations reimburses us; in
fact, the United Nations reimbursement falls far short.
This is a stock-taking item that requires further
introspection by the United Nations.
We recognize that the United Nations must cut
the cloth to fit the suit. Thus, the United Nations must
examine all its options for cost-effectiveness, including
decreasing the number of United Nations peacekeepers
deployed internationally, encouraging greater SouthSouth and triangular cooperation, allowing more
sharing of resources between nearby peacekeeping
missions, and instituting better coordination between
the United Nations and contributing countries.
Turning to preparations for the future, the clear
view of the Fiji delegation is that it is humanly
possible to resolve the various political conflicts that
have preoccupied the world’s attention for so long.
What is required is the genuine political will of the
parties concerned to negotiate and settle.
There is a reason these conflicts have to move to
speedy settlement. The reason is that if this world body
is to fulfil its Charter obligations, it must begin steeling
itself for the great security threat of the twenty-first
century. We refer not to squabbling neighbours, to
long-festering ethnic, tribal or religious feuds, or the
geopolitical gamesmanship of the twentieth century;
we refer to the looming onslaught of climate change
and the geophysical alterations it will bring upon our
planet, upon our societies, and perhaps upon life itself.
All our human resources — intellectual, economic and
political — will be required if we are to handle this
ultimate challenge as best we can. And if we care about
the welfare of our grandchildren, only our best
response will be good enough. We say “our” because it
is here at the United Nations that the solutions must be
found.
This is not a struggle that individual countries can
win, for climate change will not respect national
boundaries. Rising sea levels may drive some lowlying countries to extinction, while others will have to
deal with massive population displacement as the great
food-producing deltas go under water. Desertification,

25

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

ferocious storms and melting ice-caps will disdain
national boundaries and similar human constructs.
It is for this reason that Fiji and the other Pacific
small island developing States spoke up so strongly at
last month’s thematic debate in the Council on the
impact of climate change on international peace and
security
(S/PV.6587).
Thus,
our
concluding
contribution to this thematic debate is that United
Nations peacekeeping must indeed prepare for the
future — a different future in which, we submit,
humanity will face hostile environmental forces to a
degree we have not faced since the last ice age drove
our kind to the edge.
In all the drawn-out climate change deliberations
being pursued through other organs and bodies of the
United Nations, we submit that the Security Council
should throughout maintain focus on the security and
peacekeeping implications of climate change that lie
ahead of us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): Like other speakers, I
firmly condemn the terrorist attack in Abuja today. A
Norwegian junior professional officer was among the
deceased. Our thoughts go to the United Nations, the
people of Nigeria, and the victims and their families.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway
and Sweden.
United Nations peacekeeping is crucial in
supporting countries affected by armed conflict. The
Nordic countries are longstanding supporters of this
key United Nations endeavour. Between us, we
participate in nine of the current United Nations
operations. Three of them are headed by
representatives from the Nordic countries, two of
whom are women. That is no coincidence. We strongly
believe that we need more women at the top level in
United Nations peacekeeping and that we must
continue to strive for proper integration of the gender
perspective in all activities.
We welcome this opportunity to discuss
peacekeeping in the Security Council. Our main focus
will be on the issues of protection, capabilities and
partnerships.

26

The primary role of the United Nations with
regard to the protection of civilians should be to assist
host Governments in carrying out their responsibility to
fulfil this vital task. Strengthening good governance,
security and justice sector reform, and the participation
of women are key issues in this regard. At the same
time, the United Nations must be prepared and able to
provide robust assistance when needed. The effective
implementation of all aspects of protection mandates
requires adequate capabilities, training, planning and
strategy.
The Nordic countries fully agree with India’s
focus on the need for better alignment between
mandates and capabilities. Discrepancies between
stated objectives and the availability of capabilities can
undermine the credibility of the United Nations.
To meet future demands, the United Nations
needs to apply a more comprehensive and capabilitydriven approach. The Nordic countries support the New
Horizon initiative as a solid basis for improving the
United Nations capacity to deliver on all parts of the
mandates. The ongoing efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support to move the focus from numbers to skills and
capacity are highly commendable. Likewise, the
United Nations must make more efficient use of
available resources, both in-house and internationally,
in particular from the South. In this light, we welcome
the recommendations of the civilian capacities review
(S/2011/85).
Civilian capacities, including rule of law and
gender expertise, play a key role in the transition from
conflict to peace and development. Together, we must
build on the momentum that has been generated by the
review, and continue to work for the implementation of
the recommendations. As Nordic countries, we stand
ready to share our expertise in developing civilian
capacities in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
We must also continue to strengthen the United
Nations capacity to deliver as one. We cannot look at
peacekeeping in isolation from peacebuilding and
longer-term development. A well-integrated and more
coherent United Nations is a more effective United
Nations. This requires an ability to prioritize and to
think strategically across sectors and divisions.
Partnership is a key word. We acknowledge the
importance of further enhancing the relationship
between troop- and police-contributing countries and

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

United Nations bodies. The Secretariat and the Security
Council will benefit from closer engagement in the
formulation of new mandates as well as in the
adjustment of existing mandates.
Close relations between the United Nations and
host Governments will also benefit all parties involved
and pave the way for early transition. In order to
succeed with those very sensitive peacebuilding tasks
that tend to be included in peacekeeping mandates,
national ownership is vital. This is particularly true
with regard to security sector reform.
Enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations is another key
partnering issue. Cooperation and coordination are
important means to ensure that the increased role of
regional organizations in peacekeeping contributes to
the efficient use of scarce resources. This is highly
relevant in Africa, where the African Union is
shouldering a heavy burden alongside the United
Nations.
The Nordic countries are jointly engaged in a
capacity-building programme with the Eastern African
Standby Force Coordination Mechanism. We are
delighted with the progress made by our East African
partners. Last week, the Standby Force signed a
memorandum of understanding with the African Union
Commission to enhance the capabilities of the African
Union Mission in Somalia. This memorandum is a
milestone in the operationalization of the African
Standby Force, as it will provide the framework for the
first ever deployment of a regional African standby
force.
Let me conclude by expressing the Nordic
countries’ appreciation of India’s initiative to organize
today’s debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Zimonyi (Hungary): At the outset, on behalf
of the Government of Hungary, I join the unanimous
condemnation in the strongest terms by all previous
speakers today of the attack against the United Nations
building in Abuja. I extend our deepest sympathies to
the victims and their families and to the United
Nations.
Hungary thanks India, one of the top troopcontributing countries (TCCs), for its initiative to

11-48209

convene this open debate on the peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations.
Hungary fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today on behalf of the European
Union.
The world has changed significantly since the
first Blue Helmets were deployed in the late 1940s. We
consider it an important and urgent task to continue the
review of United Nations peacekeeping in order to
adapt it to the challenges of the twenty-first century. In
this regard, Hungary supports all reform proposals that
will enable peacekeeping operations to respond
effectively and in a timely manner to violent conflicts
in order to protect civilian populations and to establish
the conditions necessary for long-lasting peace.
The question of capabilities and resources lies at
the heart of the peacekeeping reform debate.
Developing military and police capabilities is an
important tool to enable complex peacekeeping
operations to carry out their mandates effectively.
Regarding the improvement of capabilities, Hungary
attaches utmost importance to the training of
peacekeeping personnel. The Hungarian Defence
Forces Peace Support Training Centre, located in
Szolnok, Hungary, has a long history and unique
expertise in training peacekeepers from different parts
of the world. Our country’s goal is to contribute to the
improvement of United Nations peacekeeping
capabilities by preparing Hungarian and international
peacekeeping personnel for their future assignments.
The present global economic crisis has sharpened
the focus on the financing of peacekeeping operations.
Against this background, many United Nations
Member States, including Hungary, put greater
emphasis on the need for enhanced efficiency in the
implementation of the United Nations peacekeeping
budget. As a troop-contributing country, we also
understand the added burden that many troop- and
police-contributing countries (PCCs) face in this
difficult economic climate. It is becoming more
difficult for every one of us to find the resources
needed to send further troops, offer additional technical
advice, and spend more money on peacekeeping
activities. Nevertheless, it is of the utmost importance
to provide the necessary resources to implement
effectively the complex mandates of today’s
peacekeeping operations. Thus, new solutions need to
be found to meet those new challenges.

27

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

First of all, preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention must play a bigger role in the activities of
the United Nations. Peacekeeping is part of the
political solution and not an alternative to it. We must
individualize our processes and have a well-defined
exit strategy for each peacekeeping mission in order to
avoid a prolongation of operations without clear
prospects.
Secondly, cooperation with regional organizations
must be improved in all regions of the world. There are
good examples and best practices we can build on and
which should be used more widely. In order to increase
efficiency, emphasis should be placed on developing
local know-how and capabilities. Africa, where the
largest part of United Nations forces is concentrated, is
a case in point.
Most important of all, we must preserve and
further improve the global peacekeeping partnership.
Troop- and police-contributing countries play an
essential part in this partnership and deliver first-hand
experience that is indispensable to the work of the
Security Council. We must further enhance this
cooperation by relying more on the participation of
TCCs and PCCs, as well as of host countries, in
particular in informal discussions with Council
members. We encourage the Council to further
strengthen this cooperation as part of the reform of its
working methods.
Hungary reiterates its strong support and highest
appreciation for the work of the peacekeeping missions
of the United Nations. We would hereby like to express
gratitude to the peacekeeping personnel who serve or
have served in United Nations missions, and convey
our deep respect for those who have lost their lives in
service of the cause of international peace and security.
The President: I
representative of Croatia.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Mikec (Croatia): Let me first express, on
behalf of the Croatian Government, our strongest
condemnation of the terrorist attack on United Nations
premises in Abuja, and extend our deepest condolences
to the families of the victims, the people and
Government of Nigeria, and the United Nations as a
whole.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
team for your successful conduct of the Council’s work
this month and especially for convening this important

28

debate. My delegation aligns itself with the statement
of the European Union. However, allow me to take part
in this timely debate by adding a few comments in my
national capacity.
The concepts of peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
like the international landscape, are constantly
changing, and the role of the United Nations in
multidimensional peacekeeping is becoming ever more
complex and deeper as it aims at resolving the
underlying causes, and not just the symptoms.
Over the years Croatia has gained extensive and
valuable knowledge and experience with United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, taking
into the account our path from hosting peacekeepers to
becoming a strong contributor to numerous
peacekeeping operations. In this regard, Croatia is
making every effort to use its experience in helping
other countries in need to overcome their difficulties.
Let me highlight some issues that we feel need further
attention.
The concept of peacekeeping cannot be touched
upon without mentioning two documents: the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) and the New Horizon initiative.
Croatia supports guidelines provided in these
documents, especially the premise that conflict cannot
be resolved first and foremost by military means, but
that we must rather seek to address problems at their
root causes. Lasting peace and security can be achieved
only through adherence to the three interlinked and
firmly grounded basic pillars of security, development
and the protection of human rights.
Genuine and sustainable peace can be
accomplished only through the thorough rebuilding of
core national institutions and their functions, as well as
their employment on behalf of all social, religious and
ethnic groups. Therefore, peacekeeping has to be
considered as a beginning of the peacebuilding
process. Such a multidimensional approach needs to be
reflected in mission planning processes.
A clear political strategy and integrated mission
planning are extremely important and should include
the provision of a precisely defined mandate with clear
and objective benchmarks and goals that reflect the
actual situation on the ground and are as depoliticized
as possible, as well as a clear exit strategy. In order to
ensure that expected gaps are minimized and to
increase overall efficiency, we believe that each new

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

mission needs to be tailored to concrete conditions and
political realities on the ground.
We believe that cooperation and coordination
among the main stakeholders within United Nations
and troop- and police-contributing countries need to be
strengthened. Peacekeeping operations should be
planned with the unambiguous support of a core
number of nations willing to provide troops for
proposed mission. In that regard, Croatia welcomes the
ongoing practice of interaction with the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, which offers a
comprehensive overview on the situation of each
operation.
Croatia recognizes and supports the Council’s
intention to further strengthen coherence among
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in its
work, and we particularly welcome the Council’s
practice of transforming some former peacekeeping
missions into integrated peacebuilding missions. This
practice accords with the mandates and activities of
other stakeholders in charge of peacebuilding,
especially the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and
opens the door to further fruitful cooperation among
them. In that context, let me express here our hope that
the PBC’s relevant knowledge and experience of
specific issues concerning countries that are on the
agendas of both the Security Council and the PBC will
find their way into the Council’s deliberations.
The implementation of protection of civilians
mandates continues to be one of the most operationally
complex tasks for United Nations peacekeeping.
United Nations troops, police and civilians on the
ground continue to develop innovative approaches to
the protection of civilians. In that respect, Croatia
strongly support the implementation of a strategic
framework to guide the drafting of comprehensive
protection of civilians strategies, particularly a series
of protection of civilians training models for military,
police and civilian personnel. The Republic of Croatia
itself develops civilian and military capabilities
focused on training, education and mentoring of the
national forces of conflict-affected countries. Those
capabilities, properly adapted to concrete missions,
contribute to security and stability, especially by
providing assistance in the process of establishing selfsustaining national forces and authorities.
In the conduct of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, two additional aspects — cooperation among

11-48209

international agencies and regional and subregional
organizations, and the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts — have to be considered in
order to strengthen overall achievements. Croatia
believes that these two aspects should be encouraged
as much as possible.
Finally, allow me to express Croatia’s support for
the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (A/65/19). Even though much still can be
done, we believe that the report provides vital input to
the membership’s continued efforts to implement the
United Nations peacekeeping reform agenda, and
shapes the future of United Nations peacekeeping.
Croatia will continue to contribute to that end.
In conclusion, we would like to recognize the
crucial role of all men and women serving in United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and in that regard we
condemn all attacks on United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. We would like to highlight our belief that
safety and security of all United Nations personnel are
of paramount importance.
The President: I
representative of Nepal.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Acharya (Nepal): Let me begin, as others
have done, by expressing our condemnation of the
United Nations offices in Abuja, Nigeria, this morning.
We express our sincere condolences to all those who
were killed in the dastardly attack, and our sympathies
to the bereaved families.
Let me express my delegation’s sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate in the Council on the theme
“Peacekeeping: taking stock and preparing for the
future”, and for preparing an excellent and
comprehensive concept paper on the subject
(S/2011/496, annex). This is a very timely and
important debate. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his important statement this
morning. We also endorse the statement made by the
representative of the Kingdom of Morocco on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Peacekeeping, as a flagship enterprise of the
United Nations, is constantly evolving. The increased
demand on the United Nations to respond to a growing
and diverse number of situations is testimony both to
the growing confidence reposed in the world body and
to the multifaceted challenges that the international

29

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

community has to grapple with. Likewise, the
assumption of a peacekeeping role by some regional
organizations and the participation of an everincreasing number of troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs) in
peacekeeping operations underscore peacekeeping’s
indispensability as a legitimate instrument of the global
body for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
In the space and time continuum, peacekeeping
operations have gone well beyond their traditional
modes of operation. Protecting peace and ensuring
security, providing security guarantees, including the
protection of civilians, and political and peacebuilding
support to assist countries’ transition to peace are the
principal tasks assigned to peacekeeping missions
today. They represent a mixed bag of old and new
mandates.
In
their
present-day
incarnation,
peacekeepers are performing as early peacebuilders.
They undertake many of the tasks pertaining to
peacebuilding and nation-building, particularly by
creating the necessary environment for the tasks of
monitoring elections, building necessary governance
institutions, establishing the rule of law, supporting
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, and laying foundations for
sustained economic growth and development.
The dramatic growth in peacekeeping operations
is thus accompanied by new, complex and
multidimensional mandates; diverse, challenging and
often hostile operating environments; and growing
interaction among a number of players. It is
unfortunate that the growth in the United Nations
budget is not proportionate to the growth in the number
of peacekeeping operations and the magnitude of the
mandate. The evolving trend has also brought to the
fore the critical issues of State sovereignty and
consent, building national capacity, the right to
protection and a host of other related issues.
This indicates that peacekeeping has moved into
a newer and broader territory. We believe that overall
peacekeeping has been largely successful, but we have
to make it better, as it has become a versatile
instrument of the United Nations. We should bridge the
gap in our strategy, financing and capacity not only to
ensure immediate peace and security, but also to
support economic, social and political recovery in
order to promote longer-term security and peace in the
countries concerned. After all, the root causes of

30

conflicts have to be looked at critically if we are to be
successful in the field. Moreover, strategy alone,
without corresponding resources and capacity in the
related fields, has never succeeded anytime or
anywhere. And United Nations peacekeeping cannot be
an exception to that.
There is no doubt that a higher standard of costeffectiveness, agility and operational efficiency must
be ensured. We concur with the view articulated in the
concept paper before us that United Nations
peacekeeping operations do not only carry
international legitimacy, but are also the most costeffective tools through which international peace and
security can be strengthened. It is our hope that
implementation of the global field support strategy and
a capability-driven approach will strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping further in the days ahead.
As there is no alternative to peacekeeping, it
should remain a partnership and a responsibility shared
among the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
TCCs and PCCs, regional partners, the host country
and the Secretariat. An enhanced level of
understanding and partnership among all the
stakeholders, right from the initial phase of mandate
design to the ultimate phase of withdrawal and exit, is
required for any peacekeeping operation to be
successful. In addition, doctrinal and conceptual
understanding must be simplified and defined in terms
of operational activities, and must be understood by all
stakeholders.
Based on our experiences gained along the
evolving path of peacekeeping, and looking at the
challenges ahead, my delegation emphasizes the
following key elements.
First, the Security Council must be guided by
unity of purpose and mobilize its entire political
capital, based on merits and principles, to ensure that a
coherent strategic framework is in place to achieve the
desired objectives, which must be explicitly
articulated.
Secondly, peacekeeping should be guided by an
integrated three-pronged strategy. It has to stabilize the
security situation, support national political processes
and ensure economic regeneration. All the three pillars
need to be strengthened in a holistic manner from the
very beginning. Therefore, greater coherence and
coordination are required in dealing with these
challenges and conflicts.

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, a framework for consultation with TCCs
and PCCs on the mandating process should be
substantive, institutionalized and structured in terms of
content and timing. The comprehensive and continuous
involvement of TCCs and PCCs in all stages of United
Nations peacekeeping is essential to making operations
effective and successful on the ground.
Fourthly, a strong provision of necessary
resources and effective arrangements of enablers is key
to rapid deployment and to making missions
operational. Therefore, field support needs to be
strengthened in order to overcome the increasing risks
faced by peacekeepers and changing nature of security
and growing expectations.
Fifthly, civilian capacity in diverse fields is in
increasing demand in the new generation of
peacekeeping operations. We should strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to respond to such
demands with an inclusive approach shared by all. The
proper and effective use of civilian capacity, together
with a military contingent, will have a salutary impact
on building necessary institutions and national capacity
in conflict-affected countries, which will make peace
deep-rooted and sustainable.
Finally, the safety and security of peacekeepers
should be given due priority. Equally important is for
the morale and dignity of peacekeepers to be kept high
at all times through appropriate incentive structures,
including timely adjustment of their salaries and
facilities in line with ground realities.
My country attaches great importance to United
Nations peacekeeping in line with its foreign policy
objectives. Nepal’s association with United Nations
peacekeeping is consistent and long-standing. Without
interruption since 1958, Nepal has contributed
peacekeepers for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the aegis of the United
Nations, with the cumulative figure of more than
80,000 personnel deployed in 40 different
peacekeeping missions around the world. Nepalese
peacekeepers have served in the most challenging
missions with the utmost commitment and
professionalism. To date, some 62 Nepalese
peacekeepers have sacrificed their lives in the line of
duty.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
profound commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
and assures the Council of its continued participation

11-48209

in peacekeeping missions for the sake of a secure,
stable and prosperous future for all.
The President: I
representative of Serbia.

give

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Čubrilo (Serbia): Unfortunately, the
Permanent Representative of Serbia was unable to join
us this evening, so I shall deliver the following
statement.
My country strongly condemns the terrible attack
in Abuja and extends its deepest condolences to the
families of the victims, the people and Government of
Nigeria, and the whole United Nations community.
The Republic of Serbia welcomes the holding of
this open debate in the Security Council on the subject
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, believing
that the Council can only benefit from such a debate.
We thank the delegation of India for preparing the
concept note (S/2011/496, annex), which will certainly
help steer today’s discussion on the subject.
Serbia has aligned itself with the statement of the
European Union. In addition, I would like to make a
few remarks.
Serbia attaches great importance to the United
Nations role in promoting and maintaining
international peace and security and, as a responsible
member of the international community, is committed
to playing an active role in the United Nations
peacekeeping activities, demonstrating thereby its
commitment to the goals of the Organization.
Peacekeeping operations are among the most
important aspects of the capacity of the United Nations
to safeguard international peace and security, and a
unique and valuable tool in assisting countries to make
the transition from conflicts to durable peace in an
effective and sustainable manner. In addition to the
necessary political support, the effective matching of
human, financial and logistical resources with priority
needs is essential to ensuring that there is no
discrepancy between the identified objectives and the
practical achievements on the ground.
While United Nations peacekeeping operations
continue to evolve into multidimensional undertakings
designed to provide a stable and secure environment
for smooth peace processes, it is necessary to ensure
the maximum optimization of the existing resources of
the United Nations system. It is also of particular

31

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

importance to mobilize additional capabilities in order
to minimize gaps and improve performance in the
field, bearing in mind that the absence of critical assets
hampers missions’ ability to implement their mandates.
Addressing these challenges in a comprehensive and
proper way requires the coordinated and energetic
response of all the Members of the United Nations.
Successful
peacekeeping
is
a
shared
responsibility,
so
the
continued
engagement,
commitment and dedication of all actors involved are
needed in order to improve the ability of United
Nations peacekeeping to deliver concrete results at the
field level in complex and fragile situations. This
requires a broader, holistic strategy that synergizes
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts to address the
interlinked issues of security and development in a
comprehensive manner as the best way to prevent the
resurgence of conflict. If these efforts are to be
productive, all involved actors should make their
contribution within the framework of the enhanced
peacekeeping partnership between the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the host country and
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and policecontributing countries (PCCs).
The
increasingly
difficult
operational
environments and the multiplicity and complexity of
demands and challenges require continuous dialogue
and coordination among all involved stakeholders
throughout the whole lifecycle of a mission. The active
involvement of troop- and police-contributing
countries in all stages of United Nations peacekeeping
operations has proven to be an important contribution
to their smooth functioning and the successful
implementation of their ever-diversifying tasks. Tens of
thousands of men and women serving all around the
world under the flag of the United Nations make TCCs
and PCCs an essential source of credible and useful
information on field developments and operational
challenges.
In that context, the expertise of those countries
should be incorporated into the planning and
policymaking processes early on, especially prior to
the Security Council’s decision-taking on the renewal
or appropriate adjustments of mission mandates. The
field experience of TCCs and PCCs is also relevant in
the process of the reconfiguration of missions, the
generation of required capabilities and developing or
modifying mission-specific rules of engagement,

32

operational
structures.

concepts

and

command-and-control

The Republic of Serbia considers that the
consultations between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and TCCS and PCCs can play an
indispensable
role
in
assessments
of
the
implementation of the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and opportunities to improve
arrangements for their management and oversight. The
meetings of the Security Council with TCCs and PCCs
and the ongoing practice of inviting them periodically
to the meetings of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations are very welcome. These practices are
important mechanisms for ensuring the greater
involvement of those countries in an open and
inclusive dialogue with the Security Council members
on peacekeeping-related issues.
Yet there is still space for improvements in this
regard. In particular, it would be beneficial if troopand police-contributing countries could be informed
about those meetings and their agendas well in advance
in order to have sufficient time to prepare and
coordinate with their respective capitals and national
contingents on the ground. This would enable them to
optimize their contributions to the discussions and
improve the overall quality of their interactions with
the Security Council members.
These meeting are of particular importance in the
case of new peacekeeping operations. It would be
advantageous to convene them at an early stage in
order to incorporate the views of TCCS and PCCs in
the planning processes. This would also help the
Security Council to have a clear insight into available
resources to be engaged by those countries in specific
missions in order to avoid future serious capability
gaps that could jeopardize the implementation of the
missions’ mandate.
In closing, I would like to pay tribute to all
United Nations peacekeepers who risk their lives for
the noble cause of peace. I would also like to reiterate
the readiness of my country to engage constructively
and in close cooperation with other Members of the
United Nations in advancing the objectives of United
Nations peacekeeping. With that in mind, we stand
ready to significantly increase our participation in
United Nations missions in the coming period.
The President: I
representative of Ukraine.

give

the

floor

to

the

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): First and foremost,
Ukraine would like to join others in condemning
today’s hideous attack against the United Nations in
Abuja. We express deepest sympathies to the victims
and their families, to the Government of Nigeria and to
the United Nations family.
Let me thank you, Sir, for convening this
important debate. The choice of today’s topic came
quite naturally to such a major troop-contributing
country as India. I would like to join previous speakers
in commending the extraordinary contribution of your
country in this sphere. Our appreciation also goes to
the Secretary-General for his insight into today’s topic.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, I find it
pertinent to make a few brief points in my national
capacity.
Let me start by giving credit to former UnderSecretary-General Le Roy for his dedicated
stewardship of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations through some of the most turbulent years
for United Nations peacekeeping. As he rightly noted,
“demand for United Nations-led peacekeeping
operations is likely to continue over the next five
years and may even start to rise again as … fresh
crises and conflicts emerge … The number of
peacekeepers in the field is not falling, just a year
after many thought that United Nations
peacekeeping was entering a period of
consolidation”.
Recent events — the establishment of two new
United Nations peacekeeping operations and the
sketching out of a United Nations presence in Libya —
prove that this conclusion is very much to the point.
That is why, in our view, it is even more urgent to
address the most pressing issues affecting today’s
peacekeeping operations, which were laid bare by a
historical surge in the number of uniformed personnel
deployments in 2010.
Let me briefly outline three areas where, in
Ukraine’s opinion, our attention is most needed.
My delegation remains deeply concerned over the
mismatch between resources in terms of major enablers
and the broad mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The gap is exemplified by the
classic case of military utility helicopters, the shortage
of which jeopardizes the effectiveness of some of the

11-48209

United Nations’ most complex and ambitious
operations. That was one of the unmistakable messages
of the latest Security Council meeting with Force
Commanders (6592nd meeting).
Our peacekeepers should have all capacities
needed to tackle increasingly complex situations and
tasks, especially in vast theatres of operations. We
therefore fully concur with the European Union’s call
for pragmatic and swift solutions and look forward to
studying the Secretariat’s forthcoming proposals.
Ukraine believes that those proposals should be based
on the relevant recommendations of the last two
sessions of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, especially in terms of changing the way in
which military helicopters are reimbursed for and
operated.
Much has been said about United Nations
peacekeeping as a global partnership between the
Security Council, troop and police contributors, and the
Secretariat. We cannot agree more. But for this triangle
to work best, a mutual understanding between each of
its actors is a prerequisite.
The surest way to achieve such understanding is
to give troop-contributing countries (TCCs) a much
stronger voice in the decision-making process at all
stages of peacekeeping operations, from planning to
termination. There should be no instances when TCCs
are confronted with a fait accompli, only learning
about decisions directly affecting their personnel or
assets from Security Council resolutions on the day of
their adoption.
Ensuring an adequate level of safety and security
for United Nations personnel must be the central
element of any peacekeeping operation. We are deeply
concerned over increasing threats to Blue Helmets. I
would like to take this opportunity to express my
deepest condolences over the loss earlier this month of
the lives of four peacekeepers in the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei. The perpetrators of
such heinous acts should not go unpunished, and the
relevant TCCs should have every legal right and means
to be involved in the investigation of crimes committed
against the life and health of their peacekeepers.
As one of the initiators of the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
Ukraine looks forward to the Secretariat’s
comprehensive report on all the processes involved in

33

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

the investigation and prosecution of crimes committed
against deployed United Nations peacekeepers.
The year 2012 will mark 20 years of Ukraine’s
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That period has witnessed my country’s
active military and police engagement in more than 20
missions under the auspices of the United Nations. If
there were a peacekeeping ratio, Ukraine’s would be
one new mission per year. Overall, as of today Ukraine
has contributed almost 40,000 Blue Helmets to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in every region of their
deployment around the world. There is hardly a need
for greater testimony to our commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts — a commitment that we
are resolved to maintain in the years to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by joining
previous speakers in condemning the terrorist attack in
Abuja, and in expressing our sympathy and solidarity
with Nigeria and the United Nations. This is a scourge
that we should all stand together to fight. There is
absolutely no justification for resort to terror.
I would like to join the speakers who have
preceded me in thanking you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We have found the brief
concept paper prepared to facilitate today’s debate
(S/2011/496, annex) quite comprehensive and indeed
very helpful. We thank you for that as well. We also
appreciate the Secretary-General’s statement.
Most of what I wanted to say has been covered by
the representative of Morocco and the representative of
the African Union, who have spoken on our behalf. I
will make one or two remarks more or less expanding
on some of the suggestions in the concept paper.
One very critical issue raised in the paper has to
do with the states of affairs or conditions that affect the
legitimacy and credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping. The challenge is described as having
two facets: the first relates to the apparent legal
ambiguity within which peacekeepers are often
compelled to operate, and the second to the constraints
on resources that lead to deficiencies in performance.
These are valid points.
But there is yet another major factor threatening
the legitimacy and credibility of United Nations

34

peacekeeping and of the Security Council itself, and
that has to do with the spectacle that we sometimes
witness, for example, when missions are left in the
lurch to fend for themselves and left to be humiliated.
Here one recalls the fate of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
That episode and other similar situations
underscore the need for missions to be supported
wholeheartedly by the Council, not only in words but
in deeds, which cannot be limited only to resources. In
all this, it is critical that there be no situations that
might plausibly give credence to allegations or
insinuations that the Security Council is unfair and not
even-handed. In other words, the body — the Security
Council — that authorizes peacekeeping missions must
protect its moral authority. In the absence of this,
peacekeeping missions are doomed from the outset. If
any of the parties has reason to suspect an absence of
impartiality, the mission will have no chance of
success.
The report of the Brahimi Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations (S/2000/809) suggested that
its recommendations are designed to balance principles
and pragmatism. I suppose that is the only viable
approach for making United Nations peacekeeping
credible and effective.
But again, perhaps the best option we have for
peace and stability — in our continent first of all — is
to do more in the other two principal activities of
United Nations peace operations: conflict prevention
and peacemaking, and peacebuilding. There is no doubt
that it is lack of sufficient attention to preventing
conflict, and to peacemaking in particular, that makes
peacekeeping necessary. But prevention falls within the
ambit of diplomatic initiative. As the Brahimi Panel
said, “Such preventive action is, by definition, a lowprofile activity; when successful, it may even go
unnoticed altogether.” (ibid., para. 10)
But the Panel could have said more about why we
are all so weak in utilizing all the opportunities that
preventive diplomacy offers. One could talk at length
on this theme, but suffice it to say that one major
problem is that the early warnings of conflict are not
properly heeded, and more often than not, evil is
accommodated until it is too late.
In parenthesis, let me say that we did not discover
evil as a political concept; the Brahimi Panel did.
There is no doubt that, at this juncture in world history

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

when nations see possible future trajectories of the
dispersal of power and influence, the proclivity to
accommodate evil might possibly grow, not decline.
That is a rather scary scenario.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to extend our heartfelt condolences to the
United Nations family, to the brotherly delegation of
Nigeria and, through it, to the Government and people
of Nigeria and the families of the victims following the
attack on United Nations House today — an act that we
all condemn.
I would also like to extend to the brotherly
delegation of India our sincere congratulations on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on its distinguished performance in
a month very busy with important and sensitive issues.
I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
choosing the topic of our debate and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his participation in the discussion and
his statement to the Council.
We associate ourselves with the statements made
by our brother from the Kingdom of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and by the
observer of the African Union.
Tunisia has participated in peacekeeping
operations since 1962. It has deployed hundreds of
soldiers to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, sent
troops to Cambodia, Albania and Somalia, and
contributed observers to United Nations forces in
various parts of the African continent and the world. In
that regard, I cannot fail to mention the late Hédi
Annabi, one of the best and most able experts of
Tunisia, who was killed in the earthquake that struck
Haiti in January 2010 while performing his duties in
committed service to the noble principles of the United
Nations and its mission to maintain peace and security.
Our experience is based on the following issues.
With regard to the discussion of peacekeeping
operations, we stress the importance of the effective
participation of States Members of the Organization, in
particular troop-contributing countries, in any
discussion on establishing any mission, its
implementation or its amendment. We believe that the
General Assembly and its specialized committees, in
particular the Special Committee on Peacekeeping

11-48209

Operations, are the best forums to debate all such
matters in a discussion involving all Member States,
the Secretariat and members of the Security Council,
and to consider their proposals and those of other
specialized working and ad hoc groups on
peacekeeping operations in order to ensure
transparency in all decisions on peacekeeping
operations, their implementation or their amendment.
With regard to the functioning of peacekeeping
operations in the field and their guiding principles, we
believe them to be crucial to the functioning of
peacekeeping operations, in particular consent by the
parties concerned, non-use of force except in selfdefence, and the observance of complete impartiality.
We also believe that we must have a clear vision of the
nature of such missions and United Nations forces, as
well as advance exit strategies to avoid any security
vacuums in countries where the Organization has
worked so hard. To that end, I believe that we must
recognize the inseparable and complementary nature of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
On the other hand, we believe that it is important
to conduct extensive consultations with the troopcontributing countries on logistical issues relating to
their components in peacekeeping operations, in
particular when such forces are restructured,
redeployed or given a new mandate. Naturally, the
issue of resources cannot be avoided, since it is one of
the main causes of the limited efficiency and
effectiveness of the current forces and greatly reduces
the ability of the United Nations and regional
organizations to conduct peacekeeping operations in
conflict areas.
I also note that the discussion that has been
ongoing since 2008, in particular on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, and
consequent recommendations and reports, such as the
Prodi report (S/2008/813), all need to be implemented.
We must identify possible approaches to the financing
of African missions sanctioned by the United Nations.
In any case, we believe that conflict prevention
and pre-emptive action remain the best way to spare
the United Nations and its Member States heavy
financial, logistical and political burdens. Therefore,
the international community must focus on preventive
action in dealing with conflicts before they begin or
spread, and pay sufficient attention to events
throughout the world in order to ensure that the

35

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

Organization adopts a comprehensive approach in
seeking to preserve international peace and security
and addresses the various phases of such efforts in an
optimal manner.
In conclusion, I affirm that, as it begins a new
phase of its history, Tunisia will always remain
committed to upholding the pillars of peace, stability
and security throughout the world. We will spare no
effort to contribute and participate effectively in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We believe that,
despite the difficulties that such operations face, they
represent one of the greatest successes of our
Organization and a source of hope for all people who
suffer the scourge of war and conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): At the outset, my
delegation condemns the shocking terrorist attack on
the United Nations office in Abuja. We extend our
sincere condolences to the families and relatives of the
victims. We stand in support of and solidarity with the
United Nations family and the Government of Nigeria
in the face of that horrific attack.
Let me join previous speakers in congratulating
India on its initiative to convene this timely and
important debate. The Sri Lankan delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement by the representative of
Morocco.
Today, United Nations peacekeepers are one of
the most widely recognized members of the United
Nations family. They bring hope and security to
millions of people around the world. They are at the
forefront of the Security Council’s effort to carry out
its mandate to maintain international peace and
security. United Nations peacekeeping operations, an
activity that was not envisaged at the inception of the
Organization, have come a long way from their modest
beginnings and have evolved into complex operations.
Therefore, it is appropriate that the performance and
direction of United Nations peacekeeping be reviewed
at regular intervals to maintain its focus on priorities,
fundamental principles and ground realities.
The world today is a relatively safer place
because of United Nations peacekeepers. They
safeguard the peace, often in hostile and difficult
environments. Let us remember and pay tribute to the

36

hundreds of peacekeepers and associated staff who
have sacrificed their lives in the line of duty over the
years. Theirs was a sacrifice for the today, the
tomorrow and the future of many countries and their
peoples.
Sri Lanka is honoured to have been able to serve
with other Member States in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Over the years, we have
made a modest contribution to assisting United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The year 2010 marked the
fiftieth anniversary of our first contribution to a United
Nations peacekeeping mission. We believe that United
Nations peacekeeping missions embody the best
example of nations coming together for peace and
security. Cooperation between troops and police
personnel from different countries forges bonds of
friendship and trust that transcend differences in
language and culture.
We continue the training and assessment of
peacekeepers in Sri Lanka in an effort to uphold the
highest standards of peacekeeping. Sri Lanka’s
steadfast commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
is reflected in our strategic reserve of a highly
professional and fully equipped battalion for
deployment within 48-hours’ notice. In keeping with
the United Nations stated goal of ensuring gender
parity in all areas, Sri Lanka also has in reserve highly
professional and well-trained female personnel to serve
as peacekeepers.
Peacekeeping should not be treated as a substitute
for addressing the root causes of conflict. The ultimate
goal should be building peace and the institutional
capacities of the affected countries to enable them to
manage their own affairs free from outside
interference. Hence, exit strategies are of paramount
importance. A successful transition can be guaranteed
only by developing clear, credible and achievable
mandates, which this Council agreed to ensure at its
deliberations in February.
Sri Lanka firmly believes that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be conducted in
respect for fundamental principles such as the consent
of the parties, the non-use of force except in selfdefence, and impartiality. The success of any
peacekeeping mission will depend on the respect
accorded to the principles of the sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of States. It is equally important
that the criterion for the selection of peacekeeping

11-48209

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

troops always remain the level of their proven and
recognized professionalism and integrity during their
deployment.
Peacekeeping budgets and the number of
peacekeepers have grown as the nature of
peacekeeping mandates has changed — a development
that has attracted criticism. At the same time, the gaps
between mandates and the resources required to carry
them out have widened. We hope that this debate will
focus on the importance of providing adequate
resources to allow peacekeeping missions to carry out
their mandates. From the stage of planning until actual
deployment, it is imperative to have closer
consultations and careful evaluations of the resource
gaps. United Nations peacekeeping operations remain,
despite their shortcomings, vastly superior in terms of
effectiveness and efficiency to other alternatives.
In conclusion, Sri Lanka is pleased to reiterate
our continued commitment to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The President: I give
representative of Azerbaijan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Mammadaliyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to
join previous speakers in condemning the latest
terrorist attack in Nigeria. In this regard, our deepest
condolences go to all those affected.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this very important open debate on United
Nations peacekeeping operations and for your
submission of the concept paper (S/2011/496, annex)
on this topic.
Azerbaijan fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, but I would like to make some remarks in
our national capacity.
Despite serious shortcomings, it is evident that
peacekeeping and peacekeepers have delivered results,
contributed to reducing tensions, and ensured that
peacebuilding processes in different parts of the world
moved forward. At the same time, more should be done
to strengthen international peacekeeping capabilities in
accordance with the needs of national authorities and
relevance to conditions in the host countries.
As a country suffering from the scourge of war
and situated in proximity to other conflicts affecting

11-48209

the countries of its region, Azerbaijan is determined to
establish lasting peace and stability in the South
Caucasus and beyond on the basis of the generally
accepted norms and principles of international law, the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, and the appropriate documents and
decisions adopted by other international organizations.
Azerbaijan is fully committed to and making
sustained efforts in maintaining international peace,
security and stability, including by contributing to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. The
peacekeeping company in Azerbaijan’s Armed Forces
was formed in 1997 and transformed in 2001 into a
battalion. Since 1999, Azerbaijan has contributed
sizable military personal to the peacekeeping missions
in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq. In recent years, the
Government of Azerbaijan has increased its financial
contribution to support the United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Respect for the purposes and principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter, including in particular
those pertaining to the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and
political
independence
of
States
and
non-interference in their internal affairs, are crucial to
promoting peace, security and stability in general and
to performing peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions.
It is obvious that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts and their respective mandates involve important
questions of international law, and a greater degree of
common understanding in this regard is required
among Member States. We believe that the relevant
guiding principles and strategies to be developed with
a view to strengthening the normative framework of
such efforts should strictly adhere to the concept of
State sovereignty, including, inter alia, the consent of
the parties and impartiality. Particular attention should
also be paid to the issues of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
We believe that there is a need for more effective
cooperation, partnership and coordination among the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Secretariat, and troop- and police-contributing and host
countries. It is also important to mention the links
between officers in the field and decision-makers here
at Headquarters in order to ensure that correct
decisions are made in a timely manner. This can be
achieved only through the greater involvement of

37

S/PV.6603 (Resumption 1)

troop-contributing countries, which eventually will
lead to an upgrade of peacekeeping itself.
In conclusion, Mr. President, allow me to assure
you that Azerbaijan will continue to support
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding efforts,
address their needs and contribute to the decisionmaking process of the Security Council.

38

The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m.

11-48209
