~neral Assembly-Fortieth Session

Convinced further that the participation of youth representatives from Member States in international conferences and meetings dealing with youth-related issues can
enhance and strengthen the channels of communication
through the discussion of such issues, with a view to
finding solutions to problems confronting youth in the
contemporary world,
I. Calls upon Member States, United Nations bodies,
the specialized agencies and other governmental and intergovernmental organizations to implement fully the guidelines relating to the channels of communication adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolutions 32/135 and 36/
17, not only in general terms but also by concrete measures reflecting the issues of importance to young people;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to make use of, further improve and, if possible, extend
the existing channels of communication between the
United Nations and youth and youth organizations;
3. Calls upon national youth mechanisms that have
been set up by youth and youth organizations at the
national, regional and interregional levels to continue to
act as channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations, and, where
such mechanisms do not exist, recommends that national
co-ordinating committees of the International Youth Year
should continue to act as channels of communication;
4. Takes note of the recommendations on the channels
of communication between the United Nations and youth
and youth organizations, as contained in the report of the
Secretary-General;5
5. Decides to consider at its forty-first session the item
entitled "Policies and programmes relating to youth", on
the basis of a report of the Secretary-General.
80th plenary meeting
18 November 1985

40/22. Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its objective contained in the Charter of the
United Nations to achieve international co-operation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Reaffirming its firm determination and its commitment
to eradicate totally and unconditionally racism in all its
forms, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,6
the International Convention on the Elimination of AU
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime
of Apartheid1 2 and the Convention against Discrimination
in Education adopted by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on 14 December
1960,13
Recalling also its resolution 3057 (XXVlll) of 2
November 1973, on the first Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, and its resolution 38/
14 of 22 November 1983, on the Second Decade to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
II Resolutioo 2106 A (XX), annex.
12 Re501uuoo 3068 (XXV!II), annex.
1J United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural O,ianization,
Records ofthe General Conference. Elewm1h Sl!$Slon. Resolutions, p. 119.
14 Uniled Nations publication, Sales No. E.83.XIV.4 and corrigendum.

Recalling further the two World Conferences to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, held at Geneva in
1978 and 1983, respectively,
Taking note once again of the Report of the Second
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 14
Convinced that the Second World Conference represented a positive contribution by the international community towards attaining the objectives of the Decade,
through its adoption of a Declaration and an operational
Programme of Actionis for the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Noting with concern that, despite the efforts of the international community, the principal objectives of the first
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination were not attained and that millions of human
beings continue to this day to be the victims of varied
forms of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Recalling its resolution 39/ 16 of 23 November 1984,
Emphasizing the necessity of attaining the objectives of
the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Convinced of the need to take more effective and sustained international measures for the elimination of all
forms of racism and racial discrimination and the total
eradication of apartheid in South Afiica,
l. Resolves once again that all forms of racism and
racial discrimination, particularly in their institutionalized
form, such as apartheid, or resulting from official doctrines
of racial superiority or exclusivity, are among the most
serious violations of human rights in the contemporary
world and must be combated by all available means;
2. Appeals to the international community, in general,
and the United Nations, in particular, to continue to give
the highest priority to programmes for combating racism,
racial discrimination and apartheid, and to intensify its
own efforts, during the Second Decade to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, to provide assistance and relief
to the victims of racism and all forms of racial discrimination and apartheid, especially in South Afiica and
Namibia and in occupied territories and territories under
alien domination;
3. Appeals to all Governments and to international
and non-governmental organizations to increase and
intensify their activities to combat racism, racial discrimination and apartheid and to provide relief and assistance
to the victims of these evils;
4. Appeals to all Governments, organizations and individuals in a position to do so to contribute generously to
the Trust Fund for the Programme for the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination so
as to enable the Secretary-General to implement the various programme elements outlined in his report on the plan
of ac;tivities for 1985-1989; 16
5. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Secretary-General containing information on the activities
of Governments, specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations, as well as United Nations organs, to give effect to the
Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination; 17
6. Acknowledges the progress made in preparing the
study on the effects of racial discrimination in the field of
IS Ibid.. chap. 11.
16 A/39/ !67-E/1984/ 33 and Add.! and 2.
17 A/40/416 and E/1985/ 16 ai,d Add I.

195

edo.c31 ioo. 1rnining. arrl crnployment as it affects the children of minorities. in p,rticular those of migrant workers, 13
author,1cs the Secretary-General to solicit relevant information and views from Governments, specialized agencies. regional intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council and requests him to submit
the final study to the General Assembly at its forty-first
session;
7. Congratulates the Secretary-General on the organiration of the Round Table on [ntemational Legal Issues
relating to Apartheid, Racism and Racial Discrimination,
held at The Hague from 4 to 6 September 1985;
8. Expresses its satisfaction at the convening of the
Seminar on Community Relations Commissions and
Their Functions, held at Geneva from 9 to 20 September
1Q85, and invites the Secretary-General to disseminate the
report of the Seminar widely;
9. Reiterates its invitation to the Secretary-General to
proceed with the implementation of the activities outlined
'" his report on the plan of activities for 1985-1989 and to
<nhmit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session
, ....~ study on the role of private group action to combat
,·:\cism and racial discrimination and to the Assembly at
:.•s forty-third session the global compilation of national
legislation against racial discrimination;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
issue as soon as possible a collection of model legislation
for the guidance of Governments in the enactment of fur.
ther legislation against racial discrimination;
11. Invites the Secretary-General to organize in New
York in 1987 a training course for legislative draftsmen
with the aim offocusing on the preparation of national legislation against racism and racial discrimination;
12. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scienti fie
and Cultural Organization to expedite the preparation of
teaching materials and teaching aids to promote teaching,
training and educational activities on human rights and
against racism and racial discrimination, with particular
emphasis on activities at the primary and secondary levels
of education;
13. Requests the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the Commission on Human Rights to consider the possible need
for updating the study on racial discrimination; 19
I 4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to organize in
1988 a global consultation on racial discrimination involving representatives of the United Nations system, regional
intergovernmental organizations and interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, to focus on the co-ordination of international activities to combat racism and racial
discrimination;
15. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision
1985/ 141 of30 May 1985, by which the Council authorized the organization in 1986 in Africa of a seminar on
international assistance and support to peoples and movements struggling against colonialism, racism, racial discrimination and apartheid, and requests that the report
thereon be made available to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
16. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at ·its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;
I! A/4-0/694 and Add. I
l9 United Nations pubhcanon. Sales No. E.76.XIY.2.
20 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

17. Requests the Economic and Social Council. during
the period of the Second Decade, to submit an annual
report to the General Assembly, containing, inrer alia:
(a) An enumeration of the activities undertaken or
contemplated to achieve the objectives of the Second Decade, including the activities of Governments, United
Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other international and regional organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations;
(b) A review and appraisal of those activities;
(c) Its suggestions and recommendations;
18. Decides that the item entitled "Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination" should be on
its agenda throughout the Second Decade and should be
considered as a matter of the highest priority at its fortyfirst session.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/23. National experience in achieving far-reaching

social and economic changes for the purpose
or social progress
The General Assembly,
Guided by the desire to promote a higher standard of
life, full employment and conditions for economic and
social progress and development,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development,20
Mindful of the provisions of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order,2 1 as well as the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States,22
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions 1581 A
(L) of2 1 May 197 1, 1667 (LII) of I June 1972 and 1746
(LIV) of 16 May I 973 concerning the importance of fundamental structural socio-economic changes for the
strengthening of national independence and the achievement of the ultimate goals of social progress,
Recalling its resolutions 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974, 31/ 38 of 30 November 1976, 36/19 of9 November
1981 and 38/25 of 22 November 1983, in which it
reaffirmed the importance for every State to exercise its
inalienable right to carry out fundamental social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress and the
necessity of studying national experience in this field,
Desirous of securing a speedy and complete removal of
all obstacles to the economic and social progress of
peoples, especially colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism,
racial discrimination, apartheid, military, political and
economic intervention and pressure, foreign aggression
and occupation or alien domination, as well as all forms of
inequality and exploitation of peoples,
Convinced that peaceful coexistence and co-operatiori
among States, as well as effective measures in the field of
disarmament, create favourable international conditions
for the socio-economic development of all countries, in
;-articular developing countries,
Considering that the exchange of national experience in
achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for the
purpose of social progress would contribute to the implementation of the [nternational Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade,8
21 Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
22 Resolution 328 I (XXIX).
