United Nations

S/PV.6194

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6194th meeting
Tuesday, 29 September 2009, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice/Ms. DiCarlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Davutoğlu
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2009/475)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-53153 (E)

*0953153*

S/PV.6194

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Tribute to Ms. Norma Chan, Chief of the
Security Council Secretariat Branch
The President: Before we begin our discussion
on Afghanistan and I give the floor to Special
Representative Eide, I should like to take a few
minutes to pay tribute to Ms. Norma Chan, Chief of the
Security Council Secretariat Branch. Many of us know
and some of us, myself included, have been in denial
about the fact that Norma is retiring tomorrow after a
career that has spanned 36 years at the United Nations.
Sometimes referred to as the sixth permanent
member, Norma is an institution within the Security
Council. She joined the Security Council Affairs
Division in May 1978. Apart from three years in
Vienna, she has served the Council continuously since
that time. That means that Norma has worked with
more than 100 different Member States and more than
330 Security Council presidents — an unprecedented
and unparalleled record that is unlikely to be broken.
But it is not only the length of her service that is
extraordinary, but also the skill, professionalism and
integrity she brings to this job every day. Norma has
been here to guide the Council during pivotal moments
and to ensure that every day the work gets done, and
done properly.
Numerous presidents, prime ministers, hundreds
of foreign ministers and thousands of permanent
representatives
from
Council
members
and
non-members alike have benefited from her wise
advice and expert counsel, as I have every day this
month. As a new ambassador, I relied on Norma to help
me with the ins and outs of Council meetings — the
precedents, the procedures — and how to master and
fine-tune her famous scripts for formal meetings.
Many people spend their last month before
retirement enjoying celebratory lunches and dinners
and wrapping things up, but not Norma. In her last
month, she has worked as hard as ever, helping us
prepare for the fifth summit in the Council’s history,
and once again Norma applied her unflagging
professionalism, energy and enthusiasm for the
Council. In her attention to detail, she revved up her
team and made it all happen.
So to Norma we offer our deep gratitude for her
dedication and service to the Council, to us and to

2

advancing global peace and security. Her well-deserved
retirement is a deep loss for all of us, but we share in
her joy about the new adventures ahead for her.
I ask my fellow Council members to please join
me in extending very best wishes and thanks to Norma
Chan for her remarkable service in the interest of
global peace and security and her dedication to the
United Nations Security Council’s vital work.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2009/475)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Spantâ
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Rangin
Dâdfar Spantâ.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai
Eide, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

09-53153

S/PV.6194

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/475, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Eide.
Mr. Eide: This is certainly decision-time in
Afghanistan and for Afghanistan. As we look out over
the next few weeks, we can see how many critical
decisions are ahead of us. Together, they will
determine the prospects for success in ending a conflict
that has become more intense over the last few months.
Let me just mention a few of these decisions.
First of all, of course, the final results from the
20 August elections will be determined and then
certified. Then the future president will have to
compose his Government and decide on his political
agenda. Among those decisions will be how to launch a
process of peace and reconciliation. Decisions will
have to be made on the future size and composition of
the international military forces as well as Afghan
security forces. Finally, decisions must be made
concerning priorities and the allocation of international
development assistance.
Faced with such important decisions, I must
emphasize that doing more of the same is simply not an
option any more. It is simply not an option. We must,
in a way, change our mindset.
Nothing of what I would ask the Council to do is
dramatically new. It has in fact been agreed. We talked
about it, we read about it. It has been solemnly agreed
in international documents. But there is one problem:
we have not implemented it. If implemented, I believe
that what we have committed ourselves to can have a
tremendous impact on the ground. But if we do not
implement it, if we shy away from difficult decisions,
then the overall situation on the ground will continue
to deteriorate.
First, I offer a few words about the elections. Yes,
there has been fraud, and irregularities have been
committed by election officials, by candidates and by
their supporters, as well as by Government officials.
The turn-out was low — almost as low as the elections
for the European Parliament. But Afghanistan is a

09-53153

country in conflict. No other day since 2002 has seen
so many security incidents as those we experienced on
20 August 2009.
Nevertheless, more polling stations opened than
in elections in 2004 and 2005. The security forces and
the Independent Election Commission (IEC) did their
utmost to provide access for voters. As I say, they did
so in a country that is not only in conflict, but has weak
institutions, weak infrastructure and a huge illiterate
population faced with a ballot paper containing 41
presidential candidates. That illustrates the complexity
of the matter.
I would like to emphasize a few positive elements
that we should not forget. The election campaign was
characterized by a public engagement that Afghanistan
had never seen before. There was a real debate between
political alternatives that the people of Afghanistan had
never previously witnessed. In my view, this strong
public engagement proves that the Afghan people
wanted these elections. They wanted to continue the
democratic processes in this country.
Two weeks ago, many believed that we were
almost at the verge of collapse in the election process.
But it has been kept on track. The IEC and the
Electoral Complaints Commission (ECC) have worked
together during these final stages. With the assistance
of experts brought in from abroad, an audit process has
been agreed to determine the level of fraud and then
the final results. The ballot boxes will all now be
brought to Kabul so that the final audit can take place.
This process is at every stage in accordance with
international standards. It has been used in other
complex elections. It should enable us to have a
credible and legitimate result. At the same time, this
audit process will enable us to determine the final
result in a short period of time. That means that a
second round, if required, could be held before winter
sets in, thereby avoiding a lengthy period of political
vacuum and instability.
We have been assisted by some of the most
experienced persons one can possibly find in this
world, in electoral processes and statistics and so on, in
addition to the excellent people that we have on the
ground. The challenge of the ECC will now be to
determine and reject fraudulent vote ballots while at
the same time avoiding disenfranchisement of voters
who have cast their votes in good faith and in an

3

S/PV.6194

Afghan cultural environment where many people had
never seen a ballot paper and had never used a pen.
When the final result has been certified, it must
be respected by candidates and their supporters. What
most Afghans by far now want is to see the process
come to an end, a Government formed and their lives
improved. Then the important decisions must be taken
by the future Afghan president. That means, first of all,
appointing a Government that can inspire the people
and enjoy its confidence. That will also be a first
important and necessary signal to the international
community and will help consolidate the commitment
of the public in donor and troop-contributing countries.
At this point in time, with the increasing debate about
Afghanistan in the international community, such a
signal is of vital importance.
Furthermore, we can no longer allow the warlords
and power brokers of the past, and their policy of
fragmentation, to contaminate the institutions of the
future. We need a unity of purpose and a sharing of
responsibility that have so far been lacking. Of course,
eliminating the influence of the fragmenting forces of
the past cannot be done overnight. But these forces
must also understand that in a conflict that is
expanding in scope and intensity, they will be expected
to step back from their policies of fragmentation and
personal interests.
Local and regional power brokers cannot be
allowed to hinder efforts to build a coherent
Afghanistan and thereby offer opportunities that
insurgents can exploit. In this respect, also, the
international community has an important role to play;
instead of paying tribute to and enriching those who
oppose the Government with undemocratic and
illegitimate means, we must make it clear that the
alternative to unity of purpose is marginalization.
The second challenge for the future President will
be to formulate an agenda that truly corresponds to the
concerns of the people. Better governance at the
provincial and district levels, an intensified struggle
against corruption, strengthened respect for the rule of
law, bringing an end to the culture of impunity and
promoting social and economic justice must be
prominent parts of this agenda. And I must stress that
we need a new compact between the Afghan
Government and its people. That compact will also be
the cornerstone of a renewed commitment by the
international community to Afghanistan.

4

I am often asked if there should be conditionality
in our assistance. There is, in my view, a de facto
conditionality; the decisions of donors and troopcontributing countries are not made around summit
tables, not around Government tables, nor even around
the Security Council table. They are made around the
kitchen tables and in the living rooms where public
opinion is shaped. And the strength of that public
support in the international community depends on the
readiness of the Afghan Government to come closer to
the concerns of its people. The future Afghan
Government must understand that fully.
Important decisions will also be required by the
international community. On the security side, General
McChrystal has now presented his assessment. It is
clear, straightforward and demanding. His main themes
are the need to change the operational culture and get
closer to the people, to improve unity of effort and to
focus the resources and effectiveness of the Afghan
national security forces. I welcome his assessment, not
least his emphasis on cultural sensitivity and the need
to develop a different relationship with the population
in many areas.
I do not want to comment on the debate over the
need for additional international fighting forces, but I
do want to comment on the longer-term perspective.
We agree that there is a need to improve the strength
and capacity of the Afghan army and police. The
increase in the army is ahead of schedule and could
reach the goal of 135,000 personnel by October of next
year. That is encouraging, though a further and
significant increase will be required in subsequent
years, but if the army is to take greater responsibility
and conduct independent operations, much more than
numbers will be required. Decisions concerning the
procurement of equipment and weapons will have to be
taken soon. More international troops for training and
mentoring will be required.
The situation with the police is similar. A
decision to increase the number of police officers to
around 140,000 should be taken, in my view, before the
end of the year. But again, it is not merely a question
of numbers. The current attrition rate in the Afghan
police is between 20 and 25 per cent. That illustrates
the need for better training, better equipment and better
incentives.
All this — the training and equipping of the
police and army — cannot be a United States effort

09-53153

S/PV.6194

alone. There must be a much wider engagement. I
therefore appeal strongly to other contributing
countries to step up their efforts in the area of
manpower as well as financial resources, and I did the
same to defence ministers of the European Union three
hours ago by video link to Sweden.
On the civilian side, I see two main areas that
must be given urgent priority. The first is institutionbuilding. If the Afghan Government is to connect better
with its population, a huge institution programme is
needed. I have said this before, and I insist on it. It can
be divided into five components, and I do so to
illustrate the complexity of the problem.
First, with respect to training and education for
current and future civil servants, some structures and
institutions exist, but they must be expanded and
improved. Today, 25 per cent of district governors —
one in four — are either uneducated or have only
primary education. Secondly, as regards the building of
subnational infrastructure, today half of the district
governors have no office, two thirds have no power
supply and one third has no vehicles. Thirdly, we must
build an information technology network that enables
provincial and district governors to communicate better
with their employers in Kabul, and thereby also link up
to Afghan national development plans. Fourthly,
incentives must be strengthened. The fact that a district
governor may earn $60 a month makes it difficult to
attract competent people to dangerous districts. And, of
course, there must be stronger emphasis on merit-based
appointments and accountability.
Yes, the Government must demonstrate, soon and
in concrete terms, a readiness to fight corruption and
strengthen its institutions. But the responsibility for
building viable and accountable governance is one we
must share. The shortcomings I have just mentioned
illustrate the complexity of the problem and the fact
that we must have realistic expectations as to how fast
we can go forward.
The second priority is sustainable economic
development. I understand the growing impatience in
the international community and the need to
demonstrate results for all the sacrifices that have been
made and resources committed. However, this
impatience must not lead us to accelerated pressure for
quick-impact results that can easily turn into quickcollapse projects. If that were to happen, it would
distract us further from what is required for the

09-53153

sustainable economic development that will enable
Afghanistan to rely increasingly on its own resources.
So we need a two-track approach — with doable
projects in conflict areas, in agriculture, rural
development, and so forth, that can visibly improve the
quality of the lives of the people — and greater
investments in long-term projects centred around
growth engines and national resources in those parts of
the country that can enhance revenue collection and
gradually reduce dependence on foreign aid. Today,
that balance is simply wrong, with too little resources
and attention given to long-term investment. This will,
in fact, lead to a situation where much of what we have
been doing so far will, in a few years’ time, become
unsustainable.
At the G-8 meeting in Trieste, I presented
proposals on behalf of the Government and the United
Nations for two significant infrastructure projects: a
railroad and an expanded electricity grid that would
employ thousands of Afghans in the short term, and in
the longer term enable Afghanistan to exploit its own
rich mineral resources, not least the country’s vast iron
ore deposits. These projects would stimulate the
private sector and provide engines for growth for
significant parts of the country.
I think that, in this respect, the Afghans seem to
be more advanced than we are. At the Special Envoy
meeting in Paris earlier this month, I brought with me a
paper elaborated by the Afghan Minister of Finance
with the United Nations, proposing a reorganization of
the efforts of the Afghan Government and its approach
to strategic and economic development. It moves away
from 17 inter-ministerial committees and proposes to
establish three main clusters: agriculture and rural
development, human resource development and
infrastructure and economic growth. It represents a
radical shift away from an unprioritized competition
among ministers to a strategic approach to sustained
economic growth. I wish we could follow, because
today our aid bureaucracies are too rigid and lack the
ability to respond to new and better policies.
Finally, I indicated initially that a new
Government will have to develop and decide on a
peace and reconciliation programme. Some — in
particular in the international community — are talking
about a reintegration programme distinct from a plan
such as I mentioned. I would like to appeal for some
caution. First, I am convinced that any such effort,

5

S/PV.6194

whatever we call it, must be an Afghan-elaborated and
Afghan-led process. Second, the distinction between
hard-core Taliban and those who can be brought over
with a chequebook is indeed simplistic. I think we
must analyze the insurgency better, how it is made up.
Yes, there are irreconcilable insurgents. And yes, there
are those who join the insurgency for financial reasons.
But there are many who have joined the insurgency
because they feel politically and socially alienated.
That will require a political process, greater
inclusiveness and a more effective justice system.
There are differences from region to region. The
insurgency is truly a multi-causal issue and must be
approached as such. Simplicity simply does not work.
We can play a supporting role, but let us leave it to the
Afghans to decide how to move forward.
There have been a number of calls for a new
international conference on Afghanistan, and I support
such calls. I believe that if security permits, the first
such conference should be held at the ministerial level
in Kabul. Such a conference, in the established JCMB
format, would be a strong political signal and would
underline that we are moving into a transition strategy
where the main focus must be on a compact between
the Afghan people and its Government, and where the
Afghan Government assumes greater responsibilities
for the future of its country, with the international
community gradually in a more supporting role. That
conference would be based on a new Government
programme and would provide international support to
it.
But I also believe we should look towards a
broader conference to formulate in a wider sense the
goals of our partnership for the years ahead, goals that
are ambitious but at the same time realistic and
realizable, and that would provide a roadmap for a
mutual long-term commitment, four years after the
Afghanistan Compact was concluded in London. It
would centre around some of the themes I have
mentioned: the Government’s ability to assume the full
responsibilities of a sovereign State, institutionbuilding, economic development, a peace and
reconciliation process and Afghanistan’s future status
in the region. It would mark the end of one phase of
our relationship and the beginning of another.
Before I conclude, I would like to mention a few
pieces of good news that have not received the
attention they deserve.

6

First, we talk a lot about drug production, and
rightly so. This year again, the area under opium
cultivation dropped significantly, by 22 per cent,
including a major drop in Helmand province. The
volume of production was reduced by 10 per cent and
the number of poppy-free provinces went up from 18 to
20. That is good news.
Second, in August, the young student named
Parwez Kambaksh, who had been given a death
sentence for downloading material concerning the
interpretation of the Koran, was given a presidential
amnesty on humanitarian grounds. This case had
received global attention. He is now a free man.
Third, during the United Nations Peace Day,
which we celebrated a few days ago, and the campaign
around that day, 1.2 million children were vaccinated
against polio. Only 3 per cent of the target group were
not reached, mainly due to ongoing fighting. Thanks to
the cooperation of all — including, I must say, the
Taliban — access was obtained to areas that had been
inaccessible in previous years. For us on the ground
this is important good news, and even more for the
children whose lives we may have saved.
The Council has received a set of benchmarks, as
instructed in resolution 1868 (2009) (S/2009/475,
annex). They are formulated following a debate in
Kabul on whether they should be UNAMA-specific or
of a more general nature. There was consensus on the
latter. They represent a first attempt and can, of course,
be further refined, following debate around this table
and in Kabul.
The United Nations has, I believe, expanded its
efforts in accordance with its mandate, not least in the
coordination of political and development issues. That
work will continue. Our ambition is still to continue to
expand with new offices across the country. There is a
need for a stronger coordinating effort, primarily in the
areas of development and governance. I have therefore
asked for additional resources for next year’s budget in
order to implement the mandate more fully. However,
as I have said before, it is not only a question of the
number of staff. We need specialized personnel, who
are hard to find. I appeal to Council members for their
continued support and for their assistance in finding
the people we need in a challenging environment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, His
Excellency Mr. Rangin Dâdfar Spantâ.

09-53153

S/PV.6194

Mr. Spantâ: Let me begin by congratulating you,
Madam President, on your assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. I am grateful to you for
convening
this
meeting.
Afghanistan
deeply
appreciates the strong support and solidarity of the
family of nations in its arduous struggle to stand on its
feet after decades of conflicts and suffering. Specially,
we are grateful for the excellent work and efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). Our special thanks go to Ambassador Kai
Eide and his able team. I am also thankful for his
comprehensive report on the situation in my country.
I would like to brief the Council on our recent
presidential and provincial council elections and the
way forward. This will be somewhat complementary to
Mr. Eide’s efforts.
The August elections were important milestones
in the processes of democratization and State-building
in Afghanistan. They were a multifaceted undertaking,
involving different entities and players. They included
Afghan national security forces, the Independent
Election Commission, the Electoral Complaints
Commission, the Afghan media, United Nations
agencies, national and international observers, Afghan
civil society, the Afghan political community, the
International Security Assistance Force and, of course,
the Afghan citizens. It was the first time in the history
of modern Afghanistan that Afghans had the
opportunity to organize a nationwide election.
What made this election different from other
elections was the degree of the threat to security.
Al-Qaida, the Taliban and other terrorist groups did
their utmost to disrupt the election. Painfully, we lost a
number of our security forces, our international
partners and Afghan civilians to terrorist attacks prior
and during the election day.
Taking into account the socio-historic realities of
my country, we passed this national test successfully.
As with any emerging democracy, there were cases of
irregularities. But in passing judgment, we should be
aware of the context, the process and the full picture,
rather than only one aspect or issue.
For the sake of the stability and consolidation of
our nascent democratic institutions and process, it is
imperative that all of us respect and support the
forthcoming decisions from the Afghan electoral
bodies. Continuing efforts to undermine the integrity
and legitimacy of the process and our institutions will

09-53153

certainly result in a worsening of the situation, not only
for Afghanistan but also for the international
community.
Afghanistan is faced with challenges and needs
that fall into four categories: stabilization, humanitarian
concerns, reconstruction efforts and sustainable
development. Only by pursuing a comprehensive longterm strategy can we consolidate the fragile advances
we have made and the institutions we have built since
2001. Short-term, compartmentalized and partial
solutions are doomed to fail.
The objective of such a strategy must be to help
create a fully sustained and functioning State. The
main pillars of this strategy are security, good
governance,
economic
development,
regional
cooperation and international solidarity.
A comprehensive long-term strategy needs to be
supported by adequate and appropriate resources and
skills. To implement such a strategy, there needs to be a
clearer division of responsibility between us and the
international community. Afghanistan has to shoulder
the main responsibility for creating a secure,
prosperous, progressive and democratic Afghanistan.
The sustained and substantial support of the
international community will be crucial in enabling us
to realize our national priorities. We are very pleased
with the placing of Afghanistan high among the
priorities of the new United States Administration. We
are confident that the surge in United States military
support coupled with increased civilian and
developmental assistance is the best way forward.
Afghanistan welcomes the proposal to convene
an international conference on the situation in
Afghanistan. We will be pleased to host it in Kabul.
This conference will be an opportunity to renew our
partnership and to outline specific and concrete steps
and programmes. The conference will be an important
forum for identifying effective ways to implement the
Afghanistan
National
Development
Strategy.
Furthermore, it will provide an opportunity to discuss
our mutual responsibilities and commitment to
principles of good governance, mutual accountability,
transparency, aid efficiency and enhanced coordination.
I should like to say a few words about the
strategic issue of good governance. An accountable and
functioning State is absolutely essential for addressing
Afghanistan’s short- and long-term needs and

7

S/PV.6194

challenges. However, it is a reductionist view to boil
all our problems down to one issue. Terrorists are
motivated by a set of factors, primarily their fanatical
mindset and ideological ends.
In the context of Afghanistan, we often suffer
from weak or, as Kai Eide mentioned, even absent
governance, as well as bad governance. In many cases,
we lack the basic tools required for governance. Rather
than bashing and delegitimizing our young State
institutions, we have to invest in our national
institutions. Furthermore, it is wrong and unethical to
ignore bad practice on the part of other actors,
including within the donor community.
Another important issue is the question of
re-integration of illegal fighters into civilian life. From
the beginning, it has been our stated policy that
Afghanistan belongs to all Afghan citizens. To this end,
and in the context of the Afghan Constitution, we have
used all means to encourage those Afghans who took
up arms against their country to participate in the
process of reconstructing their motherland. In the
coming weeks and months, we will accelerate our
efforts towards that end. To succeed in this endeavour,
our efforts must be consistent with the ends that we
envision for Afghanistan and the region. Secondly, as
long as the leaders of the Taliban and other terrorist
groups remain protected by external entities, we will
not be able to achieve our goal of dismantling the
dynamic of insecurity in my country. Any sustainable
reintegration effort must focus on the leadership as
well as non-ideological fighters.
Another important issue for Afghanistan is
regional cooperation. For us, regional cooperation is a
pillar of our foreign, security and development policy.
We fully believe in the utility of economic peace in our
region. Many of our challenges are regional in nature
and consequence — in particular, terrorism and drugtrafficking. Only by creating a cooperative
environment in the region can we collectively address
our interrelated challenges. In this context, our
relations with the Islamic Republic of Pakistan are of
the utmost importance. Fortunately, in recent months,
there has been a cooperative atmosphere between us
and the new civilian Government in Pakistan. I should
like to thank our friends for their support in bringing
this bilateral relationship about through the trilateral
meetings held in Washington, Ankara and Istanbul. It is
our sincere wish to extend this to other entities in

8

Pakistan. To this end, the international community
must ensure that only good behaviour is rewarded.
In addressing all these issues, the United Nations
has played and must continue to play a leading role.
UNAMA is well placed to facilitate communication
between us and our international partners and to bridge
our mutual needs and expectations. Enhancing
coordination among different stakeholders is another
important role for UNAMA.
I should like to conclude by reiterating
Afghanistan’s full commitment and readiness to
strengthen our relationships with our international
partners. I am absolutely confident that with their
support and solidarity, Afghanistan will resume its
historical role and place as a model for cooperation
among different cultures and as a crossroads for trade,
transit and tourism in the region.
The President: I thank
Mr. Spantâ for his statement.

His

Excellency

I shall now give the floor to Council members. I
begin by giving the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Turkey, His Excellency Mr. Ahmet
Davutoğlu.
Mr. Davutoğlu (Turkey): I would first like to
express our appreciation to Ms. Norma Chan, who over
the years has made a tremendous contribution to the
work of the Council. During the short period of time of
Turkey’s membership in the Council, our mission has
greatly appreciated her kind assistance and cooperation
on every issue, and thus she will be sorely missed by
all of us.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Kai Eide for his briefing, and I take this opportunity
also to commend him and the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for the
valuable work they have been doing in that country. I
also welcome my dear friend Mr. Rangin Dâdfar
Spantâ to the Council and offer, through him, our best
wishes to the people of Afghanistan.
The Afghan people should receive our
recognition for their tireless endeavours and
commitment to democracy in their country. Every
experience around the world shows that only the
commitment and perseverance of the people can make
democracy work.

09-53153

S/PV.6194

In this regard, as we await the final results of the
vote, let us take a moment to recognize that
Afghanistan continues its journey towards becoming a
vigorous democracy. We in the international
community should extend our strong support for their
pursuit. Whatever lessons exist must be identified and
whatever issues arise must be addressed primarily by
the independent Afghan authorities, and we should give
our assistance and support to them.
Immense challenges that require urgent attention
continue to exist on the ground and require the
attention of the Government in Kabul. Winning hearts
and minds is most important. Our messages to the
President of Afghanistan for the next five years will be
to embrace the whole proud Afghan nation and to work
courageously for national reconciliation. We should
continue to extend our cooperation to him and offer the
helping hand of the international community.
Next year, Turkey will be the lead country in the
Security Council on Afghanistan. We intend to build on
the positive momentum created by Japan, with the
assistance of the United Nations and other Security
Council members.
Turkey is not an outsider in that geographic
region. Historically, we have been a friend and brother
to the people of Afghanistan. We have always been
involved in one form or another, but always in support
of our brothers and sisters in Afghanistan. Currently,
Turkey is implementing its most comprehensive ever
programme of assistance to Afghanistan. We will
continue our intensive work to support reconstruction.
Turkey is also active at the regional level, inter alia in
the trilateral summit process.
Turkey believes that a four-pronged approach is
necessary in Afghanistan. First, the international
community and the Government of Afghanistan need to
initiate a robust campaign for a massive and refocused
economic reconstruction plan. Secondly, an effective
and self-sufficient Afghan military and police should
be created at a faster pace. Thirdly, the international
community must encourage an inclusive national
reconciliation process led by the Government of
Afghanistan. And, last but not least, we must foster an
environment conducive to democracy and development
through modern education.
With these thoughts in mind, I particularly thank
the Secretary-General for the report presented today
and for his benchmarks, which are focused and

09-53153

achievable. I particularly welcome the fact that these
benchmarks contain the most important five aspects of
a comprehensive strategy — security, good
governance, social and economic development, human
rights and the fight against narcotics — which Turkey
has always emphasized.
Let me close by again thanking the Special
Representative
and
confirming
Turkey’s
full
confidence in and support for his work.
Mr. Takasu: Before proceeding, I would like to
add my words of deep appreciation and warm regards
to Norma Chan for her dedication.
I would like to thank Special Representative Kai
Eide for his very frank and helpful remarks. Also, we
are grateful to Minister Spantâ for his presence this
morning. We are very grateful to the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative’s team in Kabul for
preparing the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/475), containing benchmarks. As he
has admitted, it is difficult to formulate benchmarks for
a mission in such a complex situation, but they will
serve as useful guidelines to track the progress in the
country, which is now the focus of attention of all of us.
First of all, let me congratulate the people of
Afghanistan, who cast their ballots in the recent
historic
elections
under
very
intimidating
circumstances. There is hardly any country in the
world where it is more difficult to conduct elections
now than Afghanistan. It must be stressed that the
recent elections were the very first Afghan-led
elections and included very strong public engagement.
Now that the votes have been cast, we expect the
process to be completed with due process. We expect
the Electoral Complaints Commission to handle
properly the many complaints of fraud. The ongoing
joint work of the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission is
reassuring, and we should have full confidence in their
efforts to announce the certified results soon.
I would like to urge all concerned parties in
Afghanistan to accept the certified results once they are
announced. We encourage them to try to mend the
political fissure that has been created by the electoral
process and to promote a policy of inclusion under the
new Government.
The next six months will be critical to defining
the future course of Afghanistan. We must now look

9

S/PV.6194

ahead to the post-election strategy. Sustained
international attention and assistance are needed now
more than ever. In this light, I would like to reaffirm
that the new Japanese Government will continue its
intensive efforts to extend assistance to Afghanistan.
Japan’s strong commitment to the stability and
reconstruction of Afghanistan is unchanged.
We also wish to see the newly elected Afghan
Government demonstrate its determination to address
forcefully the various challenges it faces — in
particular the issue of good governance — and thereby
gain trust both at home and abroad.
The proposed international conference will
provide a valuable opportunity to confirm
commitments on the parts of both the international
community and the Government of Afghanistan. I
would like to point out that the venue and modality of
the conference will be decided in full consultation with
the new Afghan Government. It is important to ensure
that the Government take the lead in the preparation of
the conference and demonstrate ownership in the
outcome.
In the post-election strategy, the reintegration and
reconciliation of insurgents are of critical importance.
We should encourage political outreach towards those
former insurgents who have forsaken violence and
made a firm commitment to living peacefully within
the framework of the Constitution.
We must remind ourselves that the reintegration
effort must be led by the Afghan Government. The
Government, at the national and local levels, must be
regarded by the people as credible, strong and
competent if such efforts are to be effective. Building
on its experiences in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and in the disbandment of illegal and
armed groups, Japan intends to contribute to these
efforts, including by providing vocational training for
those who have been reintegrated.
In meeting the diverse challenges in the country,
a more focused and better-coordinated approach among
donors is essential. Japan fully supports the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
prioritizing and coordinating areas of assistance, and
concurs with the areas he has identified to address.
Agriculture, rural development, infrastructure and
basic human needs are the areas on which Japan has
been focusing its assistance, and we will continue to
exert our efforts in those areas.

10

Major pledges have been made, but many of them
still await implementation. I would like to emphasize
that it is time to accelerate the implementation of
pledges, as soon as the commitment is reaffirmed by
the new Afghan Government.
Obviously, security is the biggest challenge and a
prerequisite for all these efforts. Efforts at reintegration
and reconciliation, for instance, must be carried out
from a position of strength. We pay high tribute to
those countries that are providing troops, many of
which have experienced the loss of the precious lives
of their personnel.
We also commend the performance of the Afghan
security forces, particularly in the past few months. But
clearly, much more needs to be done to further
strengthen their national capacity. Japan has been
supporting efforts to improve the national security
capacity, including through assistance for the police
payroll. Japan will continue to explore what it can do
to best assist in this area.
The indispensable role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan has been reaffirmed on a number of
occasions by the Council itself, but also at various
international forums. It was again borne out in the
conduct of the recent elections. We fully recognize how
difficult and treacherous the situation is for United
Nations personnel to accomplish their given mandates.
The leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Kai Eide, and the courageous
efforts of his staff are highly commendable.
Japan reiterates its support for the strengthening
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in the months to come and looks forward
to examining a detailed proposal.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting, and I
thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), whose
work we commend and continue to support, for his
updated briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.
I welcome Foreign Minister Rangin Dâdfar
Spantâ of Afghanistan and thank him for his statement.
I also recognize the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey.

09-53153

S/PV.6194

As Norma Chan, Chief of the Security Council
Secretariat Branch, is retiring tomorrow, I would like
to extend to her our sincere congratulations and
gratitude for the great service she has accomplished
over many decades. As upcoming President of the
Council, I very much regret that she cannot stay for
another month. I wish Norma all the best in her new
undertaking and new life.
We welcome the positive developments in
Afghanistan over the past three months, especially the
holding of the presidential and provincial council
elections on 20 August 2009, which were the first
elections run by the Independent Election Commission.
Despite many irregularities reported, we could see
from the elections the strong aspiration of the Afghan
people for peace and stability.
We respect the choice of the Afghan people of
their leadership and hope that the election results will
lay a sound foundation for political stability in the
country. In the short term, we hope valuable lessons
learned will be useful in planning Afghanistan’s 2010
parliamentary elections. In the face of the present
delicate situation, we urge all parties concerned to
constructively cooperate with a view to establishing a
new, strong Afghan Government that is capable of
moving the country forward.
From another perspective, those elections
revealed a more comprehensive picture of the current
situation in Afghanistan, in which major challenges
such as insecurity, weak institutions and insufficient
human and financial resources are prominent features.
A steadily increasing number of attacks and other
security incidents since the beginning of this year,
particularly during the weeks prior to the elections,
reconfirm the shared assessment that insecurity
remains the biggest challenge to Afghanistan. The
deteriorating security situation in many parts of the
country has significantly hampered not only attempts
to hold the elections peacefully with broad
participation of eligible voters, but also efforts to
consolidate institution-building and governance and to
improve the safety and living conditions of the people.
Most of the current infrastructure-building
projects are confined to the centre, unable to reach
remote localities where poor people are in urgent need
of assistance. The alleged electoral irregularities
indicate that there should be more focus on training

09-53153

Afghans to develop capacities of participating in and
contributing to the country’s political process.
Against that background, we welcome the
inclusion of benchmarks and indicators of progress in
the Secretary-General’s report. They will provide a
good basis for determining the priorities in the next
stage, for measuring progress and for making the
adjustments necessary to achieve the goals set in all
areas, ranging from institution-building, security
improvement and socio-economic development to
human rights promotion and the fight against drugs.
We would like to emphasize our view that protection of
civilians and the improvement of living conditions of
the Afghan people must be accorded top priority.
At this critical stage in Afghanistan’s peace
process, the long-term commitment of international
donors is of still greater significance. We support the
early convening of an international conference to
reassess the assistance needs of Afghanistan in this
post-election
period.
However,
the
Afghan
Administration and people, as the owners of the
county’s peace process, must be able to play a decisive
role in this process. The Government of Afghanistan
must be enabled to assume all the responsibilities that
belong to a sovereign State. The support and assistance
of the international community, including UNAMA,
should therefore be geared toward the achievement of
this objective.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I would also like to begin
by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General,
Mr.
Kai
Eide,
for
his
comprehensive briefing and for presenting the
Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
Afghanistan. We thank Mr. Eide for the exemplary
leadership he has provided under extremely harsh
circumstances. At the same time, we extend our thanks
to the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication and
courage.
We also wish like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Spantâ, to this
table and thank him for his valuable contribution today.
Croatia welcomes the holding last month of the
first presidential and provincial council elections run
entirely by the Afghan Government, with the support
of UNDP/ELECT. In the same breath, we would like to
praise the people of Afghanistan for their participation
in determining the future course of their country

11

S/PV.6194

despite the many serious difficulties they face and the
self-evident risks involved.
As we have been informed, there have been grave
allegations that the recent elections were marred by
serious irregularities and fraud. It is thanks to existing
electoral safeguards — including national and
international observers, as well as a large number of
candidate agents — that much of the fraud that did
occur was discovered and referred to the relevant
institutions. We hope that the process currently
underway within the Electoral Complaints Commission
will soon be completed and enable the Independent
Election Commission to certify the election results.
Croatia deplores not only the loss of life and the
barbaric destruction that occurred during preparations
for the elections as well as on election day itself, but
also a new height in the numbers of those maimed and
killed as a result of the ever-increasing violence in the
country. We strongly condemn the deliberate targeting
of civilians and the reliance on asymmetric tactics in
total disregard of human life and basic human values.
Croatia welcomes the new approach adopted by
the new Commander of the International Security
Assistance Force, with the protection of civilians as its
centre and the further Afghanization of security
operations. We note with satisfaction that there is
further progress in coordinating key Afghan security
institutions, including the acceleration of recruitment
and training of the Afghan National Army.
It is important to stress that, although we see the
military effort as an important and integral part of the
overall solution in Afghanistan, we agree with the
overall assessment that military means alone will not
bring final success in the country. Carefully planned
and attentively implemented national reconciliation
programmes, carried out under well-known conditions,
should, in our opinion, greatly contribute to this aim.
The new Government to be formed on the basis
of generally accepted electoral results is expected to
reaffirm its relationship with the international
community and its own people. We share the
assessment of the Secretary-General that the level of
trust that the future Afghan Government can build with
its people will impact the level of support that the
Governments of donor and troop-contributing countries
receive from their constituencies for continuing
support to the efforts of the Afghan Government.

12

It is important that the new Government agenda
address the main concerns of the Afghan population,
especially security, the rule of law, the fight against
corruption and the culture of impunity, as well as
capacity-building. Similarly, in the economic sector the
Government must develop a clear set of priorities with
particular emphasis on Afghanistan’s main potentials:
agriculture, mineral resources and human development.
It is encouraging to learn that the process of
priority-setting and donor alignments within the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board has significantly
improved. Furthermore, Croatia is encouraged by
reports of enhanced donor coordination and the
increased readiness of donors to adjust resources in
order to support well-formulated high-impact projects
and policies that can bring considerable improvements,
not only in post-combat areas but also in stable areas
open to insurgents. Keeping in mind the importance
and magnitude of the task assigned to UNAMA,
Croatia strongly supports the further strengthening of
the Mission and calls for additional resources.
Finally,
Croatia
finds
the
development
benchmarks drawn from the UNAMA mandate a useful
tool which the Council can use to follow the progress
towards the objectives it set for Afghanistan. Croatia
hopes they will further contribute to fulfilment of
UNAMA’s tasks and responsibilities.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to Norma
Chan for her tireless work, to thank her for all of the
assistance we received throughout the years and to
wish her all the best in her future.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would also like to
begin by thanking Ms. Norma Chan for the support we
have received and that numerous Austrian Permanent
Representatives, Austrian colleagues, and Austrian
colleagues in the Secretariat have received from her
during the years. I can only echo what my colleague
from Viet Nam has said — that we are particularly sad
to see her leave just one month before her support
would have been most dearly needed. Let me also
place on record that we particularly enjoyed and were
happy to have her in Vienna during the three years that
we were privileged to have her there.
On the subject of today, I would like to welcome
the presence and the statement of the Foreign Minister
of Afghanistan. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
for his briefing, his commitment and the work he is

09-53153

S/PV.6194

doing there under very difficult circumstances in a very
impressive fashion.
Austria shares the view that in spite of the many
shortcomings of the elections held in August, it was a
great achievement that those first entirely Afghan-led
elections took place at all. The elections were preceded
by a real campaign focusing on political agendas and
allowing genuine competition among the candidates.
The fact that millions of Afghans chose to vote in spite
of the intimidation by insurgents is impressive and
encouraging.
However, the fact that the voting process was
marred by serious electoral fraud is of concern. All
incidents must be addressed in order to ensure the
credibility of the electoral process. Austria thus fully
supports the work of the Electoral Complaints
Commission.
Once the electoral process has been completed, it
will be important for the new President to be certified
promptly in order to permit the early formation of an
effective and inclusive Government that can tackle the
many challenges that lie ahead. We fully share the
Secretary-General’s view that the future Afghan
Government will need to build a new relationship of
trust with its people. Good governance, the rule of law
and respect for human rights should form the general
basis of the work of the new Government.
Improvement in these areas, including the fight against
corruption and drug trafficking, will be decisive.
The lessons learned from the election process
should guide the preparations for the parliamentary
elections to be held in 2010. Findings of the experts
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) will certainly be useful in this context.
The same goes for the recommendations of the
European Union election observation mission, which
played a useful role in the observation of the August
elections.
I would also like to underline the important
overall contribution of the European Union in the
framework of efforts in Afghanistan, in particular
through assistance in the field of security sector
reform, development and the election process. I am
sure that the Member State holding the presidency of
the European Union will be happy to present the efforts
and the position of the Union in greater detail when the
Security Council next debates the situation in
Afghanistan.

09-53153

Undoubtedly, one of the biggest challenges now
is improving the security situation for the people of
Afghanistan. Incidents involving improvised explosive
devices and complex attacks by insurgents on civilians
and on humanitarian personnel are extremely worrying.
We have to convey the clear message that those
responsible for intimidation or violence directed
against humanitarian workers will be held to account.
Minimizing the alarming toll in civilian casualties must
be our number-one objective. We welcome the new
approach of the International Security Assistance Force
that gives the protection of the Afghan population the
highest priority and includes closer operational
partnership with the Afghan national security forces.
We are also aware of the important efforts made
by the current Government of Afghanistan to improve
the human rights situation. There are major problems
to be tackled, as documented in the recent joint report
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
on violence against women. In this context we wish to
welcome and acknowledge the adoption in July of the
new law on the elimination of violence against women.
We hope that this law will take precedence over the
Shia Personal Status law, which from our point of view
does not comply with international human rights
standards and the international commitments of
Afghanistan.
On the issue of narcotics, the Special
Representative has already referred to the positive
developments achieved during the past year. We are
happy to see that the trilateral initiative of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime “Rainbow
strategy” has entered into the operational phase.
Austria also welcomes the ongoing engagement
of the OSCE with Afghanistan and would be happy to
see UNAMA continue to engage and cooperate with
the OSCE field missions in the region wherever
possible.
Looking to the future, we welcome the proposal
to hold an international conference on Afghanistan to
renew the Afghanistan Compact. This process must
lead to what one might call a real civilian surge based
on the principles of capacity-building and increased
responsibility and ownership on the part of the Afghan
Government.

13

S/PV.6194

In conclusion, let me acknowledge the important
work that UNAMA and other United Nations bodies
are doing in Afghanistan. Austria fully supports the
planned expansion and strengthening of UNAMA. We
would also value and welcome the benchmarks and
indicators of progress annexed to the SecretaryGeneral’s report. They provide the Security Council
with a useful tool for measuring progress. We welcome
in particular the inclusion of specific indicators with
regard to the protection of civilians and are certainly
happy that the Secretary-General looks to refining
these benchmarks further in consultation with the
Afghan Government and the international community.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): Burkina Faso wishes to echo the words of the
President and the other Security Council members in
conveying our gratitude to Ms. Norma Chan. Our
delegation has benefited from her availability and
professionalism, and together we are profoundly
grateful to her. We wish her a peaceful retirement — in
any case, more peaceful than life in the Council — and
great success in her life after the Council.
I thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing. I welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and thank him for his
important contribution.
Burkina Faso welcomes the holding of
presidential and provincial elections in August, which
enabled the Afghan people to take control of their own
destiny. The organization of the elections was itself a
real challenge, and the difficulties encountered during
the electoral process once again show the necessity and
urgency of true national reconciliation, an
indispensable prerequisite for all development efforts.
It is our hope that the audit and recount process of
electoral results will take place rapidly and in a
credible manner in order to ensure that the final results
are accepted by all.
The new Government faces many arduous tasks
and numerous and difficult challenges. Once more, we
call upon the international community to continue and
enhance its support for Afghanistan, in particular in the
priority areas identified as benchmarks in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/475).
We commend UNAMA for its work alongside the
Afghan people. Its efforts to ensure greater aid

14

effectiveness and improve national reconciliation at the
local level and its support in the political and,
especially, human rights spheres deserve our
recognition. We welcome the 19 July signing of the law
on the elimination of violence against women and the
strengthening of Afghan legal and crime-prevention
capacity. Since these are essential components of
international efforts on the ground, we firmly
encourage the Mission to do everything in its power to
attain the objectives of resolution 1868 (2009). To
enable it do fulfil its mandate effectively, it is crucial
that it be granted adequate resources.
Turning to economic and social development,
there has been progress in follow-up in the area of
financing for development. But the reduced funding for
the Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund and the
tendency to focus on donors’ preferences continue to
increase the Government’s dependency on the
international community. We call upon donor States to
honour their pledges and to work with the Government
to forge a common strategy for sustainable
development owned by the Afghan people.
We hope that present trends will continue with
regard to reductions in opium poppy cultivation and
drug production and their replacement by legitimate
crops, as well as with regard to strengthening the fight
against corruption. Here, we welcome the support
provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the national and international security
forces, in coordination with neighbouring countries.
Clearly, the prerequisites for progress in
Afghanistan remain the strengthening of State
institutions, the extension of State authority throughout
the national territory and, above all, the political will
of all actors to achieve these things. In that regard we
share the view of the Secretary-General on the need for
infrastructure to make it possible for public institutions
to function, to enhance public administration capacity,
the establishment of a judicial system that is credible
and accessible to all citizens, the enhancement of the
public revenue collection system and the promotion of
youth employment on the basis of merit.
Yet none of those goals will be met without
security. That is why we support an increase in the
number of well trained and fully operational police and
military personnel. In that regard, we take note of the
quality of the new tactical approach employed by the
International Security Assistance Force, based on

09-53153

S/PV.6194

protection of populations and improvement in the
conditions under which operations take place, along
with development of the Afghan forces to whom
responsibility for security will gradually be transferred.
This, to be sure, is a difficult long-term
endeavour, but it is the path we must follow if we want
peace and prosperity in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we fully support the proposal that
an international conference on Afghanistan be
convened. We hope that this opportunity will give rise
to specific initiatives for the sake of peace and social
and economic development in that country.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me first
express the thanks of the United Kingdom delegation
to Norma Chan for her extraordinary service to the
United Nations and to the Security Council over so
many years, as well as for her kindness, efficiency and
wise advice. Her shrewd and sometimes quite wicked
sense of humour has enhanced our lives. We are
immensely grateful and we wish her all the best.
On the matter at hand, let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his latest report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2009/475) and Special
Representative Eide for his briefing today. I also
welcome Foreign Minister Spantâ and thank him for
his contribution to our consideration of this item.
It is important that we continue to have regular
and frank discussions on the situation in Afghanistan.
These reports and these briefings are a key element of
the Security Council’s engagement with the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
When the Council met in June (see S/PV.6154) to
discuss the last UNAMA report (S/2009/323), many if
not all of us underlined the significance for
Afghanistan of the August presidential election and the
need for the United Nations to work with the Afghan
authorities to ensure that they were credible, inclusive
and secure. The fact that those elections went ahead, in
what were very challenging circumstances, is an
achievement in itself. Holding the first Afghan-led
electoral process for 30 years was an important step
along the road to creating a stable, secure and selfsustaining Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General’s report sets out some of
the significant achievements, including the number of
polling stations opened and the substantive tenor of the

09-53153

political debate. It also notes the reports of electoral
fraud and irregularities. The only appropriate response
to those reports is to allow the Afghan Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission to complete the electoral audit currently
under way. We must be patient and allow that process
to run its course. Their work is essential to ensure that
the outcome of the election is credible and reflects the
will of the Afghan people. They have our full support.
As the Secretary-General’s report notes,
regardless of who wins the election, the crucial next
step is the formation of a credible and effective
Government that will deliver to the people of
Afghanistan on the issues that matter: security,
governance, justice, development and a workable
programme for reintegration. Building the legitimate
economy and pursuing the fight against corruption will
also be key challenges for the new Government. We,
alongside the rest of the international community, stand
ready to support that Government in pursuing these
priorities, focusing wherever possible on building
Afghan capacity.
To that end, we hope there will be agreement to
the proposal to convene a post-election conference in
Kabul, co-chaired by the United Nations and the next
Afghan Government, the aim of which should be to
cement the international community’s coordinated
support for a new government programme.
The United Nations, and more specifically
UNAMA, will be at the heart of the international
support to the new Government. Their ability to lead
and coordinate the overall international effort is crucial
to success in Afghanistan. So, we welcome the
publication of UNAMA’s strategic benchmarks and
indicators of progress, which will be an important tool
for measuring progress. We hope that those
benchmarks will continue to evolve. As we look to
further enhance UNAMA’s ability to deliver on its
mandate, it will be important to measure accurately the
progress of the Mission and its role in delivering our
shared objective, as well as that of the broader
international effort.
We continue to support UNAMA’s plans to
establish a more extensive presence across the country
and look forward to hearing more detail on UNAMA’s
expansion plans, their resource implications and the
setting of priorities.

15

S/PV.6194

Despite the many challenges Afghanistan faces, it
is heartening to be able to note the continuing positive
trends in counter-narcotics, as Special Representative
Eide himself noted earlier. Following the 19 per cent
decrease in opium cultivation in 2008, it looks set to
fall by a further 22 per cent this year. In Helmand,
close work with the Afghan authorities has resulted in a
decrease in cultivation by one third, and the operations
conducted this year under the trilateral initiative of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime provide
grounds for cautious optimism at the regional level as
well.
Let me touch briefly on the issue of civilian
casualties. The position of the United Kingdom
remains as set out in previous discussions. We deeply
regret — deeply regret — any civilian casualty. Each
and every innocent life lost is a tragedy. As General
McChrystal has made clear, protecting the Afghan
population is at the core of our international mission,
in stark contrast to the Taliban and their fellow
insurgents, who, as the Secretary-General’s report
makes clear, continue to account for the vast majority
of civilian deaths.
I would like to conclude by taking the
opportunity to express our gratitude and thanks for the
efforts of Special Representative Eide and all UNAMA
staff, who continue to do vitally important work, often
in incredibly difficult circumstances. The 18 August
attack in Kabul that killed two UNAMA staff members
and wounded a third is a tragic reminder of the very
real dangers they face in carrying out their work. They
will continue to have the United Kingdom’s full
support.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to join you, Madam
President, and the other colleagues who spoke before
me in expressing my thanks and appreciation to
Ms. Norma Chan, who was always an indispensable
reference-point for my delegation. I truly appreciate
her efforts, and in particular her unflagging assistance,
especially on Libya’s first day as a member of the
Security Council, when we assumed the presidency.
Certainly, we will miss Norma in the Council. We
regret her departure, but wish her good health,
happiness and success — here or elsewhere.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive and detailed report (S/2009/475)
before us, and Mr. Kai Eide for his briefing to the

16

Security Council. I welcome His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan to the
Council, and I thank him for joining us.
I would like to commend the United Nations
Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan for its
outstanding efforts to rebuild the country despite the
many security challenges and the various problems that
the Mission has faced in obtaining the funding it needs.
Once again, we are considering the situation in
Afghanistan, which has not changed greatly from when
NATO forces drove the Taliban from power.
Unfortunately, the Afghan people continue to
experience a lack of security and the unjustified killing
of civilians. Most regrettably, that killing is by both
sides — by the international forces on the one hand,
and by the Taliban on the other. Both have offered
justifications. The international forces either claim that
there were mistakes or say that the intended targets
were Taliban elements. For their part, the Taliban say
that they are fighting the foreign forces and their
collaborators. However, the innocent Afghan people
are always the victims.
Once again, the Secretary-General’s report
reaffirms the deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan and the increasing number of civilian
casualties owing to attacks by armed groups and air
strikes by the international forces. We should like to
reiterate our deep regret over the killing of civilians, in
particular by international forces, who, we believe, can
clearly avoid this. However, it continues unabated
despite appeals both from within and from outside
Afghanistan.
We are also greatly concerned to read in
paragraph 5 of the report of the Secretary-General that
“Efforts undertaken over the past several years to
increase the number of national and international
security forces have failed to stem the insurgency”.
War planners in Afghanistan have attempted to achieve
military victory regardless of the number of civilian
casualties, and therefore the number of foreign forces
in Afghanistan has increased in the past few months.
However, the result has been only an increasing
number of both civilian and military casualties.
At the beginning of this meeting, Mr. Eide stated
that the present security situation is the worst since
2002. Mr. Eide added that many Afghans have joined
the insurgency owing to a sense of political and social
marginalization. I would add another reason: the

09-53153

S/PV.6194

occasional atrocities committed by foreign forces
against Afghan civilians.
That leads us to something that my delegation has
constantly stressed in the Security Council: that the
solution is not related to the number of forces or to the
amount of equipment provided to them. On the
contrary, it requires a comprehensive review of the
situation, ranging from national reconciliation to
sustainable development. We agree with paragraph 8 of
the Secretary-General’s report, which mentions the
calls of some political forces in the country for a
ceasefire with the Taliban as a first step towards
stability in the country.
The international community’s ultimate objective
is to help the Afghan people to build a democratic,
stable and prosperous State in Afghanistan. The war
against the Taliban and others is not an objective in
itself, especially since the use of force alone will
definitely not achieve stability or security. Those can
only be achieved through a dialogue that seeks national
reconciliation among all sectors of the Afghan people
and all those who are ready to renounce violence and to
accept dialogue, and by fighting corruption, drug
trafficking and other ills.
We therefore believe that the international
community must adopt programmes that enable
Afghanistan to fully shoulder its responsibilities as a
sovereign country capable of ensuring security and a
dignified life for each and every one of its citizens and
that create the conditions for the withdrawal of foreign
forces as soon as possible. We believe that to be a
fundamental condition for national reconciliation,
without which security and stability will not prevail.
Some previous reports of the Secretary-General
have mentioned the conditions of those held in various
detention centres in Afghanistan. The report before us
today states in paragraph 52 that the Special
Representative visited several detention centres,
including the detention facility at Bagram, run by the
international forces, but makes no assessment of the
conditions in those detention centres or of respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights there.
I would ask Mr. Eide to tell us, however briefly, about
the conditions in those detention centres.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Rangin Dâdfar
Spantâ, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, to
whom we have listened with great attention, especially

09-53153

in connection with the four categories of challenges
that his country currently faces. We also welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey.
We thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/475) and for his
commendable efforts in the face of the challenges his
Office faces in contributing to Afghanistan’s
development. We also appreciate the inclusion in the
report of indicators of progress, which we should duly
follow up.
A little more than a month since the holding of
elections for the presidency and provincial councils in
Afghanistan, despite the importance of the democratic
process of elections for the first time in many years in
that country, my delegation is concerned about the lack
of clarity with regard to the outcome of the process,
which is made even worse by the numerous complaints
of electoral irregularities and fraud. We are also
concerned about the existence of acts of intimidation
and violence, which significantly hampered the
participation of citizens, including women.
We trust that the Electoral Complaints
Commission will carefully investigate the numerous
allegations that have been made, so as to ensure that
the final results to be issued by the Independent
Election Commission are respected by all parties
involved, avert any recurrence of violence and, above
all, contribute to helping Afghanistan and its
institutions emerge strengthened from the process to
focus on social issues and the stability and security of
the entire population throughout the country, thereby
establishing, as has been suggested by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General himself, a new
contract between the Government and the people that
makes it possible for Afghanistan to take on its
responsibilities as a sovereign State. In that regard, we
support all the efforts made by the Special
Representative to ensure that the Afghan Government
can continue to count on international support, in
particular from the countries of the region, which is
necessary to work in an inclusive process that will lead
to peace. Out of the elections should emerge a
strengthened Afghanistan and reconciliation, rather
than new reasons for division, in that long-suffering
country.
With regard to security, Mexico regrets the
current increase in the number of violent incidents as
compared with previous years. Without a doubt, the

17

S/PV.6194

statistics illustrate that insecurity continues to be the
main factor affecting progress in Afghanistan. Just
today, there were new incidents of violence that
claimed numerous civilian victims in Kandahar. We
condemn those events. We believe that the actions of
international forces should include parallel efforts to
promote development, respect for human rights and the
strengthening of the rule of law, thereby combating the
root causes of violence. In that connection, we support
the focus that the International Security Assistance
Force has begun to adopt, by which the protection of
the Afghan civilian population should have the highest
priority.
Moreover, we acknowledge the achievements that
have been made to reduce the cultivation of opium
poppies, which is a strategic issue in ensuring the
country’s security. We also acknowledge the progress
that has been made by Afghanistan in the process of
dialogue and bilateral cooperation with Pakistan and
Iran. That is a step forward in addressing common
challenges to regional stability such as terrorism, illicit
drug trafficking and organized crime. We hope that that
process will lead to long-term strategic planning that
includes concrete measures that contribute to speeding
up and expanding the progress that has been made.
Mexico welcomes President Karzai’s signing of
the law on the eradication of violence against women,
which criminalizes sexual violence, including rape and
forced marriage, including underage marriage. We
support all the Government’s efforts to ensure the
implementation of that law throughout the country. We
also acknowledge the work done by the United Nations
alongside institutions of the justice system with a view
to comply with international human rights norms
relative to detention and due process.
Special attention should be given to the fight
against corruption and impunity. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to provide the necessary
impetus to address that challenge and achieve results,
which would bolster its authority and legitimacy,
increase confidence on the part of the population and
strengthen the Government’s hand in counterinsurgency efforts.
In conclusion, Mexico would like to reiterate its
condemnation of attacks against humanitarian
personnel. We would also like to underscore our
concern about the serious threat posed to civilians by
mines and other explosives and remnants of war. We

18

commend the efforts on the ground by the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community to
make progress in unearthing and destroying those
devices.
Lastly, I too would like to express our gratitude
and appreciation to Ms. Norma Chan. We wish her
every success in the future.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to begin by thanking Ms. Norma Chan
for her contribution to the work of the Security
Council. I would like to convey to her my best wishes
for happiness in the new life before her.
Allow me also to acknowledge the presence
among us of Mr. Rangin Dâdfar Spantâ, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.
With regard to the current tense post-electoral
environment in Afghanistan, I would first like to
underscore the outstanding role and work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
which reflects the central part it plays in the efforts
undertaken by the international community. I would
like in particular to commend the work of Special
Representative Kai Eide, who has maintained strict and
watchful impartiality in making an irreplaceable
contribution to the credibility of the electoral process. I
should therefore like to reiterate our full confidence in
the Special Representative, both in his role as the
international community’s spokesman to the Afghan
people and in his efforts to ensure the mobilization and
coordination of the international community on an
issue where much remains to be done despite the
progress made in the past year. He will need the
unwavering support of the international community to
overcome those challenges, and he can of course count
on France’s support in that regard.
As the Council is aware, France is very involved
in Afghanistan. On the military level, we have
deployed more than 3,000 troops in dangerous combat
zones. They have paid a heavy price. With respect to
police personnel, we are currently deploying members
of the gendarmerie as part of the European gendarme
force. Turning to civilian assistance, my country has
made very significant efforts in recent years. Alongside
its partners, France will continue its commitment for as
long as is necessary to bring about an Afghan State that
is able to fully take its future in its own hands.

09-53153

S/PV.6194

Afghan voters went to polling stations on
20 August 2009 to elect their President and provincial
council members. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General
has
underscored,
certain
irregularities have been pointed out. The Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission have conducted an audit on this subject.
They must be able to work in transparency and
tranquillity with the support and confidence of all
parties.
As we await final results, we have only one
demand: that procedures be complied with so that,
ultimately, the choice of the Afghans is respected. It is
essential that dialogue and national consensus
continue, including beyond the elections. Whatever the
final result may be, the establishment of a Government
which can express that national consensus is desirable.
The elections were a time when the Afghan
people not only could see what has been accomplished,
but also turn towards the future and express their hopes
and expectations as a new period is beginning in the
history of Afghanistan. For the international
community also, it is a time to take stock of our
commitment and evaluate the challenges still before us,
as well as the best way to meet them.
That is why France, together with Germany and
the United Kingdom, has taken the initiative to propose
to the United Nations that a new international
conference on Afghanistan be convened after a new
Afghan Government has been put in place. The goal of
such a conference would be based on the comprehensive
strategy, defined in 2008 in Bucharest and at the Paris
conference, to establish the framework for relations
between Afghanistan and the international community
during this new phase, which should see Afghans taking
full control over their national destiny.
These gradually increasing responsibilities will
require from the future Afghan authorities more
resolute, virtuous and effective action than in the past.
Priority reforms must be urgently undertaken on
political and domestic matters insufficiently addressed
to date: improving governance, in particular local
governance; building Afghan security and civilian
capacities; stepping up the fight against corruption; and
re-launching the national reconciliation process and
speeding up the progressive reintegration of excombatants into society.

09-53153

We welcome the Secretary-General’s positive
response to our proposal. The modalities for the
conference will be discussed with interested parties,
beginning, of course, with the next Afghan
Government. In any case, we believe it essential that
the meeting be held as soon as possible so that the
international community can support the renewed
compact concluded between the Afghan people and
their Government.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank Mr. Eide, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his
briefing. We also welcome the presence of Mr. Spantâ,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and thank
him for his statement.
We are closely following the elections in
Afghanistan, which will have a significant impact on
the country’s peace process. We hope that the people of
Afghanistan will use them to elect leaders who will
represent the will of the people, promote social unity
and stability and advance the comprehensive
enhancement of the Government’s governing capacity.
Maintaining stability is the focus of efforts in
Afghanistan. We hope that the Afghan national security
forces, together with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the International Security
Assistance Force, will do everything in their power to
maintain stability in Afghanistan and guarantee the
safety of the lives and property of the Afghan people.
We also hope that the Afghan Government, National
Army and National Police, with the assistance of the
international community, will continue to build their
capacities and independently assume the task of
maintaining national security and social stability at an
early date.
We note that, with vigorous support from the
international community, Afghanistan has made some
progress in the areas of the peace process and domestic
reconstruction. In particular, the area under opium
cultivation has been greatly reduced. That is a
significant achievement and a contribution to the
international counter-narcotics effort. The international
community should continue to increase its investment
in Afghanistan’s economic reconstruction and assist the
country in the areas of agriculture, education and
health; support its effort to improve infrastructure;
promote the positive development of Afghan society;

19

S/PV.6194

and significantly reduce the number of destabilizing
factors in Afghan society.
We support the Organization’s continued leading
and coordinating role in assisting Afghanistan in its
reconstruction. As a friendly neighbour, China will,
within its capabilities, continue to provide Afghanistan
with
assistance,
actively
participate
in
its
reconstruction and work tirelessly to help it achieve
lasting peace and stability.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
thank Ms. Norma Chan for her more than 30 years of
work at the United Nations and for her contribution to
international peace. I wish her every success in her
retirement.
Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like other delegations, I should like to thank Mr. Eide
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/475) and to take this opportunity to
congratulate him and the entire staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
on the excellent work accomplished on the ground. I
also thank Mr. Spantâ, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, for his statement today and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Turkey for his participation in
this important debate.
Costa Rica recognizes the great challenges
involved in the electoral process and the merits of
holding elections in Afghanistan. Undoubtedly, the
very fact that they were held was a genuine success.
That said, the prolonged wait for definitive results
jeopardizes the progress that has been made. That is
why we urge the swift and transparent conclusion of
the recount process in accordance with the relevant
legal procedures.
The number of complaints submitted to the
Electoral Complaints Commission is alarming and
gives rise to concern that the electoral process has not
been seen as fair and lacks legitimacy. That will have
adverse consequences for the consolidation of
democracy, security and peace for the Afghan people.
The international community must remain
committed to fair and transparent electoral processes as
a way to express unequivocal support for the Afghan
people in electing their authorities and determining
their own destiny. We hope that the lessons learned
from this process will serve to improve the planning
and holding of the 2010 parliamentary elections. This

20

experience should be utilized to ensure greater
legitimacy in future elections and to strengthen nascent
democratic institutions. The valuable lessons that can
be learned from this experience will undoubtedly
contribute to the future sustainability of the Afghan
State.
In the area of human rights, our country deplores
the increase in the number of threats and attacks
against women participating in public life, as well as
the continuing sexual abuse to which women and
children are very often subjected. In that context, we
recognize the signing of the law on the elimination of
violence against women as significant progress towards
gender equality and a promising step in the protection
of women and children against violence.
The recent adoption of the Shia Personal Status
law, which we believe discriminates against a minority,
is grounds for concern, as it legalizes practices that run
counter to women’s rights established under the
Constitution and international treaties to which
Afghanistan is party, as indicated in paragraph 51 of
the Secretary-General’s report. It is therefore necessary
to call on the authorities to respect the Constitution and
to honour their international obligations with regard to
the protection of women.
During the process of adopting resolution 1868
(2009) extending the mandate of UNAMA, Costa Rica
spoke in favour of including explicit provisions to
ensure that all parties comply with the provisions of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
order to safeguard the well-being of the civilian
population. It is thus crucial that measures be
implemented to protect civilians.
We agree that there is a need to adopt a broad
approach recognizing that the way to guarantee
stability in Afghanistan is not exclusively military. In
that regard, we welcome the new approach adopted by
the military forces on the ground, which will
henceforth focus their attention on protecting the
civilian population, as opposed to attacking insurgents,
according to the report before us today.
While there has been a shift in the military
approach to the situation, we are concerned by the high
rate of civilian casualties. As indicated in paragraph 54
of the Secretary-General’s report, a significant
percentage of those casualties were caused by
pro-Government forces. We also regret the ongoing
attacks on humanitarian personnel, who have been

09-53153

S/PV.6194

subject to acts of intimidation, burglary, abduction and
assassination, which impede access to humanitarian
assistance to those who most need it. We call on the
new Government of Afghanistan to make security
priorities on its agenda, and to take firm steps in favour
of long-term stability and improved conditions for the
sustainable development of the country.
My country is grateful for the work undertaken
by all the personnel of UNAMA, and recognizes their
valiant efforts to promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We wish in particular to acknowledge
UNAMA’s recent efforts during the presidential and
Provincial Council elections. Costa Rica reaffirms its
support for the work of UNAMA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
Finally, I, too, wish to thank Norma Chan for her
commitment and professionalism throughout her long
career at the United Nations. On behalf of the
delegation of Costa Rica, I wish her a long life and
great happiness in her retirement.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan,
Mr. Kai Eide, for his briefing. We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Rangin Dâdfar
Spantâ, and thank him for his statement.
We commend the central role that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
continues to play in coordinating international and
regional action, assistance and support for Afghanistan.
We welcome the presidential and provincial elections
that were held on 20 August. In spite of the
irregularities in the electoral process, the elections
constitute a positive step in the democratization
process in Afghanistan.
We welcome the efforts of the Electoral
Complaints Commission to address complaints, which
is necessary to avoid disillusionment and apprehension
in the Afghan public. We call on all parties and the
Afghan people to refrain from unlawful acts and to
remain calm while awaiting the outcome of the
investigations.
Uganda is concerned about the increased
incidence of violence and insurgency by the Taliban
and other anti-Government elements. We condemn
those attacks, which are aimed at disrupting peace and
security in the country. The primary responsibility for
ensuring peace and stability in Afghanistan lies with

09-53153

the Government and people of that country. However,
long-term support and commitment from the United
Nations, regional and subregional actors and the wider
international community are essential to building up
the Afghan security forces and enabling them to
assume their role effectively. Furthermore, closer
regional
cooperation
will
provide
enhanced
opportunities to deal with common challenges that cut
across national borders, and will also generate
momentum for peace, stability and prosperity in
Afghanistan.
Much remains to be done in addressing the urgent
issues related to the reconstruction of the economy of
the country. The efforts of the Government require
additional support from the international community if
the country is to recover from the devastation of war.
Such critical areas as health care, education, energy
and infrastructure need to be addressed in order to
radically change the situation on the ground and give
greater hope and promise to the population. In doing
so, the Afghan Government should take the primary
responsibility for re-establishing the key institutions of
governance and economic recovery, with the support of
the international partners. That is key to sustainable
national development.
We therefore welcome the increased leadership
and ownership of the development process shown by
the Afghan Government. The success of those
development efforts will depend significantly on the
availability of adequate and predictable resources. We
therefore call on the international community to
enhance its support for the Afghan Government in the
revitalization of the economy and national institutionbuilding. In that regard, we also call on Member States
to provide UNAMA with additional resources and
specialized personnel to enable it to fulfil its mandate.
We welcome the benchmarks and indicators in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/475), which we
expect to facilitate more effective monitoring by the
Council of progress made in the implementation of
UNAMA’s mandate and priorities.
In conclusion, Uganda commends the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff
of UNAMA for their important contribution to
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan.
I would also like to join you, Madam, and other
members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation and gratitude to Norma Chan for her

21

S/PV.6194

exemplary service to the Council. She has been an
indispensable and reliable reference point for us in the
Council, and especially for new members. We wish her
the best in her new programmes and her retirement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Clearly, we share all the feelings so
eloquently expressed to Ms. Norma Chan by colleagues
who spoke earlier. We wish her every success in her
future endeavours.
We thank Mr. Kai Eide for his comprehensive and
candid analysis of the situation in Afghanistan, as well
as for his introduction of the Secretary-General’s
periodic report (S/2009/475). We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Spantâ, and
listened very attentively to his statement.
The main event during the reporting period was
the holding of presidential and local elections in
Afghanistan. The preliminary results have been
published, and we hope for the rapid conclusion of all
necessary procedures related to the partial recount by
the Electoral Complaints Commission. Based on those
results, we expect the rapid formation of a new Afghan
Government, which is especially critical in the light of
the significant tasks facing the country.
The very fact that the elections were held, despite
attempts by extremist forces to impede this expression
of the popular will, confirms the Afghan people’s
determination to build a strong, independent and
democratic State.
The main obstacle on the path to the
reconstruction of the country remains the security
situation. The Secretary-General’s data on the number
of incidents confirm that efforts by the Afghan
authorities and the international military presence have
not led to genuine improvements in this field. Indeed,
the situation continues to deteriorate rapidly. The
terrorist activity of the Taliban and Al-Qaida is
growing. These activities remain the main destabilizing
factor.
Against this backdrop, we are especially
concerned by the continuing civilian deaths as a result
of International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
operations. Work to prevent civilian casualties is being
undertaken. However, thus far, it has not been effective
enough.
We back the objective of national reconciliation
in Afghanistan. We cannot forget, however, that the

22

fight against the Taliban and Al-Qaida is not only
domestic in nature, but also has regional and
international dimensions. That is why the process of
national reconciliation should not run counter to
relevant Security Council decisions, including
implementation of the sanctions regime against the
Taliban and Al-Qaida.
We are against the creation of special conditions
for delisting of so-called reconciled members of the
Taliban. Who will guarantee that they will not return to
their past activities? If the Afghan leadership deems it
useful to forge contacts with former combatants, then
such dialogue should take place only with those who
have laid down their arms, who have recognized the
Government and the Constitution of Afghanistan and
who have rejected all links with Al-Qaida.
We are deeply concerned by the situation with
respect to the production and trafficking of narcotics.
Despite a reduction in the area under drug crops
cultivation and a relative decrease in the volume of
production of narcotic substances, it is premature to
talk of success here.
Thousands of people are dying as a result of the
narcotics trade. It is insufficient to apply only
economic measures to fight this, although stimulating
legitimate agricultural activity by the population
should be continued. There is an undoubted need to
bring new non-force methods to bear to eliminate drug
crops and destroy drug trafficking infrastructure. ISAF
possesses the necessary potential for this.
There is a need to move more actively to include
drug traffickers in the Security Council sanctions list.
Drug traffickers nurture terrorist and extremist
structures. The large-scale production of raw materials
for narcotics and narcotics themselves is one of the
main channels of financing for the terrorist movement
and, to a large extent, leads to the development of
negative phenomena such as corruption and
lawlessness.
We believe that the scale of the Afghan drugs
threat requires that work be stepped up at various
levels. We are referring here, inter alia, to the
importance of pooling counter-narcotics efforts of the
NATO-led ISAF in close cooperation with the
Government of the country and with the actions of
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), with
the objective of establishing an anti-narcotics security
belt along Afghanistan’s borders. In the field of

09-53153

S/PV.6194

countering terrorism, drug trafficking and organized
crime in general, there is a need to more actively
harness the potential of regional institutions that have
demonstrated their effectiveness in this field. I am
referring here, first and foremost, to the CSTO, and to
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO).
.

We take note of the initiative by a number of
European States of organizing an international
conference in Afghanistan to discuss future assistance
for the country during the post-electoral period. The
main thing here is that this proposal should enjoy the
backing of the Afghans themselves. We have noted
Mr. Spantâ’s statement on this matter here today. Such
an event should be held after a new Afghan
Government has been formed and has started its work.
In Afghanistan, we all share a common interest,
namely to provide security and to establish a
democratic and independent State. We back ISAF and
the coalition forces. To this end, we have concluded
bilateral agreements on military transit with the
Federal Republic of Germany, France and, most
recently, with Spain. An agreement has been signed on
the transit of non-military NATO shipments. There is
an important agreement on military transit with the
United States of America. We hope for the rapid launch
of the implementation of the Plan of Action of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization Member States and
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, adopted at the
special conference on Afghanistan held in Moscow. We
invite all interested States and international
organizations to promote the implementation of the
Plan of Action.
The Russian Federation is genuinely interested in
achieving a stable settlement in Afghanistan. We will
work to resolve this issue in close cooperation with our
Afghan and international partners.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.
On behalf of the United States, let me first thank
Special Representative Kai Eide for his briefing today
and for his excellent leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) during a
critical time. I also wish to thank Foreign Minister
Spantâ of Afghanistan for his presence here today and
to extend, through him, our appreciation and respect
for the people of Afghanistan.

09-53153

The United States continues to strongly support
the efforts of UNAMA to achieve the goals of
resolution 1868 (2009) as it works in concert with the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community. UNAMA’s work remains unfinished, but
important strides have been made in the past three
months.
The ongoing Afghan electoral process has not
been easy, but we applaud the courage of Afghan
voters and the dedication of officials who have been
polling, tallying and adjudicating results. The United
States will continue to encourage all parties to respect
the Afghan institutions that conducted these elections.
While serious allegations of fraud have been
made and are being investigated, Afghan citizens are
seeking to resolve their concerns through the formal
adjudication process, not through violence. The
international community must support the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission as they complete the difficult work of
investigating and adjudicating incidents of fraud, in
accordance with their responsibilities under Afghan
law.
When the new Afghan Government is
inaugurated, we must all quickly begin to work with it
to help build up its capacity to meet the needs of the
Afghan people.
Even as we approach the conclusion of this
electoral season, however, we must also begin
preparations for the 2010 parliamentary election. As
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/475) rightly
notes, that work should start immediately.
UNAMA not only plays a critical role in Afghan
elections; it is also indispensable as the coordinator of
international assistance to Afghanistan. We will work
closely with the Afghan Government and UNAMA to
ensure that aid is properly aligned with Afghan
priorities. We have already seen good progress with
regard to agricultural programmes, where the United
States plans to double assistance next year, in keeping
with Afghan priorities. We also renew our commitment
to work with UNAMA to reduce inefficiencies and
ensure the appropriate and effective delivery of aid,
and we urge other donors to join us.
The United States is also pleased to see that
UNAMA is making progress in expanding its presence
throughout Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General

23

S/PV.6194

notes, UNAMA is on track to reach a total of
17 provincial offices by the end of the year. This
expanded provincial presence, called for in resolution
1868 (2009), will allow UNAMA to better monitor and
coordinate aid programmes on the ground.
My Government urges the United Nations to
approve the 2010 UNAMA budget increase, which will
allow for further expansion of provincial offices, and
we urge all of our fellow Member States to support
UNAMA’s outreach to the provinces by providing the
necessary personnel and resources.
The United States commends UNAMA for its
development of the benchmarks and indicators of
progress outlined in the Secretary-General’s report.
Those benchmarks identify key areas where UNAMA,
the international community and the Government of
Afghanistan must focus their efforts. They helpfully
identify metrics for concretely measuring success.
Let me turn to one final topic on which it is
important to be clear. United States and International
Security Assistance Force troops continue to make
great efforts to avoid civilian casualties, as exemplified
by General McChrystal’s approach of having military
operations prioritize the protection of the civilian
population. This effort puts the Afghan people at the
centre of the Mission. It also reflects the reality that the
large majority of civilian deaths in Afghanistan are
caused by ruthless acts of terrorism by insurgent
groups that operate without regard for Afghan lives.
The United States regrets all loss of innocent life
during military operations and goes to great lengths to
avoid civilian casualties. When they do occur, we
provide
humanitarian
assistance
to
affected
communities and conduct thorough joint investigations
with the Afghan Government to determine the facts.
For all the progress Afghanistan has made, we
must work together to do even more. The United States
continues to believe that UNAMA is an essential
element of our common efforts to support the Afghan
people in their struggle to rebuild their country and
defeat a determined foe. We will continue to support
UNAMA’s critical mission for the benefit of
Afghanistan and for the peace and security of the
region.
For the record, I wish to register my objection to
some of the comments made by the representative of
Libya, which I believe are unhelpful to today’s
discussion.

24

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Special Representative Eide for
further comments.
Mr. Eide: Two or three issues were raised that I
would like to comment on briefly.
The first relates to the comment made by the
representative of the United Kingdom about the
expansion of our offices. Just to give a quick response,
I hope that over the next very few months we will be
able to open four more offices in provinces where it is
possible to operate. There are some provinces where
we are asked to go unarmed but where most people do
not want to go even armed, so that is not our priority.
After that, further offices will really depend on Council
members and many others giving us the resources we
require.
The second issue relates to the comment by the
Libyan Ambassador on civilian casualties. I really must
say that the efforts being made now by General
McChrystal are impressive, and I have also seen over
the past few weeks how the level of civilian casualties
has gone down. There has been one serious,
unfortunate incident, but apart from that, the trend of
the past few weeks is actually in the right direction. I
commend General McChrystal on his efforts. His
thinking on this is identical to mine.
With regard to detention centres, I have visited a
number of them and intend to continue to do so. There
are three reasons for that. One is to see the physical
conditions under which detainees live; the second is to
make sure that there is a possibility for detainees to
inform and keep in touch with their families; and the
third, of course, has to do with the possibility of
recourse in the justice system. My general comment is
that in Bagram the new facility being built is a
tremendous step in the right direction. With regard to
the Afghan facilities, I would say that they are in many
ways miserable. The reason for that is clear — it is a
lack of resources. They do not have them. If we, the
donors, were able to provide more resources, much
could be done in that respect.
We are suffering from a lack of resources not
only for the actual facilities, but also for the justice
system. That, of course, makes it even more difficult to
handle things the way we should. I appeal to donors to
provide more resources, and I know that those

09-53153

S/PV.6194

responsible in the Afghan Government are in full
agreement with me in this respect.
Finally, even though the French Ambassador did
not ask me a question, I would like to comment on
something he said. He said that he was grateful for the
role that I had played with regard to the election
process. I must say here that in the very complex
period we have been going through — and this is really
a very positive sign — there has been full harmony
between my view and those of ambassadors around this
table and of others in the diplomatic community in
Kabul. That has certainly facilitated our dialogue with
Afghan authorities.
The President: I am pleased to invite Ms. Norma
Chan to take the floor.
Ms. Chan (Chief, Security Council Secretariat
Branch): I would like to say a few words, but I promise

09-53153

not to speak for more than five minutes. After 36 years,
and today at the United Nations, what more can I ask
for? It is definitely time to retire. I am very touched
and thrilled by the sentiments expressed to me this
morning. I wish to thank all here who have given me
this honour. I am very privileged to have had the
opportunity and honour to work for them and for all
those who came before them. From the bottom of my
heart, I thank them all.
The President: Once again, I extend very best
wishes from all of us to Ms. Chan.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

25
