United Nations

A/RES/56/129

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 112

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/576)]

56/129. Improvement of the situation of women in rural areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/135 of 17 December 1999,
Recalling also the importance attached to the problems of rural women by the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women, 1 the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action 2 and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, 3
Welcoming the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”, namely, the political declaration4 and further actions and
initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 5
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration of 8 September 2000,6 in
which Member States resolved, inter alia, to promote gender equality and the
empowerment of women as effective ways to combat poverty, hunger and disease
and to stimulate development that is truly sustainable,
Recognizing the critical role and contribution of rural women in enhancing
agricultural and rural development, improving food security and eradicating rural
poverty,
Noting that some effects of globalization may deepen the socio-economic
marginalization of rural women,
Noting also that the globalization process has had some benefits by providing
opportunities for wage employment for rural women in new sectors,

_______________
1
Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15–26 July 1985 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
2
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
3
Resolution 34/180, annex.
4
Resolution S-23/2, annex.
5
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
6
See resolution 55/2.

01 48291

A/RES/56/129

Mindful of the fact that the available data and existing tools of measurement
and analysis are insufficient for a full understanding of the gender implications of
the processes of globalization and rural change, and their impact on rural women,
Recognizing the urgent need to take appropriate measures aimed at further
improving the situation of women in rural areas,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 7

2.
Welcomes the holding, from 4 to 8 June 2001 at Ulaanbaatar, of the
expert group meeting on the situation of rural women within the context of
globalization;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a user-friendly publication
based, inter alia, on case studies presented at the expert group meeting referred to in
paragraph 2 above in order to raise awareness of the situation of rural women in the
context of globalization;
4.
Also requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States
on the desirability of convening a high-level policy consultation at the governmental
level with a view to setting priorities and developing critical strategies that would
meet the manifold challenges faced by rural women;
5.
Welcomes the convening of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development in South Africa in September 2002, including the review of chapter 24
of Agenda 21, 8 entitled “Global action for women towards sustainable and equitable
development”, entailing, inter alia, measures to improve the situation of women in
rural areas, and the World Food Summit: five years later, to be held in Italy in June
2002, and urges Governments to integrate a gender perspective, with attention to the
improvement of the situation of women in rural areas, in the respective processes
and outcome documents;
6.
Invites Member States, in collaboration with the organizations of the
United Nations and civil society, as appropriate, to continue their efforts to
implement the outcome of and to ensure an integrated and coordinated follow-up to
United Nations conferences and summits, including their five-year reviews, and to
attach greater importance to the improvement of the situation of rural women in
their national, regional and global development strategies by, inter alia:
(a) Creating an enabling environment for improving the situation of rural
women, including integrating a gender perspective in macroeconomic policies and
developing appropriate social support systems;
(b) Designing and revising laws to ensure that, where private ownership of
land and property exists, rural women are accorded full and equal rights to own land
and other property, including through the right to inheritance, and undertaking
administrative reforms and other necessary measures to give women the same right
as men to credit, capital, appropriate technologies and access to markets and
information;
(c) Taking steps towards ensuring that women’s unpaid work and
contributions to on-farm and off-farm production, including income generated in the
_______________
7

A/56/268.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
8

2

A/RES/56/129

informal sector, are visible, and assessing the feasibility of developing and
improving mechanisms, such as time-use studies, to measure in quantitative terms
unpaid work, recognizing the potential for it to be reflected in the formulation and
implementation of policies and programmes at the national and regional levels;
(d) Investing in and strengthening efforts to meet the basic needs of rural
women through capacity-building and human resources development measures and
the provision of a safe and reliable water supply, health services, including family
planning services, and nutritional programmes as well as education and literacy
programmes and social support measures;
(e) Pursuing the political and socio-economic empowerment of rural women
by supporting their full and equal participation in decision-making at all levels,
including in rural institutions through, inter alia, the provision of training and
capacity-building programmes, including legal literacy;
(f) Promoting programmes to enable rural women and men to reconcile their
work and family responsibilities and to encourage men to share equally with women
household and childcare responsibilities;
(g) Integrating a gender perspective into the design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of development policies and programmes with an
emphasis on reducing the disproportionate number of rural women living in poverty;
(h) Designing and implementing policies that promote and protect the
enjoyment by women of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and creating an
environment that does not tolerate violations of the rights of women and girls;
(i) Developing specific assistance programmes and advisory services to
promote economic skills of rural women in banking, modern trading and financial
procedures and providing microcredit and other financial and business services to a
greater number of women in rural areas for their economic empowerment;
7.
Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to pay due attention to
the situation of rural women in the consideration of the priority themes identified in
its multi-year programme of work for the period 2002–2006;
8.
Invites the relevant organizations of the United Nations system dealing
with issues of development to address and support the empowerment of rural
women and their specific needs in their programmes and strategies, including in the
context of globalization;
9.
Stresses the need to identify the best practices for ensuring that rural
women have access to and full participation in the area of information and
communications technologies, inter alia, through specific studies, and invites the
International Telecommunication Union to consider this matter in connection with
the preparations for the World Summit on the Information Society;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

3
