S/2016/99

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 February 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UNMIK,
and developments related thereto, from 16 October 2015 to 15 January 2016.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and res pect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo in
line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political developments
3.
The reporting period was marked by continued disruption of the functioning of
the Assembly of Kosovo by opposition lawmakers protesting, in part, against a
package of agreements adopted in August 2015 under the European Union facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. Despite this, progress was
achieved in the European integration process. On 27 October, the Prime Minister of
Kosovo, together with his Minister of European Integration, signed a Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy as well as the Commissioner for European
Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations. On 2 November, the
Assembly of Kosovo adopted a law ratifying the agreement. All opposition
representatives but one left the plenary hall minutes before the vote, without
disrupting the session.
4.
During other Assembly sessions convened during this period, opposition
members released tear gas canisters, inside or outside the plenary hall. The publicly
16-01063 (E)

090216

*1601063*

S/2016/99

stated issues of contention were the opposition’s rejection of the establishment of
the Association/Community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo and the
agreement on territorial delineation signed with Montenegro. In an attempt to
overcome the political impasse and foster dialogue, the President of Kosovo, Atifete
Jahjaga, facilitated a series of consultations among political leaders.
5.
On 28 November, following violent protests which occurred during
celebrations of the Albanian “Flag Day”, the Kosovo police detained a number of
activists of the opposition “Self-Determination” party, including its co-founder, who
was arrested on suspicion of criminal offences relating to the disruption of the
Assembly, including for the “use of a weapon or dangerous instrument”. On
30 November, the President of the Assembly suspended for the remainder of the day
all but two of the opposition party members of the Assembly, invoking article 41 of
its rules of procedure regarding disorderly conduct.
6.
On 9 January, opposition parties staged a large-scale protest in Pristina, calling
for the resignation of the Prime Minister, Isa Mustafa, and the First Deput y Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Hashim Thaçi. Some of the protestors
became violent, and this resulted in injuries to persons as well as damage to public
property. The “Alliance for the Future of Kosovo” and the “Initiative for Kosovo”,
two of the three major opposition parties, condemned the violence in statements
issued on the same day. On 10 January, however, all three opposition parties
announced that protests would continue. Demonstrations held in Pristina on
24 October and on 17 and 18 November had also been marred by violent incidents,
as detailed in paragraph 19.
7.
On 30 October, President Jahjaga referred the agreements reached in Brussels
on 25 August 2015 on the “general principles/main elements” of the
Association/Community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo to the
Constitutional Court of Kosovo for review. On 23 December, the Court ruled that
the Association/Community can be established as provided for by the agreement of
19 April 2013. However, the Court also argued that the “general principles/main
elements” were not entirely in compliance with the spirit of the Constitution and
further ruled that the government should incorporate these conclusions in
subsequent legal acts. On 24 December, the Prime Minister publicly reaffirmed the
government’s readiness to continue the process of establishing the
Association/Community, in keeping with the decision of the Court.
8.
No high-level meetings of the European Union-facilitated dialogue were
convened during the reporting period. The Government of Serbia consistently
expressed concern over the possible adverse effects of internal political conflict in
Pristina on the status of the implementation of agreements between Belgrade and
Pristina. Nevertheless, continued progress was made in some practical areas of the
implementation of agreements. On 4 January, the Government of Austria, on behalf
of Kosovo, applied to the International Telecommunication Union for a 3 -digit
telephone dialling code, in accordance with the action plan on telecommunications
agreed under the agreements of 25 August 2015. For their part, the Kosovo
authorities decided that they would license the subsidiary of a Serbian company
under the Kosovo regulatory framework in compliance with the same action plan.
9.
On 10 December, the Belgrade and Pristina Chambers of Commerce agreed to
a three-stage plan to harmonize veterinary certificates by the end of March 2016 to
overcome technical obstacles to cross-boundary commerce. On 21 December, the

2/19

16-01063

S/2016/99

two Chambers convened a Business Forum in Belgrade, exploring further avenues
of enhanced commercial cooperation.
10. On 22 November, representatives of the Serbian Armed Forces and KFOR
signed an agreement to fully relax the air safety zone. Established by the Kumanovo
Military Technical Agreement of 9 June 1999, the air safety zone previously
encompassed a 25-km-wide band of Serbian airspace along the Administrative
Boundary Line.
11. On 16 December, the Millennium Challenge Corporation of the United States
Government confirmed Kosovo’s eligibility to develop a compact, which will make
available development funding of $60 million-$100 million over a period of five
years. The Office of the United Nations Development Coordinator in Kosovo
supported the Kosovo institutions towards achieving this milestone.
12. On 18 December, the European Commission adopted the third and final report
on Kosovo’s progress in fulfilling the requirements of its visa liberalization road
map. The Commission noted that Kosovo needed to fulfil eight o utstanding
requirements, most of which pertained to the rule of law, before the Commission
would recommend lifting the visa obligation. The European Union Council
conclusions on Kosovo, published earlier in December, stressed the importance of
the fulfilment of all conditions set for visa liberalization and encouraged Kosovo to
pursue its efforts to make progress.

III. Northern Kosovo
13. In northern Kosovo, implementation of elements of the agreements of
25 August 2015 was mixed. The implementation of the agreed plan for the
revitalization of the main Mitrovica bridge and its surroundings began on
17 October. However, a memorandum of understanding delineating the
administrative boundaries of cadastral areas in the neighbourhoods of Suvi
Do/Suhadoll and Kroi i Vitakut/Brđani remained under discussion, and had yet to be
signed.
14. The situation in the ethnically mixed neighbourhood Kroi i Vitakut/Brđani in
North Mitrovica remained on the agenda of local and central-level institutions. In
November, Kosovo Albanian workers were observed on several occasions clearing
plots of land for reconstruction. On 20 November, two Kosovo Albanian workers
defied orders from municipal inspectors to cease such activity, and were consequently
detained for questioning by Kosovo police. The Inter-Ministerial Working Group on
Returns to Kroi i Vitakut/Brđani met on 25 November and 15 December. At the
second meeting, the Working Group agreed to grant permission to three Kosovo
Albanian families to begin reconstruction of their homes, and the good faith
demonstrated by both sides in the process helped in keeping tensions in check.
15. Following its rejection of the budgets proposed by the northern municipal
assemblies in September 2015, the Ministry of Finance submitted revised proposals
to the municipalities in November, significantly reducing the allocations in the
original submissions, in particular regarding capital investments and salary lines.
Although both sides attempted to avoid a repeat of the situation in 2015 in which
municipal functioning was hampered because of a prolonged budget dispute,

16-01063

3/19

S/2016/99

subsequent meetings between the mayors and the government on 9 and
16 December did not yield a compromise and consultations continued.
16. The implementation of the agreement of July 2011 on civil registration
documents continued, with the handover of certified copies of pre -1999 civil
registry books from Pristina to the northern municipalities. On 23 October and
11 December, civil registries were delivered to the Zubin Potok, Zvečan/Zveçan and
Leposavić/Leposaviq municipalities. On 25 December, the Zubin Potok Municipal
Assembly, further to a request from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, agreed to
allocate a plot of land for the construction of a Kosovo police and fire brigade
station, marking the first instance in which a northern municipality granted land use
rights for a Kosovo central institution.
17. On 18 November, KFOR withdrew its troops from a forward observation point
near Boundary Crossing Point Gate 31. On 21 December, KFOR handed over the
land parcels of the now-dismantled Čabra/Çabër Camp in Zubin Potok municipality
to their local owners.
18. UNMIK continued its monitoring, mediation and facilitation on a wide range
of outstanding issues between government and civil society in North and South
Mitrovica. UNMIK also organized meetings with municipal authorities from both
sides of the Ibër/Ibar River to promote more local resolution on contentious matters.

IV. Security
19. The overall security situation in Kosovo remained generally stable during the
reporting period, despite violence during political protests. On 19 October in
Pristina, assailants attempted to target the Prime Minister’s convoy with paintballs.
The Kosovo police arrested two suspects in relation to the incident. On 24 October,
the Kosovo police arrested 10 suspects for throwing stones and Molotov cocktails i n
the direction of police officers during a protest in front of the Assembly building.
On 17 November, Kosovo police used tear gas and water cannons to disperse a
crowd of violent protestors in the same location. Three protesters were arrested, two
of whom were in possession of petrol bombs. Seventeen officers sustained injuries.
On 18 November, Kosovo police arrested another 30 protesters during two violent
protests in Pristina. During the protest on 9 January, demonstrators threw Molotov
cocktails and stones in the direction of the police officers. Approximately 30 people
were injured, including 24 police officers, and 34 persons were arrested.
20. The terrorist attacks in Paris on 13 November prompted the Kosovo authorities
to moderately enhance security measures, while KFOR upgraded its alert status. On
15 November, at the Hani i Elezit/Đeneral Janković crossing point with the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the Kosovo police arrested three Kosovo
Albanians who had been returned by the Turkish authorities on terror-related
charges. On 1 December, in Rezhancë/Režance village (Hani i Elezit/Đeneral
Janković municipality), the Kosovo anti-terrorism unit and the Special Prosecutor
arrested one Kosovo Albanian suspected of terrorism in a joint operation with
Italian authorities. On 4 December, the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office indicted
five Kosovo Albanians who had been arrested on 11 July at Lake Badovc/Badovac
near Pristina while allegedly preparing to shoot a video pledging allegiance to a
terrorist organization (ISIL). On 4 January, two Kosovo Albanians deported from
Turkey were arrested on suspicion of having violated article 143 of the Kosovo

4/19

16-01063

S/2016/99

Criminal Code, “Organization and participation in a terrorist group”. Between
23 and 25 November in Bosniak Mahalla of North Mitrovica, graffiti reading “ISIS”
were found at several places, including at the entrances to two Kosovo Serb
residences.
21. A number of incidents involving non-majority communities occurred during
the reporting period, mainly in northern and western Kosovo. On 24 October, in
Kufc i Epermë/Gornje Kusce (Novobërdë/Novo Brdo municipality), one Kosovo
Serb juvenile was stabbed in a confrontation between groups of Kosovo Serb and
Kosovo Albanian young people over a football match. Two Kosovo Albanian
juveniles were arrested. On 25 October, a bus with Kosovo Serb internally displaced
persons was pelted with stones in Pejë/Peć. Two Kosovo Albanians were arrested in
relation to this incident. On 7 December, unknown perpetrators committed t wo
separate drive-by shootings in Gorazhdevc/Goraždevac (Pejë/Peć municipality) and
Srbobran/Sërbobrani (Istog/Istok municipality). In the first case, a memorial to
Kosovo Serb victims was damaged and a car was burned. On 30 December, graves
were damaged in a Catholic cemetery located in Dedaj village in Prizren
municipality.

V. Rule of law
22. On 15 January, the Council of Ministers of the Netherlands agreed to host the
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office in the Netherlands. The
Specialist Court, which is a Kosovo institution with international judges, will try
cases involving serious crimes committed during and in the immediate aftermath of
the Kosovo conflict and is expected to begin operating sometime in 2016. The
Governments of the Netherlands and Kosovo have concluded a seat agreement,
which sets forth the arrangements that will apply to the institution.
23. UNMIK continued to monitor the rule of law situation, exercising some
responsibilities in the area of rule of law while maintaining technical cooperation with
rule of law-related institutions in both Belgrade and Pristina. UNMIK continued to
facilitate requests for mutual legal assistance from States that do not recognize
Kosovo and to provide document-certification services including to Kosovo residents,
primarily to certify civil status, academic credentials and pension documents. A total
of 459 such documents were processed from 16 October to 15 January.
24. UNMIK continued to facilitate communications between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and its
member countries. During the reporting period, 13 INTERPOL “red notices” were
issued at the Mission’s request. UNMIK attended the 84th INTERPOL General
Assembly, held from 2 to 5 November 2015 in Kigali.
25. During the session of the Kosovo Assembly on 30 November, two judges were
selected for appointment to the Constitutional Court of Kosovo. On 30 December,
President Jahjaga appointed the nominees and they took the oath of office. The
Court panel is now fully staffed with nine judges.
26. On 11 January, 378 former Serbian civil protection personnel in northern
Kosovo were integrated into different Kosovo institutions by signing either their
contracts with those institutions (328 persons) or declarations allowing them to be
paid from the contingency fund (50 persons). The handover of some premises,

16-01063

5/19

S/2016/99

however, remained pending. The arrangements were a part of the integration process
between Belgrade and Pristina agreed within the framework of the agreement of
19 April 2013.
27. The capacity of the Detention Centre in North Mitrovica increased as
25 former civil protection personnel began work as corrections officers on
16 November. The Detention Centre can still house only male inmates, however,
and adequate detention facilities for women and juveniles have yet to be
established. The management of the Detention Centre announced that international
standards are being met with regard to inmates in detention on remand, but not for
those serving prison sentences inside the facility.
28. During the reporting period, little further progress was made in the
implementation of the Pristina-Belgrade agreement on integration of the judiciary
and the Government of Serbia had yet to enact special legislation regulating the
pensions of the staff still employed in its institutions. The integration of legal
support staff was also delayed and no vacancy announcement had yet been issued.
29. In December, the closing arguments were given by the prosecutor and the
defence counsels for defendants Oliver Ivanović, a Kosovo Serb political leader,
and Dragoljub Delibašić, in the Oliver Ivanović et al. case before a trial panel of
EULEX international judges at the Basic Court of Mitrovica, which also involv es
three other defendants. Mr. Ivanović is accused, inter alia, of incitement to commit
war crimes against the civilian population in April 1999. The closing arguments for
the remaining three defendants, with a verdict, are expected in January.
Mr. Ivanović and three other defendants remain under house arrest.
30. On 10 December, a panel of EULEX judges acquitted two defendants in
relation to the killing of a Kosovo police officer, Enver Zymberi, on 25 July 2011.
One defendant was acquitted of all charges while the other was found guilty of
“obstructing official persons in performing official duties” and sentenced to six
months’ imprisonment with a two-year suspension.

VI. Returns and communities
31. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
recorded a total of 258 voluntary returns to Kosovo from October to December
2015, the breakdown of which was as follows: 103 Kosovo Egyptians, 70 Kosovo
Serbs, 40 Kosovo Roma, 25 Kosovo Ashkali, 16 Kosovo Albanians, 3 Kosovo
Bosniaks and 1 Kosovo Montenegrin.
32. UNHCR also estimates that the total number of internally displaced persons
living in Kosovo has decreased from 17,113 in 2014 to 16,862 at the end of 2015,
owing to the provision of durable solutions for some of the displac ed persons. Of
the total number of displaced persons living in Kosovo, 472 reside in 29 collective
centres.
33. To address the potential influx of migrants taking the West Balkans route
towards Europe, the Kosovo authorities, led by the Ministry of Internal Affairs,
developed a draft response plan in November to prepare for the eventuality of a
large-scale diversion of mixed migration flows through Kosovo. Meanwhile,
UNHCR continued to support individual community members in obtaining personal

6/19

16-01063

S/2016/99

documentation and resolving issues relating to their civil status. During the
reporting period, such assistance was provided to 107 individuals.
34. In the context of improving the educational standards of the Kosovo Roma,
Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptian communities, the Kosovo Scholarship
Program awarded a total of 500 scholarships to secondary school students from the
three communities for the 2015/16 school year.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
35. On 30 December, the Kosovo government adopted its draft legislative
programme for 2016, which foresees a new draft law on amending and
supplementing the law on cultural heritage to be discussed during the session of the
Cabinet scheduled for 30 June 2016. The draft law is to be submitted to the
Assembly once endorsed by the government.
36. On 3 December, the European Union approved funding for a joint United
Nations-European Union programme on community-level confidence-building
through cultural protection. This agreement represents substantial new cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union in Kosovo on the
implementation of confidence-building measures for the preservation of cultural
heritage. The funding for the initiative has been made available by the European
Union Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace, with project implementation
led by the United Nations Development Programme sch eduled to start early in 2016.
37. The land dispute between the Deçan/Dečani municipality and the Serbian
Orthodox Visoki Dečani Monastery continued. On 5 December, the Constitutional
Court of Kosovo, taking into account the classification of the monastery as a
UNESCO World Heritage Site, granted an interim measure suspending any judicial
proceedings, actions or decisions of public authorities in relation to the
constitutional complaint submitted by the Visoki Dečani Monastery. The interim
measure expires on 29 February 2016. The Deçan/Dečani branch of the League of
Kosovo Historians criticized the decision and organized a peaceful protest in
Deçan/Dečani town on 17 December, drawing an estimated 400 people.

VIII. Human rights
38. The International Human Rights Working Group, established by UNMIK in
September 2015 and comprising representatives of the Council of Europe, the
European Union, OSCE, UNICEF, France, Switzerland and the United States of
America, fostered synergies among its participants and strengthened coordinated
support for the implementation of human rights mechanisms and frameworks by the
relevant Kosovo institutions. On 25 November, the first consultation between the
Ombudsperson and the Working Group identified a number of challenges fa ced by
that institution, including insufficient funding and a shortage of trained experts. The
Working Group also supported the Office of the Prime Minister in reviewing the
draft of the Kosovo Human Rights Strategy (2016 -2020) to ensure that the strategy
meets international human rights standards, including those established within the
European human rights framework.

16-01063

7/19

S/2016/99

39. On 22 October in Pristina, the Kosovo Government Commission on Missing
Persons met with representatives of the Commission on Missing Per sons in
Montenegro and signed a cooperation agreement on the exchange of information on
persons who remain unaccounted for. The Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances had recommended concluding such agreements in its
report presented to the Human Rights Council in September 2015.
40. On 9 November, excavations began at Kiževak, a new location in the Rudnica
region, Serbia. EULEX has been guiding the activity in coordination with the
prosecutorial office of the Belgrade District Court of Wa r Crimes. Both the Belgrade
and Pristina delegations to the Joint Working Group on the persons unaccounted for
in connection with events in Kosovo have been participating in the excavations
since 16 November.
41. On 9 December, the Joint Working Group on the persons unaccounted for in
connection with events in Kosovo held a session, during which discussions focused
on exchanging lists of missing persons. The meeting was chaired by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and UNMIK attended as a member of the
Pristina delegation. Although the two delegations agreed to meet again by March
2016, substantive work of the Joint Working Group has largely stalled as Pristina
has yet to appoint the head of its delegation, a position that has remained vacant
since November 2014.
42. During the reporting period, the UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel
delivered nine opinions on 31 complaints. In eight of the nine opinions, the Panel
found that UNMIK had failed to meet the procedural requirements stipulated in
article 2 (right to life) of the European Convention on Human Rights, due to the
lack of proper criminal investigation. Further, the Panel established that, in 22 of the
31 complaints, the procedural requirements had not been met as provided in article
3 of the Convention (prohibition of torture, inhumane or degrading treatment). In
the ninth opinion, the Panel concluded that the Mission had violated article 3 of the
Convention as well as articles 9 (right to social security) and 11 (right to an
adequate standard of living) of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. Since my last report, no progress has been made with regard to the
Panel’s recommendations relating to the payment of adequate compensation for
moral damages suffered as a result of those violations. By the end of 2015, the Panel
had closed 518 cases, with nine remaining. The Panel plans to complete its
substantive work by March 2016, followed by preparation and presentation of its
final report.
43. In December, UN-Women supported the implementation of the action plan of
the Kosovo Council on the Survivors of Sexual Violence during the War with regard
to ensuring survivors’ access to justice by providing joint training with EULEX on
sexual violence as an international crime for investigators, judges and prosecutors.
44. During the global “16 Days of Activism against Gender -Based Violence”
campaign, held from 25 November to 10 December, over 20 separate events were
held across Kosovo to raise awareness of gender-based violence and to advocate for
improved institutional responses. The campaign was organized chiefly by the
Kosovo Agency for Gender Equality with support from UN -Women.

8/19

16-01063

S/2016/99

IX. Observations
45. The continuing use of violence and inflammatory rhetoric by opposition
parties, which disrupted the proceedings of the Assembly and exacerbated tensions
in the streets of Kosovo, is of serious concern. Such actions are unacceptable; they
have no place in a democratic society and can have only a negative impact on
Kosovo. I urge those responsible to refrain from challenging the dividends of
democracy by resorting to violence, to address political grievances through
legitimate channels, and to rise to their stature as elected representatives. I
commend the professionalism and restraint demonstrated by the Kosovo police in
managing several violent protests which occurred during this period. I commend
President Jahjaga’s sustained efforts to help to resolve the situation through
transparent and inclusive dialogue.
46. I note with concern that these developments have contributed to delays in
some aspects of the implementation of the Belgrade-Pristina agreement of 19 April
2013, and the subsequent package of agreements of 25 August 2015. In particular,
procedures agreed towards the establishment of the Association/Community of Serb
majority municipalities in Kosovo have fallen short of meeting the specified
timeframe. Nonetheless, the recent decision by the Constitutional Court in Pristina
and the commitment by the government to continue the process of establishing the
Association/Community in keeping with the Court’s decision mark an important
step towards the expeditious resumption of this effort. I urge stakeholders to
redouble their efforts, in the interest of all who live in Kosovo . I appreciate the
commitments made by both Pristina and Belgrade to continue the high -level
dialogue meetings under European Union facilitation in the very near future.
47. I welcome the very significant progress made in the integration into Kosovo
institutions of former Serbian civil protection personnel. This comes as a direct
result of the continuing implementation work by both sides to fulfil the agreements
achieved in the European Union-facilitated dialogue. I also note the application for
a unique Kosovo dialling code, submitted to the International Telecommunication
Union by the Government of Austria on behalf of Kosovo. At the local level, I
commend the continuing productive interchanges between the mayors of North and
South Mitrovica on pending matters, including that concerning the settling of the
municipal boundaries.
48. The signing and ratification of a Stabilization and Association Agreement
between Kosovo and the European Union marks a milestone in progress towards
European integration, and a clear recognition of the work already accomplished by
Kosovo institutions. I encourage the government and all political stakeholders to
remain resilient and steadfast in their commitment to this path, regardless of the
many short-term political challenges and struggles.
49. Demonstrating fundamental commitment to the rule of law in Kosovo likewise
demands swift and determined action to fully establish and operationalize the
Specialist Court. I note with appreciation the agreement of the Government of the
Netherlands, announced on 15 January, to host this institution in The Hague. I
expect all stakeholders to proceed expeditiously towards concluding the remaining
steps, in line with the constitutional amendment and related legislation adopted by
the Assembly of Kosovo in August 2015.

16-01063

9/19

S/2016/99

50. The confirmation of Kosovo’s eligibility to develop a Millennium Challenge
Corporation compact is a significant achievement, providing further opportunities
for Kosovo to access resources that advance social and economic development. I
also make special note of the initiatives by business leaders within the Chambers of
Commerce in both Belgrade and Pristina to put aside political problems and to build
new cooperation within the business community. Their efforts are a lesso n in farsighted action.
51. I express my gratitude to my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, for leading
UNMIK with commitment, and all Mission personnel for their service. I am also
thankful to members of the United Nations family and UNMIK partners on the
ground, including KFOR, EULEX, OSCE and the European Union, for their
cooperation and continuing contributions to peace and progress in Kosovo.

10/19

16-01063

S/2016/99

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo
(covering the period from 16 October 2015 to 15 January 2016)
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued its
monitoring, mentoring and advising activities, and to implement its executive
functions in line with its mandate in the rule of law area. A number of verdicts were
pronounced in cases concerning organized crime, corruption and other serious
crimes. The trial in the “Matrix” case, relating to organized crime and migrant
smuggling into the European Union, led to the conviction and imprisonment of four
defendants. Five Kosovo police officers were found guilty in the “Gracanica 10”
case concerning mistreatment of nine Kosovo Serbs from northern Kosovo. A
former member of the Liberation Army of Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac was
sentenced to imprisonment for attempted aggravated murder, commi tted in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The Mission supported the Kosovo Border Police and the Ministry of Internal
Affairs with technical advice to deal with the potential influx of irregular migrants
and refugees into Kosovo. Against the backdrop of the political stalemate and
demonstrations by the opposition, EULEX provided advice to the Kosovo police in
their response to the protests, some of which turned violent.
In northern Kosovo, the Mission exercised its executive functions in a numb er
of judicial cases. Two defendants received suspended prison sentences for
involvement in attacks against EULEX personnel in the municipality of Zubin Potok
in April and May 2012. One defendant received a suspended prison sentence for
obstruction of official persons in a case related to the killing of a Kosovo police
officer in 2011. The main trial against five defendants, including a well -known
Kosovo Serb politician, accused of war crimes, continued.
Further successful steps were taken in the implementation of European Unionfacilitated dialogue agreements with support from EULEX. In the context of the
integration of the Serbian civil protection personnel, in November, 25 new Kosovo
corrections officers, all former staff of the Serbian civil protection, graduated from
their training course at the Kosovo Academy for Public Safety and began
employment at the Mitrovica Detention Centre. In December, all 483 positions in
Kosovo institutions were filled and on 11 January 2016 all remaining contracts were
signed. The Mission also supported the Ministry of Internal Affairs in its efforts to
make civil registry services fully available in northern Kosovo. Certified copies of
civil registry books have now been handed over to three of the four northern
municipalities.

16-01063

11/19

S/2016/99

2.

EULEX activities

2.1

Executive
War crimes
On 18 November, a EULEX judge at the Mitrovica Basic Court held an initial
hearing of a defendant in the “Kukes” case related to mistreatment of persons held
in Kosovo Liberation Army facilities in northern Albania during the Kosovo
conflict. The suspect had managed to avoid arrest since 2010, but was arrested by
Kosovo police and EULEX police on 6 October. The defendant has pleaded guilty to
unauthorized possession of a weapon, but not guilty to war crimes against the
civilian population.
On 10 November, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Court of Appeals finalized the case against the “Llapi group” relating to the beating
and torture of Kosovo Albanian civilians illegally de tained in the detention centre in
Llapashtica/Lapaštica. The appeal of one of the defendants was dismissed as belated
and the verdict of three years’ imprisonment against him was confirmed. For the two
other defendants, the time spent in detention on remand was credited to their earlier
sentences of six and four years’ imprisonment respectively.
Organized crime and corruption
On 15 October, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Pristina Basic Court announced the verdict in the “Matrix” case. Four defendants
were sentenced to imprisonment of three to four years for organized crime and
migrant smuggling into the European Union. The case was led by a EULEX
prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office. One defendant had pleaded
guilty earlier and was sentenced separately.
On 23 October, a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office
filed an indictment against four defendants charged with inter alia organized crime
and money-laundering committed in 2011-2012. The accusations include large-scale
tax evasion committed in the context of fuel sales. The proceeds were allegedly
subsequently laundered through a construction business. The case was investigated
by EULEX police.
On 26 October, the first session of the appellate proceedings in the “passport”
case was held by a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges. In December
2014, eight defendants were sentenced to imprisonment ranging from one to
12 years for offences related to the theft of €1.4 million in the context o f a public
supply contract for biometric passports at the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
On 30 October, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges started the
trial for corruption-related offences in the “Ministry of Transport, Post and
Telecommunications” case against inter alia a former Minister of Transport, Post
and Telecommunications.
Other serious crimes cases
In October, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge at the Court of
Appeals finalized a decision affirming an earlier ruling of the Mitrovica Basic Court
whereby two Kosovo police officers serving in Mitrovica were given suspended

12/19

16-01063

S/2016/99

sentences of imprisonment for 14 months and 5 months, respectively, for abuse of
official position or authority. Four other defendants were acquitted . The case relates
to the provision of assistance and/or information for smuggling goods through
police checkpoints in Mitrovica.
On 26 October, a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office
filed an indictment against two defendants for money-laundering and tax evasion.
The funds, which were allegedly smuggled from Western Europe and laundered in
Kosovo, exceeded €2 million. The indictment was filed following a complex
investigation conducted by the EULEX police together with the Kosovo p olice.
On 2 November, a EULEX judge at the Mitrovica Basic Court issued a
judgement in a case regarding the dismantling and reselling of stolen cars. Two
defendants received suspended sentences of 18 months and 10 months’
imprisonment, respectively, while a third defendant was acquitted.
On 11 November, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Gjilan/Gnjilane Basic Court sentenced a former member of the Liberation Army of
Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac to six years’ imprisonment for attempt ed
aggravated murder committed in December 2004 in Tetovo, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. The case was led by a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo
Special Prosecution Office.
On 18 November, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Pristina Basic Court announced the verdict in the “Gracanica 10” case against
11 Kosovo police officers for mistreatment of nine Kosovo Serbs from northern
Kosovo in January 2013 during their time in detention. Five of the defendants were
found guilty; one was sentenced to 18 months’ imprisonment and the four others to
suspended sentences and prohibition of exercising public service functions. The
case was led by a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
Allegations found in the report by the Special Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal
Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe
The Special Investigative Task Force was set up in 2011 to conduct a criminal
investigation into the claims found in the report of January 2011 by the Special
Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of
Europe, Dick Marty, entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo”. The investigation conducted under the auspices of the
Special Investigative Task Force seeks to determine the individual criminal liability
of those most responsible for the allegations made in the report.
The Special Investigative Task Force is moving forward with engaging injured
parties, victim advocacy groups and individuals in order to gather evidence and
information relevant to the investigation. Cooperation with judicial and law enforcement authorities in the region and beyond is ongoing and remains
satisfactory. The Task Force looks forward to sustained cooperation from all parties
as operational and investigative activities continue to make progress.
The preparation for the establishment of the Specialist Chambers and
Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office continues. On 15 January 2016, the Council of
Ministers of the Netherlands agreed on the hosting of the Specialist Chambers and
Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office in the Netherlands.

16-01063

13/19

S/2016/99

Department of Forensic Medicine
On 9 November, EULEX forensic experts at the Kosovo Department of
Forensic Medicine started the site assessment at Kiževak in the Rudnica mine
complex in Serbia around 20 km from the stone quarry where excavations were
carried out in 2014. EULEX is guiding the excavation in coordination with a
prosecutor of the Belgrade District Court of War Crime s and a Serbian mine expert.
Among those present at the excavation were also the Government Commissions on
Missing Persons from Belgrade and Pristina as well as local staff of the Kosovo
Department of Forensic Medicine. The site assessment was temporarily suspended
on 11 December owing to bad weather conditions but it is expected to resume in
2016. At the beginning of November, EULEX forensic experts conducted site
assessments in the areas of Prizren and Deçan/Dečani.
Property rights
During the reporting period, the Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel
received 37 new appeals and adjudicated 42 appeals, while 444 appeals are pending
a decision of the panel. The Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for privatization
matters rendered 196 decisions in first instance trial panel cases and finalized 53
cases at the appellate panel level.
2.2

Strengthening
The Mission supported the Kosovo Border Police with technical advice,
focusing on identification and registration of irregular migrants and refugees and in
strengthening their investigation capacity against smuggling as well as in the
drafting of their operational plan “Influx of refugees”, which defines activities and
responsibilities for a coordinated response to a potential influx of irregular migrants
and refugees. The Mission also provided advice to the Ministry of Internal Affairs
on migration crisis contingency planning with a special focus on budgeting, and
advocated enhanced coordination efforts among all Kosovo institutions involved.
EULEX continued its work with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to strengthen
the civil status system and provided advice on sublegal acts for changing a person’s
name and defining personal identification numbers. Both are critical for the proper
identification of individuals, in particular in criminal cases, and in the context of the
visa liberalization road map.
The Mission continued to monitor and advise the Kosovo police in its response
to various protests by the opposition, some of which turned violent. The Kosovo
police demonstrated professionalism, reflecting the lessons learned from previous
interventions, in accordance with European best practices. EULEX provided
additional advice on arrest procedures to special units of the Kosovo police.
In the course of the implementation of a pilot project on intelligence -led
policing in Ferizaj/Uroševac, statistics showed an increase in the number of
adequately submitted information reports in the last quarter. The success of the pilot
project will be used as an example for other police regions in Kosovo.
As part of the Mission’s mandate to support Kosovo Customs, EULEX
organized a workshop on intellectual property rights in Pristina. Concurrently, a
public awareness campaign was launched in cooperation with Kosovo Customs to
highlight the risk of health and safety hazards when buying counterfeit goods.

14/19

16-01063

S/2016/99

Further, the Mission continued to monitor the process of merging Kosovo Customs
and the Tax Administration of Kosovo. In addition, the implementation of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement will mean a gradual removal of all customs
duties on imports from the European Union over a six-year period, with a projected
decrease of revenue in 2016 of approximately €25 million. It is therefore essential
that the Tax Administration improves tax collection in order to compensate for the
predicted reduction in customs revenues.
On 13 November, 25 new Kosovo Correctional Service officers, all former
staff of the civil protection, graduated from their training course at the Kosovo
Academy for Public Safety. They started working at the Mitrovica Detention Centre
on 16 November, where their presence significantly alleviates the staffing shortage.
EULEX was part of their integration process, from selection to monitoring of their
training in the classroom and their work at the Mitrovica Detention Centre. At the
Centre, there is, however, still a lack of Kosovo Albanian staff. EULEX sent
recommendations to the newly appointed Acting Director General of the
Correctional Service to strengthen the management and operation of the institution,
to ensure more efficient use of space and to reduce staff and operational costs.
Demonstrating improved will to respond to recommendations, the Correctional
Service closed down one block of Dubrava Correctional Centre in its current
function to enable future use in accordance with economies of scale.
The Mission continued to provide advice to the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council
and the Kosovo Judicial Council in drafting the regulations for the package of laws
on the judiciary that were amended in mid-2015. The drafting process proceeded
slowly during the reporting period. The Councils did not finalize the regulations by
the set deadline of 15 January 2016. Both Councils will have to address the
impending end of mandates of respective members and subsequent potential loss of
institutional memory early in 2016. In addition to the legislative expertise, EULEX
continued to provide support to the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council and the Chief
State Prosecutor to ensure accountability and enhance management capacities, in
particular in view of the changes, mentioned above, soon to be introduced.
The Mission continued capacity-building activities for the Office of the
Disciplinary Counsel/Prosecutor and supported another workshop to improve the
skills of the Office’s inspectors and legal officers in the process of interviewing and
collecting evidence.
2.3

Northern Kosovo
On 17 October, the revitalization of the main bridge and its surroundings
began, within the context of the European Union-facilitated dialogue. The situation
in Mitrovica remained calm following the initiation of the revitaliz ation. In
November, several incidents of alleged molesting and attempted abduction of
underage children by an unknown person were reported in Mitrovica North. EULEX
encouraged the Kosovo police to address public concerns through media outreach
and community policing activities. On 9 November as well as on 9 and
10 December, some 50 to 60 former employees of the Serbian Ministry of the
Interior protested in Mitrovica North demanding the review of their employment
and retirement status by Serbia. On 18 November, the Minister of Finance and the
Director General of Kosovo Customs were prevented from travelling to the
Rudnica/Jarinjë crossing point after protesters blocked the road. On 29 November,

16-01063

15/19

S/2016/99

an explosive device was thrown at a residential building under re novation by a
Kosovo Albanian company in Mitrovica North; a Kosovo Albanian worker sustained
minor injuries and several cars were damaged.
The Mission continued to implement its executive mandate in a number of
criminal cases. On 23 October, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic
Court issued a judgement against seven defendants in the case related to attacks
against EULEX personnel in the municipality of Zubin Potok in April and May
2012. Two of the defendants received suspended prison sentences of two years and
one year and 10 months, respectively, as well as fines. On 10 December, a panel of
EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court announced the verdict in the second of
three judicial proceedings related to the shooting of a Kosovo police offic er, Enver
Zymberi, in July 2011. One defendant received a suspended sentence of six months’
imprisonment for obstruction of official persons in performing their duties, but was
acquitted on all other accounts, including aggravated murder. The other defenda nt
was found not guilty of all charges. The main trial in the case against five
defendants, including a well-known Kosovo Serb politician, accused of war crimes,
continued. Towards the end of the reporting period the closing statements by the
prosecution and the defence were heard.
The Mission continued to advise the Kosovo police in northern Kosovo. From
9 November until 13 December, the Kosovo police conducted an operation, with
active EULEX support, to prevent illegal woodcutting in northern Kosovo. A n ew
momentum was gained in the efforts of the Kosovo police to introduce intelligence led policing principles in northern Kosovo, to which EULEX contributed with
strategic and practical guidance. On 3 November, the Mission held a workshop with
the Regional Police Directorate Mitrovica North on submission of information as
part of intelligence-led policing, which in turn was replicated by the Kosovo police
in workshops with all station commanders and department heads in northern
Kosovo. On 10 December, Kosovo police Regional Directors of Mitrovica North
and South met, with EULEX facilitation, to discuss regional challenges and how to
increase coordination and cooperation on cross-regional security. On 17 December,
EULEX organized a media training and communication workshop for 14 Kosovo
police officers from the four northern police stations, which will contribute to the
Kosovo police’s goal to increase trust and confidence by adequately informing the
population. EULEX contributed to combating domestic violence in northern Kosovo
by organizing an expert meeting on 22 December that led to the setting up of regular
coordination meetings on domestic violence. On 23 December, quick response
teams of Regional Police Directorates Mitrovica North and South attended a jo int
training which included a crowd and riot control demonstration by EULEX,
followed by a discussion on training needs. On 30 December, the Police
Inspectorate of Kosovo opened its branch in Mitrovica North.
2.4

Dialogue implementation
On 27 November, the fourth central-level meeting on integrated management
of crossing points was held in Belgrade. The meeting had high -level representation
from both sides and contributed to moving forward with the implementation of the
Technical Protocol. Preparations to start the construction of the permanent crossing
points were discussed and all parties proposed the participation of EULEX as a
permanent member of the project steering committee.

16/19

16-01063

S/2016/99

On 17 December, EULEX facilitated the first joint meeting of representa tives
from the customs administrations of Belgrade and Pristina at the Merdarë/Merdare
crossing point. The purpose was to discuss technical and practical issues related to
the recently fully operational exchange of customs data.
EULEX received via UNMIK a reply from INTERPOL to a request sent to
Belgrade in 2013 for verification of the registration and authenticity of documents
used by people in 2,087 cases in order to change their SRB vehicle number plates to
KS or RKS plates. The Mission continues to follow up on this verification process
as 126 of the cases remain unanswered.
The Mission supported the Ministry of Internal Affairs in its efforts to make
civil registry services fully available in northern Kosovo. To this end, EULEX met
several times with government representatives, senior officials of the Civil
Registration Agency and the northern mayors to discuss the establishment of main
civil status registry offices. Certified copies of civil registry books were handed
over by the Agency to the representatives of the satellite offices in Zubin Potok in
October and in Leposavić/Leposaviq and Zvečan/Zveçan in December.
With the signing of contracts on 11 January 2016 for the remaining 328 former
Serbian civil protection staff plus the signing of documents by the 50 former staff
members selected for the contingency fund, all 483 former civil protection staff
members have been assigned a position in Kosovo institutions in accordance with
the agreement.

16-01063

17/19

S/2016/99

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2016)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

1

Total

8

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 January 2016)
Country

18/19

Number

Czech Republic

2

Moldova

1

Poland

2

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

9

16-01063

S/2016/99

16-01063

19/19
