S/PV.6987

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6987th meeting

Wednesday, 26 June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

13-37409 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1337409*

S/PV.6987

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

his thoughts on how inter-mission cooperation could
impact on crisis management by our Missions.

Adoption of the agenda

The President: I now give the floor to Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz.

The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; Major General Leonard Ngondi,
Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia; and Major General Muhammad Iqbal Asi,
Force Commander of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Major General Babacar Gaye,
United Nations Military Adviser, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I promise to be
very brief.
As the Council knows, this week gives us the
chance to gather all of the military component Force
Commanders of the Missions. All of the Generals are
therefore present here today. In keeping with tradition,
we thought it would be useful for them to meet with
the Security Council for this interactive meeting. We
therefore decided to request three Generals to give short
briefings to the Security Council. Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, will share his
thoughts on our efforts to use advanced technological
military capacity to implement the tasks included
in our mandates. Major General Leonard Ngondi,
Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, will speak about the evaluation within his
Mission of predeployment training. And Major General
Muhammad Iqbal Asi, Force Commander of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, will share

2

Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz: It is a
pleasure and a privilege for me to be here today. The
subject I will focus on is the use of advanced technology
in peacekeeping and the associated benefits, not only to
the Mission but to the United Nations and the Security
Council at all levels.
This topic is of particular relevance to the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) at this
time as we prepare for the arrival of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). A very extensive selection process is
being run by the Secretariat for a contractor to field and
operate the complete UAV system. We hope to see its
arrival in the Democratic Republic of the Congo very
soon.
This capability will certainly help us in addressing
some of the major tasks set out in our most recent
mandate under resolution 2098 (2013). How will we use
these assets? We will use the UAVs to identify armed
groups headquarters, logistics hubs, troop movements,
convoys, clandestine air strips and roadblocks; to
obtain early warning of armed groups’ movements
and intentions; and to monitor camps for internally
displaced persons. The ability to fly over sensitive
areas for extended periods of hours and days will
provide timely information. Those UAVs will help to
deter hostile action by the armed groups and to trigger
the use of rapid reaction forces.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there
may be contingents from Portugal, Spain, Italy, France,
the Netherlands, Germany, Austria and Poland in the
same area — making it impossible to operate without
very good information. I believe that information as
key to the success of any mission.
I should not limit myself to discussing UAVs
alone. There are other advanced military technologies
that also have the potential to offer major benefits for
United Nations peacekeeping. We are already using
ground-based radar in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to provide better knowledge and awareness of
activity on the Great Lakes. There is also the potential
to make much greater use of surveillance technology to
bolster monitoring capacity, as in the context of cross-

13-37409

S/PV.6987

border activity. We have borders with many countries
and more than 50 armed groups operating close to
those borders, which they may cross, leading to broader
disturbances. High-resolution imagery could be of
significant use as material evidence. In a similar vein,
the selective employment of signals intelligence could
enable peacekeepers to stay one step ahead of those
posing a threat to peace, which would undoubtedly
help to mitigate the risks both to the population and to
United Nations troops and personnel.
Other advanced military technologies that could
deliver benefits in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo include weapon-locating systems, boats, radar
and acoustic technology. These are important because
the rebels may use the territory of foreign countries
as a base for fighting. That is something we need to
know. We have scanners and forward-looking infrared
systems in our helicopters and aircraft. We have GPS
trackers in our vehicles. Small and mini unmanned
aircraft systems are extremely important for tactical
operations. We should also note that the adoption
of other basic technologies, such as night-sights for
weapons, both thermal and image-intensifying, manportable surveillance radar and laser range-finders
would confer excellent benefits. The problem is that we
need more than advanced technology. At the moment,
we need much more basic technology.
While pointing to the many potential benefits of
the increased used of advanced military technology
in United Nations peacekeeping, there are certain
sensitivities and limitations that need to be recognized.
The use of surveillance devices could be regarded
as overly intrusive by host nations if not adequately
controlled, including the information that is generated.
Only unarmed UAVs will be used in MONUSCO.
Advanced technology also often requires skilled
operators and analysis to support it. Such resources
are often in scarce supply, particularly for the United
Nations, which is heavily dependent on others for
most of its military manpower. When we increase
the technological resources in our mission, we need
to adapt the structures we have. We need to have
much more information. We need to have many more
analysts. We need to have much more structure to deal
with the intelligence. It is important to ensure that we
can fully exploit the information and intelligence that
are captured. If we do not link our structures to the new
technology as it is adopted, the results are likely to be
suboptimal.

I would like to highlight the fact that the benefits
of this technology relate not only to the results they
bring to the mission. They are important at all levels,
especially with regard to the political conclusions made
because the political analysts have real evidence of
what is going on the ground.
In this brief address, I have pointed to some of the
potential opportunities presented by advanced military
technology for United Nations peacekeeping. No two
United Nations peacekeeping missions are the same.
While such technology might be good for one mission,
it might not be as beneficial for another. Indeed, I have
not discussed technologies that, while not suitable to
MONUSCO, might suit other missions particularly
well.
Technology has its limitations and will not always
be the answer to our challenges. In MONUSCO, we
will soon have a chance to see for ourselves what UAVs
can do for peacekeeping in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It promises to be a very interesting and
instructive period for us, and we will be keen to share
our experiences as we proceed forward.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Dos
Santos Cruz very much for his statement.
I now give the floor to Major General Ngondi.
Major General Ngondi: It is a great honour to
brief the Security Council on the need for an in-mission
assessment of pre-deployment training of United
Nations peacekeepers.
Troops selected for United Nations missions
undergo pre-deployment training that is administered
by the troop- contributing countries (TCCs), as part
of national preparations. The main purpose of the
pre-deployment training is to re-orientate the troops’
operational capabilities to operate in a specific
peacekeeping environment and situation. In addition,
the pre-deployment training period is used to organize
and equip troops in accordance with approved and
agreed operational requirements, as well as to establish
mechanisms for being able to self-sustain their
contingent and/or contingent-owned equipment in the
field.
The expectations are that troops deployed to a
peacekeeping operation will be mission-capable in
terms of knowledge, skills and attitudes; have the right
equipment and enablers, as asked for in the statement of
unit requirements by the Department of Peacekeeping

13-374093

S/PV.6987

Operations; will be covered for reimbursement
purposes by an agreed and signed memorandum of
understanding; and are expected to have a high state
of operational readiness which needs to be maintained
and sustained by the force throughout its deployment
period.
Prescribed induction-training and initial inspection
of contingent-owned equipment are conducted when
troops arrive in the mission area. This training focuses
on individual skills, not the collective ones, and
cannot therefore be relied upon to validate the entire
pre-deployment training. While both the training and
contingent-owned equipment inspections are valuable,
there is no assurance of mission-capable sustainability.
Basic guidance documents and policies are
available and continue to be produced to inform
and steer the TCCs in training their contingents on
mission-essential tasks to ensure that their troops have
mission-capable capacities. The documents, including
the generic TCC guidelines, also guide the TCCs on
how to conduct an evaluation of the training activities
undertaken. It is worth noting that, while the same
documents are a considerable source of information for
field commanders to ensure that their units conform
to United Nations operational standards, the force
headquarters does not have the means in the field to
ascertain the same.
The aim of this short briefing is to highlight the
need for an in-mission assessment of pre-deployment
training and the TCCs’ capability to self-sustain in
accordance with the United Nations standard level
of contingents’ operational readiness, with a view to
recommending the establishment of a mechanism
within force headquarters that will undertake the same.
I am fully aware that the TCCs are responsible
for pre-deployment training before deploying their
contingents into the mission area. This training
should be validated on arrival in the mission area in
order to assure the force leadership of the contingents’
operational readiness. Currently, force headquarters do
not have the capacity to conduct the validation.
Capability gaps may be established during the
in-mission assessment and require bridging or rectifying.
However, bridging can be done only through in-mission
training, and evaluation to ascertain the achievement
of the training objectives is necessary. For this reason,
force headquarters are required to have the capacity to

4

formulate training plans and training objectives, and
subsequently to evaluate the achievement of the same.
Over the years, it has been observed in the field that
some contingents encounter numerous challenges in
maintaining their equipment. Therefore there is a need
to assess the contingents’ sustainability procedures and
policy to ensure that they meet the desired effectiveness
and United Nations standards. Timely interventions on
sustenance efforts will guarantee mission capability.
Force headquarters do not have the capacity to
evaluate the sustainability frameworks of the deployed
contingents.
Every mission is unique and has its own challenges.
There is a need to keep on analysing emerging trends
and challenges with a view to developing viable
intervention measures. Such measures include the
formulation of training plans and training objectives and
the conduct of training in order to impart the necessary
skills. That function requires a suitable arrangement in
the field. Additionally, force headquarters have several
staff functions that make the entire force effective.
Those functions also require monitoring and evaluation
to ensure that the headquarters operates at an optimal
level.
Owing to the aforesaid, I strongly recommend
the establishment of an evaluation team within force
headquarters that will assist the force leadership
in sustaining mission-capable troops as well as a
functional headquarters. The team would be invaluable
in evaluating contingents and the force headquarters
itself, and in drawing the attention of commanders to
areas requiring their intervention.
Lastly, the evaluation team should comprise experts
in all of the envisaged functional areas, which mainly
encompass mission essential tasks, staff functions and
sustainability. The team should be directly responsible
to the force leadership with respect to monitoring,
evaluating and sustaining the operational readiness of
the entire force.
The President: I thank General Ngondi for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Iqbal Asi.
Major General Iqbal Asi: I am greatly honoured
to be here this morning, sharing my thoughts on how
planned inter-mission cooperation can impact mission
crisis management capability. During my discourse,
I will briefly dilate upon the existing framework of

13-37409

S/PV.6987

cooperation between the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL), highlight opportunities for further
cooperation, identify challenges and recommend a way
forward.
Inter-mission cooperation optimizes the use
of available assets for peacekeeping operations
by facilitating, through pooling or the temporary
redeployment of equipment and personnel in
geographically contiguous missions on a short-term
basis, as well as strategic gains. When unforeseen
events threaten to destabilize a country, inter-mission
cooperation can be an adaptive and effective response
to help provide key assets in a timely and efficient
manner.
The concept is not new, as initial efforts to stimulate
it began as early as 2005 under the sponsorship of the
United Nations Office for West Africa, headquartered
in Dakar, Senegal. That regional office initiated the
practice of convening regular meetings of Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) missions based
in three West African countries, namely, Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. Those meetings are
considered to be pioneering efforts in that particular
direction.
Today, there is greater need for coordination and
cooperation among United Nations missions operating
in geographic proximity. The current global economic
environment necessitates a more efficient approach
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Although
the concept has been practiced, and UNOCI has firsthand experience in benefiting from inter-mission
cooperation, areas for further expansion exist.
I shall now identify the dividends of inter-mission
cooperation accrued from the cooperative framework
of UNOCI and UNMIL. The temporary redeployment
of three infantry companies from UNMIL to UNOCI
in late 2010 helped UNOCI to fill a critical shortage
of personnel needed to protect Abidjan. In December
2011, one infantry company was temporarily redeployed
from UNMIL to reinforce UNOCI during legislative
elections in Cote d’Ivoire. That shifting of personnel
within the region saved precious time, as well as the
cost of bringing in troops during the crisis. The shifting
of three armed and two military utility helicopters from
UNMIL to UNOCI for the two elections just mentioned
provided UNOCI with the mobility required to enhance
monitoring of the sensitive areas surrounding the

borders, as well as the ability to quickly respond to
cross-border violence.
A number of reconnaissance sorties are being
conducted on a required basis by UNMIL armed
helicopters on both sides of the border. Recently, prior
to regional and municipal elections in Côte d’Ivoire in
April, regular reconnaissance and security sorties were
flown along the border by UNMIL armed helicopters.
Thus, the United Nations aerial platforms available in
the region were optimally utilized and the show of force
dissuaded the miscreants from acts of violence.
Another area of inter-mission cooperation is
joint border surveillance. Under that framework, two
operations, generally called “mirror patrolling”, each
of one week duration per month, are conducted on
both sides of the border in selected areas. The practice
enables the establishment of the United Nations
footprint in remote border regions, which effectively
deters border crossings of miscreants in large numbers.
Enhanced local cooperation at the tactical level is
yet another area of cooperation with obvious benefits.
I am referring to Operation Mayo, in which border
meetings are held twice a month. Representatives
of all components of the two missions, national
law enforcement agencies and local administrative
authorities participate in those meetings. They provide
a forum for liaison, coordination, the exchange of
information and review of progress on agreed action
points.
Lastly, the ability to take counter measures in
terms of intelligence-sharing is a valuable outcome of
inter-mission cooperation. An effective intelligence
sharing mechanism exists between UNOCI and UNMIL
at the force headquarters, sector and unit levels. To cite
a couple of examples among many, vital information
provided by UNMIL made it possible to take countermeasures and thereby avert attacks against Blolequin
and Guiglo in May 2012, and against Djouroutou in
April.
Having indicated workable and constructive
effects accrued from cooperation between UNOCI
and UNMIL, I shall now identify a few areas where
opportunities exist to further enhance such cooperation.
As a physical presence along and monitoring of an
extended border is not possible, for obvious reasons,
shared monitoring and surveillance of border areas
through technological means is another achievable

13-374095

S/PV.6987

field of cooperation. To compensate for a paucity of
troops, technological means can be jointly employed by
missions located in geographic proximity.
Rapid surge capability is another area of
opportunity. The identification and earmarking of a
quick reaction force based in one mission, but able to
deploy to operate in neighbouring mission areas, need
to be pursued. The earmarking of such a flexile force
could have a considerable impact in crisis situations
and provide a strong United Nations presence in areas
where it otherwise has limited troop presence.
The establishment of a joint information and
analysis centre is a possible field of cooperation. A
centre could be established for UNOCI and UNMIL
and fed through all internal and external resources to
provide a clearer picture for decision-makers in order
to achieve well-thought-out and informed decisions.
It will improve the quality of information and assist
in its speedy dissemination to all concerned. Such an
arrangement would be beneficial for both missions, for
better crisis management.
The successful execution of inter-mission
cooperation has certain challenges, which I shall
briefly highlight here. Legal and political constraints
are a major challenge as the shifting of assets across
national borders requires the prior approval of the host
country and troop-contributing countries, which can
be an organizational and administrative challenge.
Invariably, it results in the delayed deployment of
troops and assets.
The second challenge emanates from restrictive
mission mandates. Protection, privileges, immunities,
exemptions and facilities in missions, the respective
status-of-forces agreements, as related to United
Nations personnel and property, must be worked out
in a timely manner with host countries in cases where
United Nations personnel and material may required to
deploy and operate.
The non-availability of standard means at the
tactical level is also another impediment. The use of
maps to share operational information — especially
contiguous locations — becomes time-consuming due
to lack of standard maps. Moreover, lack of standard
communication means is another area of concern that
needs to be addressed for coordinating important
operational activities, such as patrolling along the
border.

6

On the way forward for the future, I shall proffer
certain recommendations.
First, DPKO should negotiate prior agreements
between the United Nations and troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) that allow TCC units to be utilized
during reinforcing missions. That would ensure timely
deployment of assets when needed.
Secondly, status-of-mission agreements, statusof forces-agreement, memorandums of understanding
and rules of engagement should be worked out with
the Governments concerned, providing legitimacy
for crossing into neighbouring mission areas and
facilitating cross-border operations in cooperation with
the Office of Legal Affairs.
Thirdly, the commercial provision of some of
the military capabilities required to make efficient
use of technology to implement mandates in a costeffective manner should be considered from a regional
perspective. Such means would be made available on a
cost-sharing basis among different missions.
Finally, the joint mapping of armed groups and
criminality across the borders should be carried out by
contiguous missions, which would prove useful to an
effective response against miscreants. The availability
of standard maps and communication means should be
examined to facilitate cross-border operations and the
sharing of operational information.
Inter-mission cooperation needs to be strengthened
and expanded. Obviously, there is no one-size-fitsall solution, each mission being a unique case. But
there are important opportunities and sometimes even
compulsions to enhance cooperation and coordination
among them, thereby maximizing available resources.
Such cooperation is becoming increasingly important
as a tool to ensure the optimal utilization of limited
resources in an environment characterized by the
regional nature of conflicts and fiscal considerations.
The President: I thank Major General Iqbal Asi for
his briefing.
I should like to remind colleagues that this is an
informal meeting, and its main value is the interactive
questions and answers with the Force Commanders.
So I would encourage Council members to keep their
statements brief and to focus on questions for the three
Force Commanders and Mr. Ladsous so that there will
be time for them to respond to those at the end of the
meeting.

13-37409

S/PV.6987

I also remind colleagues of the three topics under
discussion: the use of more technologically advanced
military capabilities to fulfil mandates, in-mission
assessments of pre-deployment training, and
inter-mission cooperation.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) — General Ngondi, General
Dos Santos Cruz and General Iqbal Asi — for their
briefings to the Council. The operational and logistical
details shared by them today give us a glimpse into
the realities on the ground and the challenges faced
by peacekeepers. We pay tribute to the 111,000 brave
men and women in various peacekeeping missions
for their dedication and courage, as well as for their
professionalism and service.
Today, we also remember all military, police and
civilian peacekeepers who have laid down their lives in
United Nations peacekeeping. The safety and security
of peacekeepers and strengthened field security
coverage are of paramount importance. Safety and
security are the shared responsibility of this Council,
the Secretariat, host countries, troop-contributing
countries, police-contributing countries and the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping.
For the past 53 years, Pakistan has been one of
the largest troop contributors. Pakistan’s participation
in diverse peacekeeping missions is an affirmation of
our abiding faith in the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The briefings by the three Generals today
demonstrate that United Nations-led peacekeeping
controls violent conflicts, stabilizes post-conflict
fragility, catalyses internal political processes and
engages in peacebuilding. Peacekeeping has evolved
with the changing nature of conflicts. Professionalism
in peacekeeping ensures excellence in service
delivery, as well as safety and security. In that
context, pre-deployment training, including common
and standardized training, is vital for all mission
components. Different operational imperatives require
scenario-based training and exercises during the course
of active deployment. Such exercises are supplementary

to pre-deployment training. The case for the in-mission
assessment of pre-deployment training is therefore
compelling.
In Pakistan, we have developed peacekeeping
training modules that form part of the curriculums
for mandatory courses required in career progression.
We are willing to share our training programmes and
experiences with the Secretariat and the United Nations
membership.
In the recent past, two momentous decisions have
been taken in peacekeeping. First, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Security Council has
authorized “targeted offensive operations...in a robust,
highly mobile and versatile manner” (resolution 2098
(2013), 12 (b)) with the aim of neutralizing armed
groups. Secondly, the use of unarmed, non-offensive,
unmanned aerial vehicles has been authorized to
support peacekeepers operating under the MONUSCO
mandate. Both of those arrangements need to be
monitored closely to ascertain their effectiveness.
Positive and negative feedback, especially from Force
Commanders, will help us with the refinement of the
mandates and course correction. It will also enable
us to address in inclusive inter-governmental settings
some residual legal, operational, technical and financial
questions.
In MONUSCO, we would particularly appreciate
it the rules of engagement and concept of operation
conformed to tasks identified in resolution 2098 (2013)
for framework brigades and force intervention brigades.
I request the Force Commander of MONUSCO to
give us feedback about this arrangement and how it is
working on the ground.
As current Chair of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, we plan to hold a meeting on
the use of modern technology in peacekeeping missions
next month. Today’s briefing by General Dos Santos
Cruz has provided useful input for our meeting.
We support the sharing of human and material
resources between neighbouring missions on a case-bycase basis. In 2010, when the situation in Côte d’Ivoire
deteriorated, Pakistani troops from UNMIL proceeded
to assist UNOCI. Our internal processes for authorizing
this movement were completed expeditiously. We
did not delay the transfer of Pakistani troops despite
serious logistical and operational constraints. Later
events proved that reinforcement from UNMIL was

13-374097

S/PV.6987

critical to the success of UNOCI operations during the
crisis of 2010-2011.
Building on the insightful comments made by
General Iqbal Assi, I will make three points on
inter-mission cooperation.
First, inter-mission cooperation is an ad hoc
arrangement to make up for deficiencies in the wake of
a crisis. It is not a long-term solution.
Secondly, the question of the operational and
administrative control of assets being transferred
should be addressed up front. Each mission has its own
dynamics that undergird the calculation of the costs of
contingent-owned equipment. Moving to a different
mission entails change in dynamics, thus warranting
application of different financial modalities.
Thirdly, inter-mission cooperation is a contingencybased exercise, ideally restricted to infantry units and
some enabling assets such as helicopters. Caution is
therefore necessary in the transfer of engineering units
and hospitals, which require more permanent measures.
I have a question for General Iqbal Asi. What are
the most difficult and in fact intractable challenges and
difficulties in the area of inter-mission cooperation?
I conclude my remarks by reiterating Pakistan’s
support to United Nations peacekeeping and to the
noble cause upheld by the Blue Helmets all over the
world.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Force Commanders, Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz, Major General Ngondi and
Major General Iqbal Asi, for their briefings on current
issues of concern to peacekeeping operations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Côte
d’Ivoire and United Nations peacekeeping overall.
Regarding cooperation between peacekeeping
operations, it is our view that missions and the
Secretariat must be fully prepared for any negative
scenarios that may develop in the field, in particular
with respect to the exchange of information between
missions in the same region, the coordination of their
activities and the movement of troops and equipment
in case of emergency resource shortage. In this regard,
we would like to express our appreciation to the troopcontributing countries, which flexibly and promptly
agree to such movements.

8

However, although such interaction between
peacekeeping operations in West Africa as a temporary
mechanism for dealing with emergency problems
has shown itself effective in a number of emergency
situations, for example maintaining security during
elections in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, it is vital to
ensure that all United Nations peacekeeping operations
have the necessary resources to discharge their
mandates. From a political and operational standpoint,
it is important to take into consideration all possible
scenarios in countries where cooperating are missions
deployed. Each peacekeeping operation should at any
time be prepared to fulfil its mandate fully. There must
be minimum threats to the security of the Blue Helmets.
In the majority of cases, peacekeepers and equipment
are being sent into the most tense and dangerous
circumstances.
We need to approach the idea of standardizing
cooperation between peacekeeping operations very
carefully, especially in moving troops and equipment,
bearing in mind the range of political, legal and
financial considerations. Such questions must include
the agreement of the country concerned to the change,
even if it involves temporary configurations of the
international presence, the peacekeepers being prepared
to be moved, and United Nations administrative and
budget procedures. Of major significance is Security
Council agreement to the movement of personnel and
resources.
Separately, we would like to talk about the
challenges for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). These are laid out in resolution
2098 (2013), which calls for the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
with a view to a political path towards a long-term
settlement of the conflict and the establishment of
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region overall. We look forward to the
full implementation of the provisions of that resolution,
including that establishing the intervention brigade
with the Mission.
In this context, we would like to inquire how the
process for the deployment of the Brigade is going.
How is it perceived as an instrument for achieving a
qualitative turnaround in combating anti-Government
units? An important United Nations peacekeeping
innovation, which has been noted in MONUSCO, is the

13-37409

S/PV.6987

use of unmanned aerial vehicles. It is still our view that
this experimental process will require a careful analysis
of all aspects of the implementation of new technologies
and is not a carte blanche for similar steps in other
missions. In this regard, we would like to know at what
stage the deployment of the drones within MONUSCO
is, and when the United Nations anticipates achieving
their operational use. What is the perception of this
question on the ground? Is there a risk that the drones
could become an irritant, hindering the establishment
of an atmosphere of trust among neighbours and even
the very process of Congolese peacebuilding?
Ms. King (Australia): I too would like to welcome
the Force Commanders here today and convey
Australia’s sincere appreciation to them and to the men
and women with whom they serve for their dedication
and commitment to the cause of international peace and
security. I would like to thank them for their informative
briefings. The three topics that they briefed us on today
are all very relevant to the Council’s ability to structure
the mandates appropriately.
We are currently in a crucial period in the evolution
of peacekeeping. The mandates entrusted to them
are highly diverse and complex and increasingly
span a broad range of political and strategic goals,
encompassing not only traditional security functions
but also stabilization and peacebuilding tasks.
Therefore it is incumbent on the Council to engage very
closely with those responsible for implementing those
mandates on the ground and to ensure that our decisions
are properly calibrated to the conditions that they face
and that they have adequate tools and resources at their
disposal. We agreed to do this as recently as January
2013 in resolution 2086 (2013), and it is important that
we continue to hear the kind of feedback that we have
heard from them today.
Much of the complexity of current peacekeeping
operations arises, in our view, from the fact that many are
now mandated to protect civilians, which is a necessary
and defining element of modern peacekeeping, and the
robust elements of recent mandates have been driven in
large part by protection of civilians imperatives. The
United Nations reputation and authority in the field
now often depend on the capacity of the peacekeepers
to effectively protect civilians. To deliver on those
responsibilities effectively, the peacekeepers must have
the appropriate training, skills, equipment and mobility,
all of which are aspects that are relevant to the issues
that have been raised this morning.

In the specific context of training, Australia has
always been a strong supporter of the development
of United Nations capability standards. We strongly
support
Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous’
recommendation that a director for the evaluation
of field uniformed personnel be appointed, and we
recognize General Ngondi’s analysis that missions
must be able to conduct in-mission assessments and
pre-deployment training with a view to addressing gaps
and, as he put it, delivering a high state of sustained
operational readiness.
The security situation for most missions is not
static. We know that. Therefore there should be
in-mission capacity to identify force capability gaps as
they emerge and to rectify them. Otherwise, it is hard
to see how we can sustain standards and ensure that
mission contingents are able to respond to evolving
challenges, let alone crisis situations. Therefore, the
establishment of an evaluation component within force
headquarters is an interesting proposal and worthy of
close consideration, in our view. I would welcome the
views of the Force Commanders on the most common
pre-deployment training gaps, identified once collective
skills are assessed, realizing that there are two parts
to that process once the troops are actually in-theatre,
and their view on whether it is possible then to address
those gaps once the troops are in-mission. It would be
interesting to have some of their views on that.
I thank General Iqbal Asi for his remarks on the
force multiplying benefits of inter-mission cooperation
and asset sharing. The cooperation between the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia is best practice, it would
seem. The Council rightly expects peacekeeping
operations to respond to evolving threats and crises,
but it is also rightly vigilant about efficiencies, and
inter-mission cooperation can bridge some gaps
by sharing key capabilities and providing surge
capacity in times of crisis. He has also given us some
compelling evidence of the benefits and challenges,
and we would strongly support consideration of his
recommendations, particularly given the fact that so
many issues on the Council’s agenda have cross-border
and regional dimensions. In that context, I would be
interested to hear his perspectives on the scope for
further inter-mission cooperation in the context of
efforts to stand up the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.

13-374099

S/PV.6987

The use of innovative technologies in support of
peacekeeping is an operational necessity, in our view.
National military planners prioritize this aspect, and
we would advocate strongly for the use of technology
to allow United Nations missions to achieve their tasks
efficiently and at the same time enhance the safety
of United Nations personnel and the people they are
mandated to protect. We appreciate General Dos Santos
Cruz’s briefing on the benefits that he sees unmanned
aerial vehicles delivering to MONUSCO. We also take
his point on the importance of their being integrated
very carefully into the overall objectives of the Mission.
We would encourage the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to continue to identify the scope for the use
of advanced technologies. Operational requirements
should obviously be the overriding consideration, as
General Dos Santos Cruz has said, but as long as we
expect peacekeeping missions to perform increasingly
complicated tasks, we should also encourage the use
of technologies that enhance their capabilities to do so.
I thank you again, Sir, for the opportunity to hear
from the Force Commanders. It is essential that we,
the Council, the Member States — particularly troopcontributing countries — and the Secretariat engage in
a continuous effort to adapt and innovate to improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations, and this dialogue, in our view, is an
important part of that.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you for convening this meeting,
Mr. President, and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
for introducing it. We are particularly grateful to
the three Force Commanders for their enlightening
briefings on three topics related to peacekeeping, and
we warmly welcome all the Force Commanders here
today. Their views should improve synergy between
those on the ground and the Security Council.
Guatemala considers the peacekeeping operations
of the United Nations to be of fundamental importance.
They are an essential tool in the Organization’s work,
in which we have taken part as a troop-contributing
county on the American continent, in Africa and in the
Middle East. We value our participation in a task as
noble as that of peacekeeping, which is also edifying
for our own armed forces. From its beginnings to this
day, United Nations peacekeeping forces have evolved
both conceptually and operationally. The introduction
of new technologies, as General Dos Santos Cruz
mentioned, is only one example of that. The increasing

10

number of complex operations in recent years has led to
an ever-growing demand for resources and, with that,
a series of unprecedented challenges. It is clear that in
order to solve them we will have to rely on everyone’s
involvement and participation — the Security Council,
the States Members of the United Nations and the
Secretariat.
Guatemala contributes troops to the three missions
about which we have been briefed today. We are very
aware of the high quality of their Force Commanders
and their commitment. Owing to time limitations, I will
make only the following remarks and ask one question.
First, we emphasize again the importance of
peacekeeping operations with mandates that are clear,
practicable, verifiable and adapted to each individual
case. The primary responsibility for establishing that
condition falls to the Council.
Secondly, like many others, we demand results
from mission Heads and the troops on the ground,
but we must also stress that we have to provide them
with the tools they need to do their work effectively
and ensure their security. In that context, we should
also deal with the issue of the large gaps that exist
in the areas of capacities, resources and training, by
improving coordination between the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Secretariat, as well as
the troop-contributing countries.
Thirdly, we should point out the importance of
giving the greatest possible priority to improving the
security and protection of personnel deployed in the
field, particularly in crisis situations or where we are
dealing with a politically challenging environment.
The clearest example of the importance of this point
can be seen in the recent events involving the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. For their part,
host Governments must respect the basic principles of
peacekeeping operations, with no exceptions.
Fourthly, as is well known, we still have reservations
about the involvement of the United Nations in
peace-enforcement operations — in other words,
offensive activities — which raise serious questions.
I am specifically referring to resolution 2098 (2013),
adopted on 28 March, which includes a new approach
in support of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The chief issue is about an accurate definition of the
line that divides peacekeeping and peace enforcement.

13-37409

S/PV.6987

Fifthly, we believe that cooperation between
missions is important on a case-by-case basis,
always assuming that the conditions on the ground
and the mandates allow it. In that regard, and as was
explained by General Iqbal Asi, we believe that the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire is a positive
example that could help to clear up doubts about the
timing, requirements, impact and implementation of
such cooperation.
Finally, during the interactive part of ths meeting,
we would like to hear from the Force Commanders their
thoughts as to how we, the members of the Council,
can do a better job of taking into account the opinions
of personnel in the field and feedback from Force
Commanders when we are renewing peacekeeping
mission mandates.
Before I conclude, I would like to pay tribute to
peacekeeping operations personnel, including from my
own country, who have sacrificed their lives in service
to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): We
welcome these now regular exchanges between
peacekeeping representatives and the Security Council,
one of the chief results of the Franco-British initiative
of 2009. We thank the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire for their briefings. Their vision for
operations on the ground is essential to informing our
thinking.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the emblematic
United Nations activities. While their number and
complexity is constantly growing, we continue
to plead for strengthening military expertise,
improving the Council’s cooperation with troopand police-contributing countries and for keeping
a better grip on the cost of peacekeeping operations.
We therefore support the guidelines of the High-level
Working Group on Programme Criticality, which
is trying to reconcile cost management with the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
I would first like to recall France’s commitment to
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping capacities.
France has about 1,000 men and women participating
in seven of the 15 peacekeeping operations. Beyond
our direct contribution, we are also deploying about
10,000 men and women in various external theatres

of operations mandated by the Council and conducted
or directed by the European Union, NATO or by us
in our national capacity. We support the participation
in peacekeeping operations of some African States
through networks of national regional vocational
schools, teaching technical and operational know-how
adapted to the needs and personnel of African forces.
We also participate alongside European partners in the
EURORECAMP programme, where we first initiated
the concept of African peacekeeping capacity-building
in 1997.
I would now like to offer some reactions to the
Force Commanders’ briefings.
We support all initiatives designed to achieve the
optimal instruction and regular training of contingents
before or during their deployment. The changes of the
past 10 years — the fight against impunity and, in
some cases, mandates for peacekeeping operations on
working to arrest people sought by the International
Criminal Court in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali, the protection of civilians, special
vigilance regarding sexual violence — all require
adapted training.
We welcome the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to establish operational
standards and provide troop-contributing countries
with training manuals to allow them to deploy troops
capable of accomplishing the ever-more-complex tasks
given to peacekeeping operations. The recent example
of the generic United Nations Infantry Battalion Manual
gives troop-contributing countries a solid basis for
providing more effective peacekeeping forces. I would
like to stress in particular the importance of training
contingents on human rights, as well as to take this
opportunity to express our full support for the policies
put forward by the Secretary-General in that regard, in
particular the due diligence policy, which was taken
into consideration by the Council in its establishment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
With regard to the use of modern technologies
in peacekeeping operations, we welcome the
experimental tactical use of surveillance drones that
will soon begin in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). We await with great interest
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations evaluation
of this initial experimental phase in terms of the

13-3740911

S/PV.6987

potential future deployment of such technology in the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
and the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS). These systems are excellent
force multipliers that help to enhance the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations in the context of limited
resources. Other avenues should also be explored,
especially in the area of helicopters, where modern
technologies can allow for fuel savings to be made and
significantly improve flight safety.
Finally, when unexpected events threaten to
destabilize a country, inter-mission cooperation, as
the UNOCI Force Commander set out in his briefing,
can be an adaptive and effective response to provide
timely reinforcements in terms of troops and materials
to missions in need. Such cooperation is a flexible
mechanism, whose effectiveness has been proved in
West Africa, between UNOCI and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia; in East Africa, where MONUSCO
helicopters can be temporarily deployed to UNMISS;
and in the Middle East, where the rapid deployment of
the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic was possible only due to the logistics
support of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
and the redeployment of military observers, civilian
personnel, equipment and vehicles from other Missions.
In that regard, I would like to ask the UNOCI Force
Commander what specific steps have been taken within
UNOCI to support the deployment of MINUSMA.
This question takes up that posed by the representative
of Australia. More broadly, what are the regional
possibilities for ongoing cooperation between Liberia,
Côte d’Ivoire and Mali for United Nations peacekeeping
operations in West Africa?
In conclusion, I commend the commitment of
peacekeepers of all nationalities, some of whom even
pay with their lives for their dedication to peace. France
pays tribute to them.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this dialogue. I also welcome the Force
Commanders and thank them for their briefings and
the dedication with which they carry out their tasks
in their respective Missions, under such difficult
circumstances.
We thoroughly support consultations such as
today’s meeting, which provide Security Council
members with quality first-hand information on

12

mission activities on the ground and the challenges they
face. We trust that the holding of such meetings, which
has now been ongoing for four years, will become
established practice and continue in the future.
The maintenance of international peace and
security continues to be among the highest priorities
of the Organization. Peacekeeping operations are
now a complex and continuously evolving system,
developed to fulfil this fundamental aim. Argentina
has therefore contributed troops and police since 1958,
based on its commitment to developing such a system
of peacekeeping and working to strengthen it and to
make it more transparent and democratic in upholding
international law.
As we always note in our statements on this
topic, we believe that peacekeeping is a legitimate
and valid tool to promote and protect human rights
in those countries affected by conflict, in particular
by providing assistance to rebuild institutions and
strengthen democracy and the rule of law through
multidimensional missions with increasingly complex
and comprehensive mandates. Examples of this
include the peacekeeping operations whose Force
Commanders briefed us so informatively today: the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). The
presence of those Missions is crucial to guaranteeing
the protection of civilians in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Côte d’Ivoire and to promoting the
effective functioning of State institutions in Liberia. I
shall take only a brief moment to make some additional
comments and pose some questions so as to leave more
time for the briefers to respond.
The first point I would like to raise is the clear linkage
between the broadening mandates of peacekeeping
missions, referred to as robust or effective, and the
increasing number of security incidents. In that regard,
during the negotiations on the relevant resolutions, we
expressed our concern at the recent modifications in a
number of mandates of missions in Africa, in particular
the establishment in MONUSCO of an Intervention
Brigade authorized to carry out peace enforcement
activities. We know that the Secretariat has begun
to implement additional security mechanisms for
Mission personnel, as described at the recent meeting
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.

13-37409

S/PV.6987

Nevertheless, we would like to hear the impressions of
the MONUSCO Force Commander on this topic.
The second question I would like to pose to the
Force Commanders is related to the use of unarmed
aerial vehicles (UAVs), or drones, whose deployment
is already planned for MONUSCO and has been
requested for UNOCI. Argentina supports the use of
such technology as long as it is done in adherence to
the principles of the Charter and of peacekeeping, on
an exceptional and controlled basis, and only with the
purpose of gathering information. In that regard, have
some lessons already been learned from this phase of
deployment of MONUSCO? What potential is there to
extend the use of UAVs to other existing Missions?
We view as important the topic of inter-mission
cooperation, including in terms of the use of new
technologies, as long as savings made through such
cooperation do not detract from the capacity of a
cooperating mission to fulfil its mandate or guarantee
the security of its personnel. On that point, I would like
to hear from the Force Commanders if any lessons have
been learned with regard to the command and control
exercised by a Force Commander of over personnel
of another mission who join his or her peacekeeping
operation.
With regard to the challenges posed by
predeployment evaluation, it is our understanding that
the generalization of predeployment courses through
which the United Nations can certify and insist on
minimum standards guaranteeing a universal level of
training could be crucial for attaining better results on
the ground.
In conclusion, I would like to pose a specific question
to one of the Missions to which my country contributes
a large contingent and which is the only Mission in
the Latin American and Caribbean region: the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Bearing in mind that it is among the Missions that have a
large number of engineering companies, I would like to
ask the MINUSTAH Force Commander, either directly
or through Mr. Ladsous, how he would describe, from
his experience and the results obtained, the strengths
and weaknesses of the use of such companies and their
impact on the humanitarian assistance being provided
to the Haitian people. At the same time, I would like
to hear his views on the use for the same functions of
military engineering companies and civilian companies
contracted by the United Nations.

Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous
and the four Generals who briefed us this morning.
Togo, like the previous speakers, welcomes the holding
of this fourth consecutive interactive meeting, which
gives Council members the opportunity to receive
up-to-date operational information from the various
United Nations peacekeeping operations and on the
difficulties they face.
My delegation pays a well-deserved tribute to the
components of the peacekeeping missions, in particular
to the soldiers of peace who, through their courage and
at the price of their lives, work to keep, re-establish
and maintain international peace and security. We also
commend the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support for their ongoing
efforts to further operationalize these missions in the
context of the mandates that the Council has given
them.
Given the difficulties currently faced by the
various missions, my country believes that if they are
to accomplish their respective mandates with greater
effectiveness and to minimize negative performance,
peacekeepers must have military training that meets
international norms and standards, particularly those
of the United Nations. There is no doubt that this
imperative for quality requires a frank evaluation of the
level of training and education of the different troops,
which will require further pre-deployment training
when circumstances require it. Given budgetary
constraints, it is increasingly obvious that some
peacekeeping operations are encountering difficulties
in fully implementing their mandates because of their
limited resources.
In order to remedy this situation, even if only
slightly, Togo calls for strengthened cooperation
among missions. Such cooperation is crucial and has
the advantage of allowing us to optimize our use of
available resources. For example, when unexpected
events threaten to destabilize a country, or when
precursor signs of resurgent conflict arise in some
countries, this cooperation is an adapted and effective
response that will promptly strengthen, in manpower
and material, those missions that need it. This was
the case when the intercommunal crisis erupted in
Jonglei in December 2011 and January 2012, when
the United Nations Interim Security Force in Abyei
provided the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan with substantial and needed assistance,

13-3740913

S/PV.6987

particularly logistical assistance. Such cooperation was
also exhibited between the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, particularly during the post-electoral crisis
in Cote d’Ivoire. It is still ongoing, fortunately, in the
monitoring of the Ivorian-Liberian border where armed
rebel groups and mercenaries are at work.
We welcome the ongoing deployment of the
Intervention Brigade, mandated to combat armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.
We believe that, given the nature of its mandate, the
Intervention Brigade should have the effective military
matériel necessary to carry out its mandate. We
therefore once again welcome the acquisition by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Congo of drones, whose basic job will be to monitor
the movements of armed groups and to reveal them to
the Brigade. They will also monitor and locate internally
displaced persons in order to assist and protect them.
In conclusion I would like to ask a question. What
is the status of cooperation between UNOCI and the
defence and security forces of Côte d’Ivoire in fighting
organized groups that are sowing insecurity throughout
the country.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this interactive meeting with the
Force Commanders of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz, Major General Ngondi and
Major General Iqbal Asi. I also thank them for their
detailed and comprehensive briefings today.
In resolution 2086 (2013), adopted under Pakistan’s
presidency recently, the Council noted that peacekeeping
today ranges from traditional missions, chiefly
monitoring ceasefires, to complex multidimensional
operations tasked with peacebuilding and mitigating
the deep-rooted causes of conflict. If they are to deal
with this broad panoply of missions, it is essential that
Force Commanders have professional staff with the
required capacity and the necessary resources. Military
staff must also be given pre-deployment training that is
specific and adapted to their missions. Thanks to such
training, we are able to mitigate risks and to improve
the safety and security of Blue Helmets, and put them
in a better position to discharge their increasingly

14

complex mandates and to increase the security of those
they are entrusted with protecting.
In order to assess if pre-deployment training
responds to needs, we need in-theatre assessments, as
noted by Major General Ngondi in his presentation.
We also note the suggestion in his presentation that an
assessment team be established at the level of chief of
staff that could evaluate the training of Blue Helmets. In
that respect, we feel it important that such teams benefit
from the contribution of child protection advisers and
women’s protection advisers within peacekeeping
missions. We also feel that it would be important to
strengthen capacities at United Nations Headquarters,
and we welcome the proposals for establishing an
evaluation unit and a general inspectorate in this area.
With respect to the use of modern technologies,
particularly surveillance drones, as was very well
pointed out by General Dos Santos Cruz, it is important
to improve our understanding of the situation in
peacekeeping operations because such knowledge is an
important part of risk-mitigation and helps to improve
the security and safety of troops. This being the case,
we feel that it is important that United Nations missions
have recourse to such technology in order to have a
greater understanding of the situation, enabling them
to take the measures necessary with regard to security
and protection.
In our view, by combining modern technologies
for information collection, transmission and analysis
with modern technology related to the use of non-lethal
force, United Nations missions will be able to more
effectively implement their mandates to protect
civilians. In regard to the protection of civilians, I
have a question for Lieutenant General Dos Santos
Cruz. Are studies or experiments under way to make
modern communication equipment available to local
communities in high-rish areas in order to give those
communities an early-warning system in case of an
attack by armed groups? I am thinking particularly
about the situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
I would now like to move on to inter-mission
cooperation. Luxembourg is very much in favour of
stepping up such cooperation to provide for a better
management of resources. We feel that the optimal use
of peacekeeping resources, be it through an ongoing
regular exchange of information to take the regional
dimension of a conflict into account, or through joint

13-37409

S/PV.6987

temporary use of resources deployed in a given region, is
most appropriate. However, it is clear that inter-mission
cooperation cannot substitute for the provision of the
resources necessary in fulfilling a mission’s mandate.
Rather than reducing the cost of a mission, the sole
objective should be to increase its efficiency.
The example of UNMIL and UNOCI, as described
in detail by General Muhammad Iqbal Asi, shows that
inter-mission cooperation is useful, on a case-by-case
basis, in providing timely assistance, in terms of staff
and equipment, to missions that so require.
In that context, I have a specific question for
General Iqbal Asi with regard to cooperation between
UNOCI and UNMIL. The Panel of Experts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003), concerning Liberia, recently
recommended the establishment of an UNMIL border
control unit, aimed at strengthening cooperation with
UNOCI and based on a shared strategy between the
Governments of Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire on controlling
the border. I would ask the General if he considers that
recommendation appropriate, and whether it will be
implemented in the near future.
More generally, with regard to West Africa overall,
we welcome the efforts under way to strengthen
inter-mission cooperation, including in the context of the
establishment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
In conclusion, I would like to express the
heartfelt thanks of the Luxembourg delegation for the
commitment of all the Force Commanders of the various
United Nations missions, including the committed staff
who carry out crucial work to implement the Council’s
mandates, often in trying circumstances.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to
welcome the Force Commanders to this meeting of the
Council and to thank them for presenting their insights
on various aspects of peacekeeping. We underline
the importance of such interaction with the heads of
the military components of peacekeeping operations,
which provides an opportunity for Council members to
listen to their perspectives and exchange views on the
current challenges confronted by peacekeepers in the
field.
Matters related to the increased effectiveness of
peacekeeping, as the flagship activity of the United
Nations, and its conceptual and operational evolution,

including on the military side, constantly require novel
ideas. I would like to share some brief thoughts on
certain issues raised in the presentations.
To start with Liberia, we note that the process of
the gradual reconfiguration of the uniformed personnel
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), as
authorized by resolution 2066 (2012), is being carried
out against the backdrop of the country’s continuously
improving security situation. As the reconfiguration
envisages a significant increase in police personnel,
vis-à-vis a decrease in the military strength of the
Mission, the issues of predeployment training and the
subsequent in-mission assessment of formed police
units become more relevant. Meanwhile, it is essential
for the Government of Liberia to step up its efforts to
establish sustainable and effective security forces, with
a view to progressively assuming UNMIL’s security
functions.
As for Cote d’Ivoire, the case of inter-mission
cooperation between the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and UNMIL has demonstrated
that close coordination between missions operating in
geographic proximity, especially on issues transcending
the respective areas of deployment, is becoming more
imperative in achieving efficient and cost-effective
execution of the mandates. Increased cooperation
between the two missions is essential to support
the efforts of the Ivorian and Liberian authorities to
effectively address cross-border threats and challenges
and to stabilize the situation in the border areas between
the two countries.
Concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the comprehensive political process — under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region — is currently
being accompanied by the strengthened offensive
posture against illegal armed groups by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The
provision of unmanned aerial systems will significantly
increase the Mission’s surveillance capabilities,
including for the purpose of observing the movement
of armed groups, arms and related materiel, and will
help in obtaining tactical information, which is critical
to protecting civilians and ensuring the safety and
security of peacekeepers.
The deployment of unmanned aerial systems
to MONUSCO was agreed on a trial basis. In that

13-3740915

S/PV.6987

regard, we would be interested to hear the views of
the briefers on what kind of political, logistical and
operational challenges the use of that system — as part
of inter-mission cooperation — may pose.

doctrine. That being said, I would appreciate hearing
details from General Ngondi on the criteria to be
considered or used when assessing the deployment of
troops.

Finally, through the Force Commanders present at
this meeting, I wish to pay homage to all of the men
and women serving in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, for their enormous sacrifices in order
to advance global peace and security. Azerbaijan
strongly condemns the recent spate of attacks against
peacekeepers in some countries. We stress that there
is no justification for such attacks whatsoever, and that
the safety and security of all peacekeepers must be
respected, guaranteed and ensured by all and under all
circumstances.

On the point of inter-mission cooperation presented
by the Force Commander of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire, there is no doubt that such cooperation
plays a critical role in mitigating and preventing the
escalation of conflict, by timely intervention and the
use of available resources of neighbouring missions.
However, we must bear in mind that inter-mission
cooperation is just a temporary, short-term solution that
should not replace a permanent solution.

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I especially want to thank
Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous; Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz, Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Major
General Leonard Ngondi, Force Commander of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia; and Major General
Muhammad Asi, Force Commander of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire; for their very
informative briefings and their critical leadership at
Headquarters and in the field.
I think it is very helpful to continue to have
interactive discussions such as today’s on a regular
basis and to share lessons learned in order to better
prepare for the challenges ahead. I have only a few
comments and observations, as well as a few questions.
On the topic developed by the Force Commander
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, we support
the need for in-mission assessments of predeployment
training as being critical to efficiency.
Since its decision to join United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, the Rwandan Defence Forces
(RDF) have heavily invested in different training
opportunities, especially predeployment and postdeployment training. The RDF holds training courses
for contingent personnel prior to deployment, which
focuses on enhancing their mastery of force and
civilian protection peacekeeping policies and crosscutting negotiation and communication skills,
among others. Apart from generally recognized
training, predeployment training needs to encompass
mission-specific scenarios, while also taking into
account and respecting specific national military

16

Turning to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Council has authorized the deployment of
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), which were supposed
to be operational by July, on a trial basis. As it would
be the first use of that technology in peacekeeping
operations, the lessons learned in UAV efficiency, in
terms of implementing the Mission’s mandate, should
inform future decisions on the use of drones in United
Nations-mandated missions. Bearing that in mind, I
would ask Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz, from
his experience as MONUSCO Force Commander thus
far, how optimistic he is with regard to the intended
usefulness of the drones, given the dense jungle
topography of the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
In addition, what arrangement has he put in place to
ensure that the information provided by the UAVs is
properly handled for United Nations use, particularly
when we all know that the operators are non-United
Nations personnel.
Finally, there are various credible reports
confirming the collaboration of the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo with the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, a movement
that committed genocide in Rwanda and is subject
to United Nations sanctions. How does he see this
situation impacting his mission, especially when the
national army he is supporting is closely working with
a negative group that he is mandated to neutralize and
disarm?
I will end with a question for the panel as a whole.
Given that they are commanding United Nations troops
deployed in African countries, from their perspectives,
what do they think the Security Council has not done
or is not doing enough to end the cycle of conflicts

13-37409

S/PV.6987

and violence in Africa? Any particular advice to the
African members of the Council would help.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Force Commanders for their
briefings. The United States places great value on
the contribution that they and the men and women
under their commands make every day to peace and
stability in the countries where they serve. I thank
them for their frankness in presenting the challenges
and capacity gaps that can impede their ability to carry
out the mandates that we on the Security Council have
given them. Regular and open communication with
our military and police leaders is necessary to help us
match mandates to the realities on the ground.
We thank Major General Ngondi for his analysis of
the question of in-mission assessment of pre-deployment
training. There is currently no mechanism for assessing
how well prepared troops are once they have actually
deployed to the field. The United States supports
the proposal currently under consideration for the
appointment of a Director General whose office would,
among other things, assist troop-contributing countries
in reviewing their pre-deployment training regimes in
order to determine how the United Nations or donors
can provide better support to peacekeepers in the
field. We strongly agree that training can play a key
role in bolstering the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Developing effective training
requires the evaluation of results and transparent
conclusions that lead to change where necessary.
The United States is making every effort to
improve the standards for evaluation of our own
training assistance for both military and police. We
encourage other Member States to take similar steps to
foster performance improvements, and we ask that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) work
with troop-contributing countries and Member States
to provide training assistance so that together they can
revise their training when needs dictate.
We would appreciate the General’s thought on
what type of gaps in essential skills and capacities
he is seeing to help direct efforts to address these
challenges. In that regard, we welcome the United
Nations decision to proceed as quickly as possible to
develop an additional 10 manuals for skill sets needed
in peacekeeping. The United States is pleased to be able
to support this essential project.

We would also like to draw attention to the
recommendations of the Senior Advisory Group on
rates of reimbursements and related issues, which
were approved by the General Assembly last month.
Those recommendations included the establishment
of premiums for units that performed admirably under
conditions of elevated risk, premiums for enabling
capacities in high demand but short supply, and
incentives for units to deploy with and maintain the
capabilities required to perform their assigned tasks.
We welcome that outcome and believe that it provides
an opportunity to enhance the ability of missions to
achieve their mandates.
We thank Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz
for his remarks on leveraging advanced technology
in United Nations peacekeeping missions. The United
States supports the use of new technologies to help
improve mission security and facilitate mandated tasks,
such as the protection of civilians. We look forward to
learning from the experience of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s (MONUSCO) how these
technologies can best be incorporated by DPKO and the
Department of Field Support, where appropriate, and
whether MONUSCO has the personnel and equipment
necessary to rapidly assess the information from
unarmed, unmanned aerial systems and transmit it to
subordinate units in a timely fashion.
We thank Major General Iqbal Asi for his briefing
on how inter-mission cooperation and the sharing
of assets can effect missions’ crisis management.
The current fiscal crisis and the shortage of enabling
forces, such as helicopters and the proximity of several
peacekeeping missions in Africa, make inter-mission
cooperation more important than ever before. It is our
impression that the cooperation between the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations
Mission in Côte d’Ivoire has worked well on the whole.
We would welcome any other recommendations he
would have for Force Commanders in contingents in
other United Nations peacekeeping operations on best
practices for coordination. I think that a number of
other delegations have asked for a similar assessment.
Finally, this Council asks the Force Commanders
and their troops to operate often in dangerous
and difficult environments. I would ask all Force
Commanders to please share our sincere gratitude to
the servicemen and servicewomen at the missions who

13-3740917

S/PV.6987

are working day and night to bring peace and security
to vulnerable populations.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank UnderSecretary-General Hervé Ladsous and the three Force
Commanders for their briefings.
United Nations peacekeeping has evolved
throughout its history, overcoming new challenges that
have arisen from time to time. As resolution 2086 (2013)
epitomizes, a multidimensional approach is increasingly
important. There is also growing recognition of the need
for a more robust mandate. The Intervention Brigade in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali offer the most recent evidence of that
evolution. There are also cases like that of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force, where a
typical mission with a traditional mandate has to adapt
itself to a harshly changing environment.
The changing environment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations may raise challenges for
the Force Commanders on the ground. Against that
backdrop, my delegation salutes all heads of military
components here today and everyone under their
command for their professionalism, dedication and
courage. In order to ensure the efficient implementation
of peacekeeping mandates, the capabilities of missions
should be enhanced with strategic insight, utilizing
all available means, including troop enforcement, the
application of modern technology and inter-mission
cooperation.
I would like to comment on two points. First,
inter-mission cooperation is useful in its nature as a
short-term stopgap measure. Nonetheless, the transition
of troops between missions cannot be considered
lightly and should be dealt with very cautiously because
it requires the consent of the relevant parties, including
the troop-contributing countries. Even the successful
case of inter-mission cooperation between the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and United Nations
Mission in Liberia, which Major General Iqbal Asi
elaborated on today, did not include major troop
transitions, but mainly the movement of equipment
such as helicopters.
Secondly, with regard to modern technology, my
delegation supports its application to peacekeeping
as a matter of principle. We are well aware that new
undertakings always entail new questions. However,
we believe that the development of technology will

18

strengthen efficiency and reduce the cost of our future
activities, as it has in the past. It was in that vein that
we supported the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to enhance the operational mobility and surveillance
capability of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The adoption of new technologies for
peacekeeping is likely to bring about new tasks for
the Secretariat. We expect the Secretariat to exert
extra efforts in this regard, to cooperate with the
troop-contributing countries that have the ability and
willingness to provide technology. Also, the political
and legal implications for introducing technology need
to be fully and further analysed.
In terms of the presentation by General Dos Santos
Cruz on the adoption of advanced military technology in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I have a similar
question for the Force Commander of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. In places such as Darfur or
Jonglei, the technological improvement of the Mission’s
intelligence capability could greatly contribute to the
protection of troops and the implementation of their
mandate. The question I would appreciate answered is
whether a sufficient level of intelligence is available
for his decision-making. Does he find any specific
limitations on the Mission’s capabilities?
In conclusion, today’s briefing reminded us all that
the responsibility of the Security Council lies not only
in giving tasks to field missions, but also in ensuring
that they are provided with sufficient capabilities. May
we all be equal to the task.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the
three Force Commanders for their respective briefings.
United Nations peacekeeping operations, as an
important means for maintaining international peace
and consolidating collective security, have made
important contributions to resolving conflicts and
disputes and restoring and rebuilding peace. In the
process, they have gained the trust and support of
Member States. United Nations peacekeepers carry
out their tasks in difficult, complex and dangerous
conditions, overcome various difficulties to discharge
their mandate and have brought peace and hope to the
peoples of areas in conflict. They are the embodiment
of faithfulness, dedication and sacrifice. I would like
to pay tribute to the Force Commanders here today

13-37409

S/PV.6987

and, through them, to all United Nations peacekeeping
personnel.
The current international situation is undergoing
complex changes. New elements have emerged in
conflict situations. The threats and challenges to
international peace and security have become more
diverse. In order to adapt to changing needs, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have been the subject
of constant reforms and adjustments. At the same
time, against the backdrop of expanding operations
and growing complexity in mandates, the issues of
how to ensure that the mandates of peacekeeping
operations are more targeted and operational, enhance
the management of peacekeeping operations and ensure
that their mandates achieve the expected results have
become issues that we need to urgently address. In
response to the briefings we have just heard, I would
like to make the following four comments.
First, we must adhere to Dag Hammarskjöld’s three
principles for the smooth conduct of peacekeeping
operations. Deviation from or dilution of the basic
peacekeeping principles will jeopardize the presumed
objectivity and impartiality of peacekeeping operations
and may even create a situation where the United
Nations becomes a party to a conflict, hence hampering
international efforts to resolve it. Peacekeeping
operations, in the discharge of their mandate, should
fully respect the sovereignty of the host countries,
strengthen coordination with the parties concerned and
work to win the trust, understanding and support of
host countries.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations should create
favourable conditions for the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and work with and support the political
process. Only through political dialogue, resolving
differences through consultation and achieving
national reconciliation will it be possible to effectively
eliminate conflict. The success of peacekeeping
operations must rely on a clear political process and
a complete set of strategies on security, stability and
peacebuilding. Peacekeeping operations must strictly
abide by the Council’s mandate and play the role of
agent and mediator in the political process and process
of national reconciliation in the host country.
Thirdly, adequate resources are an important
element for the effective discharge of peacekeeping
operations’ mandates. The Department of Field Support
should continue to improve the level of logistics

services it provides to missions to enhance efficiency in
the disbursement and utilization of logistical resources
and to provide effective and timely support to missions.
We support the idea that countries with high technical
and equipment capacity should actively participate
in peacekeeping operations so as to make a useful
contribution to enhancing the overall capability and
equipment of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Fourthly, enhancing the level of management and
strengthening internal coordination are effective means
to enhance the efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
We support stronger communication and coordination
between United Nations Headquarters and missions,
on the one hand, and the various departments within
a mission, on the other, so as to ensure that there is
an effective system of command and control. Missions
may carry out inter-mission cooperation based on their
mandates and make rational use of resources and assets.
Attacks against peacekeeping operations and
personnel have caused grave loss to troop-contributing
countries and United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The United Nations should deal with this matter as
a matter of urgency and enhance measures for the
protection and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
China is a firm supporter and active participant
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Chinese
peacekeepers have made an important contribution to
maintaining international peace and security through
their own actions, from South Sudan to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and from the Middle East to
Cyprus. More 1,600 Chinese peacekeepers are deployed
in nine mission areas in the service to peace. China
is prepared to continue to support and participate in
United Nations peacekeeping operations and, together
with the international community, to promote the cause
of peacekeeping and make a greater contribution to
maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
country is pleased with this new opportunity to hold
a dialogue and interact with United Nations Force
Commanders from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia. This opportunity is
a continuation of a good practice, one that allows us to
move forward in our thinking on more effective and
better management of peacekeeping operations and
how to better use the resources available. We would like
to thank Mr. Ladsous and the three Force Commanders
for their respective briefings and for having shared with

13-3740919

S/PV.6987

us their thinking and their perspectives based on their
experience on the ground.

Mission in Liberia, as we were able to see during the
Security Council’s visit to West Africa.

Peacekeeping operations today represent, as my
colleagues have said, one of the most important and
valuable tools available for collective United Nations
action for peacekeeping and international security,
and they allow us to save millions of lives. In recent
years, multidimensional peacekeeping operations have
encountered increasing challenges. Faced with that fact,
it is clear that adaptation is necessary in order to ensure
that the capacity of peacekeeping operations is able to
respond to the increasingly complex tasks mandated
to them by the Council, and so that they can function
more effectively in the political, security and climatic
environments where they are called on to deploy.

Our belief in the growing usefulness of that approach
encouraged us during Morocco’s presidency of the
Council in December to organize a debate specifically
on the subject (see S/PV.6886). That debate enabled us
to highlight the potential of this type of cooperation
and identify the difficulties to be overcome. It also
emerged that this tool should not be seen as a lasting
solution to a number of the structural problems that
undermine the effectiveness of peacekeeping. It also
underlined the importance of supplying all the various
United Nations missions with the human, logistical and
technical means they need to carry out their respective
tasks adequately.

The format of meetings like today’s enables us to
better understand realities on the ground and to see the
point of view of those who are permanently in touch
with those realities and whose job it is to carry out
the mandates that we discuss and that are adopted by
the Council. It is important to have their perceptions
on how to make peacekeeping operations as effective
and efficient as possible. The three Force Commanders
and Mr. Ladsous raised three very pertinent points
today concerning training, new technologies and
inter-mission cooperation. My delegation would like to
comment specifically on those three points.

The subject of the use of new technology in
peacekeeping operations deserves greater reflection.
Yesterday, we heard Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Ameerah
Haq’s discussion (see S/PV.6985) of the new security
and logistical challenges facing the forthcoming United
Nations mission in Mali, owing to climatic conditions
that require innovative approaches and the use of
new technologies to ensure peacekeeping operations
do not deplete the water table. However, it was
explained that some technologies do not work, owing
to extreme temperatures requiring the use of more
basic communication methods. All of which shows
how important it is to continue reflecting on how to use
those new technologies, and to arrive at a consensus
on the subject at the level of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations in order to clarify every
aspect of their use.

First, the issue of training is extremely important
and a crucial factor in the successful conduct of every
mission. We believe it is helpful to draw on the expertise
of the major troop contributors, who have accumulated
considerable experience during their service in
multiple peacekeeping operations. In that context,
the effectiveness of cooperation between emerging
contributing countries and those that possess knowhow and expertise has been widely demonstrated. It is
time to make that practice routine.
Turning now to inter-mission cooperation, my
country has always supported this approach, with its
proven usefulness on the ground whether in a crisis or
when a new peacekeeping operation is being set up.
Inter-mission cooperation also has many advantages in
dealing with optimizing resources and filling logistical
gaps in crisis situations. Indeed, it has demonstrated
its effectiveness in the past few years, particularly
in the Mano River area, between the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations

20

The success of peacekeeping operations rests
on crucial interdependent factors such as realistic
mandates, triangular cooperation between the
Secretariat, the troop-contributing countries and
the executive department in planning both the
implementation of those mandates and genuine exit
strategies along with measures ensuring sustainable
development. Morocco stresses again the importance
of full respect for peacekeeping operations mandates
and the basic principles that govern them — that is, the
consent of the parties, the non-use of force except in
legitimate self-defence and impartiality.
Finally, Morocco is a traditional contributor to
United Nations peacekeeping operations in terms of
troops but also of training and humanitarian assistance.
We therefore remain committed to our peacekeeping

13-37409

S/PV.6987

and peacebuilding missions. In conclusion, I would
like to pay tribute once again to all the men and women
who have paid with their lives for their dedication to
the cause of peace, while calling on the United Nations
to continue to strengthen the measures that will ensure
greater security for its peacekeeping troops.
The President: I shall now make some remarks in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
Like my colleagues, I would like to thank the
three Force Commanders for their very informative
briefings this morning. We see this as one of the most
important sessions the Security Council has, since it
is critical that we hear directly from the field before
establishing and renewing mandates for peacekeeping
forces around the world. I might also add that with the
use of video technology, one of the advantages we see
in having video-teleconferencing (VTC) with Special
Representatives, as we do occasionally, is that they
sometimes enable the Force Commanders to be present
and sitting alongside them and can thus actually give
the Security Council direct advice. I hope that will
become normal practice when we have our briefings
and consultations via VTC.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
Lieutenant General Gaye and thank him for his sterling
leadership of the Office of Military Affairs and for his
sage advice to the Security Council over the past three
years. We wish him well in his new position in the field.
I would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to those engaged in what my Pakistani colleague rightly
called the noble cause of peacekeeping, and to recall
and acknowledge their many sacrifices in making our
world a safer place.
Turning to the briefings, I do have some questions
for the three Force Commanders. General Dos Santos
Cruz made a compelling case for the use of advanced
military technology in United Nations peacekeeping,
including unmanned aerial systems (UAS). I know a lot
of people were asking about the General’s experience
with it; my understanding is that the system is not yet
deployed, so it is obviously too early to respond as to
how effective it is, but I would like him to say something
about the preparations the Mission is making for the
arrival and deployment of the UAS, so that the system
can be used to best effect when it is eventually deployed
in a few months’ time.
to

I was also struck by the General’s reference
innovative disarmament, demobilization and

reintegration and reconciliation-and-reintegration
efforts such as using loudspeakers attached to
helicopters. I understand that that has been used to
some effect in the fight against the Lord’s Resistance
Army in the Central African Republic, and wondered
if that was a technique — not high-tech, by any means,
in fact rather old-tech, but nonetheless one that can
be quite effective in getting the messages out from
the United Nations peacekeeping missions — that the
General thinks might have a role to play.
I would like to thank Major General Ngondi very
much for his briefing, the focus of which was the
in-mission assessment of pre-deployment training, but
I wonder whether he thinks that it would be useful to
have a validation of that training before the deployment
and after the training, as it were. Obviously, as we say in
English, the proof of the pudding is in the eating, but it
would nonetheless be useful if there was some validation
of the preparatory training before peacekeepers were
actually put into the field.
Major General Iqbal Asi talked a good deal about
inter-mission cooperation being a crisis and contingency
tool, but I wonder whether in fact it could be used more
widely than that. Clearly there has been quite a lot of
support consolidation around Entebbe and Brindisi,
and so forth, in support of peacekeeping missions. But
I wonder, given that most missions already have joint
operations centres and joint mission analysis centres,
whether these can be used on a more regular basis to
share information, particularly in adjacent missions,
rather than waiting for the crises to hit.
In that respect, I would ask Mr. Ladsous if, with
respect to some of the constraints that General Iqbal
Asi referred to, in terms of inter-mission cooperation,
which we understand, as well as the legal and political
aspects, consultations, host Government consent and so
on, there is more than the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations can do to address some of those constraints.
Finally, I would pose a question to all four briefers,
building on the question of the UASes and recognizing
that they have not yet been deployed in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given that we have
the two Force Commanders in another theatre where
there is a lot of enthusiasm by the host Governments,
in Liberia and in Côte d’Ivoire, for the use of UASes
in that theatre, in theory, at least, do they see some
advantages in the deployment of UASes in that West

13-3740921

S/PV.6987

African theatre or, more generally, in peacekeeping
areas where the mission or the mandate is very broad,
the territory very widespread and resources, obviously,
constrained?
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous to decide if he wishes
to respond to any of the questions raised. I hope that he
will. He may wish to pass on to the Force Commanders
any questions that are more appropriate for them.
Mr. Ladsous: Mr. President, I wish, through you, to
thank the entire Council for a discussion that has been
very substantial and that certainly helps us all. Indeed,
many questions were asked of the three Generals and of
at least two other Force Commanders. Allow me at the
outset to make a general comment.
The meeting of the heads of military components
this year we have placed under the general theme of
what is a constant concern and theme of work for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and that is the
issue of performance: how to cultivate it and how to
enhance it. That is true in the field of training. As the
Council is aware, and some delegations have mentioned,
we have been working intensively on manuals for a
number of specialties, and more are on the way. I thank
those Member States that are helping us in doing that
work, but certainly those basic considerations — what
an infantry battalion should look like, what a field
hospital should look like — have to be complemented
by actual training, with such training ideally being
done before the deployment, but also on the ground.
Here I very much take the point that there is a need
for very specific training, for instance in the areas of
women’s issues and child-protection issues. That cannot
always be achieved before deployment. That is what we
are going to do mainly in Mali once the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) takes over from the African-led
international support mission for Mali (AFISMA).
All the main training focused on human rights issues,
women’s issues and children’s issues in Mali will be
handled on the ground; quality control, of course, has
to be constantly kept in mind.
We are working on — and this is curently being
debated in the Fifth Committee — the proposal for
the post of a director of evaluation of field uniformed
personnel. Once again I thank those delegations that

22

mentioned their support for that initiative, which I
hope will materialize and which will be an institution
attached to the Under-Secretary-General, working very
closely with all the Force Commanders to solve the
systemic issues that arise time and again.
Performance is also very much enhanced by
inter-mission cooperation. Within the limits we have all
agreed on, it cannot be a procedure used systematically
to circumvent the regular ceiling of staff, regular
funding or regular equipment. It is about addressing
surges, either surges that are well identified in advance,
such as election processes, or unexpected ones. Over the
recent period, three clusters among our operations have
appeared. One is in West Africa, where the cooperation
between our missions is exceptionally good, because it is
also anchored in cooperation between the Governments
concerned; I refer here to Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
There must be appropriate mechanisms and therefore
suppleness has to be introduced.
Yes, I can confirm that this same process that I am
seeing in West Africa is being used to the benefit of
MINUSMA in Mali in terms of staff and equipment. I
think that this is also an opportunity to thank the Force
Commanders for their willingness and understanding
and for their actual deliberate participation in making
it work.
The second cluster is focused mainly on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan, and there it is mainly about equipment and
helicopters — attack helicopters and utility helicopters.
These, as the Council is aware, are a very scarce
commodity, and we are led regularly to exchange
rotary-wing machines among the four main missions
concerned.
The third, and not least, geographical area is that
of the Middle East missions where, especially since last
year, when we deployed the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, there has been
absolutely exemplary cooperation among the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force and the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization, and, let us not forget,
with the support of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus, which is more often than not a backup
to those three missions. I think that there is much to be
said, but in terms of personnel and equipment, it works
in a rather exemplary way.

13-37409

S/PV.6987

Let me finish by saying a word about the new
technologies, first about the unmanned aerial vehicles
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are in
the middle of the procurement process, which, as the
Council is aware, is not a simple process, but it is
very much under way. It is my hope that before long,
probably not in July, though, those unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) will be flying in the skies above the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They will be doing
what they are intended to do, which is three things.
First, give the best information possible to the
Force Commander.
Secondly, they will give better protection to our
people on the ground and, let us not forget, to the
civilian populations, including the camps for internally
displaced persons that the General mentioned. I think
that is a major tool for enhancing the safety and security
of all those concerned.
Thirdly, but not least, they will serve to deter the
ruffians or miscreants, or whatever one might call them,
who will know that there is an eye in the sky watching
everything they are doing, with our Force Commander
and his staff being fully aware of what is happening.
That also serves a great purpose; we do know that some
of the armed groups in a particular region of the Kivus
are quite concerned that this is going to happen, and it
does, I think, fit well in the picture.
Concerning other technologies, I would perhaps
hesitate to use the term “advanced technology”, because
mainly it is state of the art. UAVs are around in so many
sectors and so many professions, and many of the items
of equipment that Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz
mentioned are indeed readily available in thousands of
models. So it is about in fact bringing United Nations
peacekeeping into the twenty-first century.
I think it is a very welcome initiative that Pakistan,
as Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, after having already engineered resolution
2086 (2013) earlier this year, which has served the
Council well, will convene this meeting some time in
July. I think it will be a very useful discussion because
we simply need, again in the name of performance, to
be able to use what is readily available to do the job
within the parameters that have been expressed by a
number of delegations.
I have one final remark to make with regard to
unmanned aerial vehicles in other missions. Of course,

I will want to be able to draw some initial lessons from
the first few months of using those machines in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but clearly there is
a demand in several other missions and I think there is
a need. We shall do that in an appropriate way in the
sense that we will first want to learn our lessons and
then see how we can best implement it elsewhere.
The President: I now give the floor to Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz.
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz: I have
many questions which basically concern the Force
Intervention Brigade and unmanned aerial vehicles.
The first training is fundamental, and during the
training we may have much more basic technology
because, for instance — and I will mention some
details — with regard to night vision, it is very difficult
to find some rebel groups or gangs with the equipment
we have. If we have the new technology, we will have
more night combat and that is much better for us. It is a
great advantage.
There is a variety of technology, from basic to high
tech. We need to know how to use it. At this moment, we
are organizing our structure to receive the equipment.
In New York, they are working on procurement and
the final contract. I need to find specialized people to
use the system in the best way. It is not complicated.
Sometimes from Headquarters it seems very complex,
but it is not. It is simple. I am sure that we are going
to have good results in favour of our mandates. We
are going to protect more civilians and better protect
our people, and we are going to have much more
information, not only for us, but for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole. It will be very useful for
everyone.
With regard to the Force Intervention Brigade,
I came to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
three weeks — less than one month — ago and it is
my personal opinion that the mandate of 2098 (2013)
is something new. It is the first time a more open
and stronger position has been taken with a Force
Intervention Brigade. That has generated much
speculations and many interpretations. I do not see
unanimous understanding about it. But, with regard to
the situation at this moment with the Force Intervention
Brigade, in Sake we have one battalion from Tanzania,
one battalion from South Africa that just arrived last
week, one special force company from Tanzania as

13-3740923

S/PV.6987

well, and we are waiting for the Malawians. We do not
have exact information at the moment, but we hope they
will be in place in late July.
The problem with the Force Intervention Brigade
is that it entails greater expectations, here and on the
ground. On the ground, the common citizen thinks
that we are going to solve all the problems, even public
security, but that is not true because one brigade will
not solve that problem. We need to protect civilians to
accomplish our mission with the 20,000 we have on the
ground.
With regard to the question concerning the rules
of engagement, in that environment it is not so easy to
have a clear target because we have more than 50 armed
groups. At this moment, we have only one in uniform
and in a clear position, but we have some 56 groups in
civilian dress within the population.
With regard to the rules of engagement, we need
to understand that peacekeeping operations follow the
same principles. Even with the new mandate, the Force
Intervention Brigade and more freedom to operate, we
are operating under the same principles. The use of
force follows the same rules and the same principles.
We do not have many ways to justify the use of force.
Therefore, it is not a problem to employ the Intervention
Brigade because all the troops, even the Intervention
Brigade, need to follow the same principles and we
have very clear guidelines to justify the use of force.
What may be of concern is artillery. Artillery is
something new because normally we are not in an
open field; rather we operate in very heavily populated
areas. But we have the means to employ artillery. We
have smoke grenades. We have ways to illuminate the
battle field. We need to be very careful with explosive
grenades. I have the staff and we follow the rules.
I sometimes see some sectors very concerned about
the protection of civilians. The protection of civilians
is the main task for everybody, even for us. The main
conditionality in our plans is the protection of civilians.
With regard to the Intervention Brigade, it is not a
problem. We have the rules of engagement, we are very
clear and it is not a problem.
There was one more question concerning how
the Security Council can obtain more up-to-date
information from the field. If we have more technology,
certainly the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
has the structure and will provide all the information

24

because we are connected in real time. In that regard,
it is not a problem. We are available in the missions for
video-teleconferences and to respond to questions, and
we do that daily for our commanders in the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations.
I would like to make one more point with regard to
the reference to the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda and the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC). The FARDC is the
national armed force. Everybody knows that we have a
complex situation. It is not a national problem. It is more
regional and has regional consequences because the
groups operate very close to the border and sometimes
interfere throughout the region. But, with regard to that
question, we have four mechanisms in place now. We
have the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the Southern African Development Community,
the African Union and the Peace and Security Council
framework. With the guarantors, the Secretary-General
and all of the countries around the lakes, we have very
good prospects for being able to deal with any problem.
From the military point of view, the protection of
civilians is our primary concern, and we treat all threats
against the population equally.
The President: I now give the floor to Major
General Ngondi.
Major General Ngondi: I wish to say how
humbled I am and thankful for all the kind comments
and gratitude expressed to our troops, which I promise
I will pass on.
I addressed the need for in-mission assessment of
pre-deployment training conducted and administered
by troop-contributing countries. To make my point
clear, the gap that exists in force headquarters — and not
necessarily mine alone, but all force headquarters — is
in the ability of the Commander to understand or know
the standard of operational readiness of the troops
because he or she does not have the capacity to check
that standard.
The performance of the troops basically involves
three areas: the ability to conduct essential mission
tasks which are well covered and documented, the
staff functions, and the sustenance of the contingents.
If a Force Commander is in a position to know that
all of those areas are going well, then he or she can
be confident when it comes to detailing the troops to
undertake various tasks.

13-37409

S/PV.6987

With regard to the question of whether such
evaluation should be carried out even before troops
deploy, I would say yes. It would be even better if,
before the troops deployed to the mission area, their
training could be validated to establish, in particular
for the Force Commander, that they are ready for
operations. However, I addressed this topic only within
my area of responsibility.
With regard to the issue of which criteria should
be used, let me say that as of today there are manuals
and documents, and more continue to be produced;
they are shared between the United Nations and troopcontributing countries, including guides on what
pre-deployment training activities should be provided.
Those same activities are to be applied in the field.
Where new trends and challenges emerge, the new
component I have called an “evolution team” will be
on hand to analyse what is going on and formulate
appropriate training plans and directives to ensure
that troops received appropriate training within the
mission to deal with an emerging situation. We cannot
wait for them to go back to their countries to be trained
there. There should be an opportunity to train troops
to address emerging issues; otherwise such emerging
issues could throw the mission off completely.
I also wanted to respond to the question regarding
what the United Nations can do to end the cycle of
violence. I do not know who should be responsible, but
my own view is that, in my own experience, violent
conflict is the result of exclusion within a country.
Therefore, if it is possible to focus on the need to create
inclusive political and economic institutions within the
country, where everyone feels a sense of ownership and
enjoys the fruits of the country, then perhaps we will
see the end of such cycles of violence. But as long as
extractive and non-inclusive institutions exist within a
country, it is just a matter of time until grievances will
grow into violence. That is my opinion.
The President: I now give the floor to Major
General Iqbal Asi.
Major General Iqbal Asi: At the outset, I wish
to thank all of representatives for their very kind
remarks and expressions of support for troops in the
field. Questions were asked with regard to three areas,
including inter-mission cooperation, my subject.
Secondly, there was one question regarding cooperation
between United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) and the Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire?

And thirdly, I will make a short comment on training
based on my experience in the field. I will handle the
questions in reverse order.
A joint analysis centre, covering two or more
missions, is very much a possibility and, in fact,
desirable. But to achieve that, we must first agree
that there has to be a regional approach to conflict
management by the United Nations, a common threat
perception and a common mechanism for initiating
responses. These things have to be agreed upon first.
There could be no better examples than those provided
by the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. The three Missions are
so contiguous that resources can be placed centrally
and utilized in all of the Missions. We have to work at
that. In the light of the continuing implications of the
current financial crunch, we should seriously consider
such options. They are bound to be useful.
The representative of the Republic of Korea
mentioned that troop transfers should be dealt with
carefully. I could not agree with him more, but I
have also spoken about status-of-forces agreements,
status-of-mission agreements and memorandums of
understanding. We need to formalize this practice for
proper sanction. Without that, such transfers will not
be possible.
The representative mentioned that there was no
movement of troops between UNOCI and UNMIL. I
would just like to make the clarification that troops
have moved twice — three companies in 2010 and
one company in 2011, which was significant. We have
definitely utilized helicopters more than once for
security and reconnaissance sorties, which was useful.
The representative of the United States spoke about
inter-mission cooperation viability. There is no doubt
that such cooperation is an extremely viable option.
The only issue is the need to sort out the approach to
conflict resolution taken by the United Nations.
I would also like to deal with the training question
that was raised. Regarding training gaps among troops
working in the field, my opinion is that such gaps will
continue to exist, and we will not be able to remove
them on a permanent basis. That is not possible. The
military contingents come from very different national
backgrounds. There are very wide gaps in their training

13-3740925

S/PV.6987

standards. We cannot do much about that, although we
must try to reduce these gaps as far as possible.
However, it is my personal observation that the
collective attitude of the contingent and the ability of
the battalion commander and the officers to inspire
performance make all the difference on the ground. If
that can be done — if somehow or other the national
authorities and the local commanders on the ground
can make that much difference — I am sure that troops’
performance in the field will improve.
In response to the representative of Rwanda,
inter-mission cooperation as a short-term solution
cannot replace a permanent solution. I agree that there
is absolutely no doubt about that, but a permanent
solution needs resources. We actually talk in the
context of a lack of resources. A lack of resources can
be dealt with only by multiplying resources through the
use of those available in other missions. That is how
one can take care of the shortage of resources that we
are experiencing in the field in one form or another.
The representative of Azerbaijan spoke about
particular logical and administrative problems in
inter-mission cooperation. There is no doubt about it.
These problems are there, but we have the mechanisms
of status-of-forces agreements, status-of-mission
agreements and memorandums of understanding, of
which I have already spoken. We can reduce or even
eliminate these problems through this legal framework.
The representative of Luxembourg asked about the
creation of border-control units. There is no doubt that
they can be very useful, but they have to be subordinated
to the inter-mission cooperation framework. We have
to agree that this framework is acceptable to all of us
in all missions around the globe before we can think
of establishing border-control units, although this
too will not be without its challenges. Who controls
and commands the battalion? Where is the battalion
deployed? What are the terms of reference of operation
of this battalion across different missions? All that will
have to be sorted out.
I now come to some of the more challenging
questions. The French and Australian representatives
had questions regarding inter-mission cooperation
within the context of Mali. I remember that when the
crisis in Mali started, I was in the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). We actually
started working the logistics support part ourselves,
without any clear direction from the Department of

26

Peacekeeping Operations, because we thought that a
mission in Mali would certainly require some initial
support from UNOCI to help it settle in, because there
was such natural logistical support available from Côte
d’Ivoire. We have broad infrastructure; we just brought
it to Bamako and there was no problem.
That support is there; it is very possible. There
is the use of helicopters. I have learned here that the
MI-24s are being transferred to UNOCI. That is very
much the central point of the three missions in Côte
d’Ivoire, Mali and Liberia. We may have to work out
some of the logistical aspects of refuelling in-between,
but otherwise operationally there should be no problem.
I think this should be pursued.
As to a central quick reaction force, there is force
available that is placed centrally, maybe somewhere
in northern Côte d’Ivoire. This force is available to
react anywhere. Again, some of the teething aspects
will have to be sorted out in the memorandums of
understanding, the status-of-forces agreements or the
status-of-mission agreements in order to ensure that it
works out smoothly. The use of technology, again, is
one of those areas of cooperation that I believe to be
feasible.
Finally, I come to the most challenging question,
which came from the representative of Pakistan. What
are the challenges in inter-mission cooperation? I covered
that particular issue in my presentation. There were
three things that I spoke about in terms of challenges:
legal and administrative challenges, restrictive mission
mandates, and the non-availability of standard means.
The last two are important, but the most difficult
challenge is the legal, political and administrative part.
What number of troops is acceptable to a particular
country? What types of weapon are acceptable to a
particular troop-contributing country? Is a country
politically prepared to move into the mission area or
not? Is it acceptable to that country or not? Maybe they
are neighbours; maybe in a regional context they are not
ready to operate in a certain country. As to contingentowned equipment, the United Nations wants a certain
standard and a certain type of weapon, whether that
country has it or not. What are the capabilities? Some
of these things will have to be sorted out. This is a real
challenge.
But I should like to digress a little bit here. There is
one more very important challenge to which I alluded
earlier. That is regionalizing our approach to conflict

13-37409

S/PV.6987

resolution. I was talking with my colleague, the Force
Commander of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
We are neighbours. Day in and day out, we are sorting out
some of our problems in Sector West along the border.
He is on the other side and I am on mine. Although we
talk regularly to each other on the telephone and meet,
and I always thought our understanding of some of our
issues was really common and we had no problem, but
having talked with him here, I realize how differently
he thinks of his own problems than I do of mine.
A mission has a certain identity, and one develops
sympathy with that identity. One develops sympathy
with the local authorities. They have their own
respective points of view on different issues. Until
such time that we regionalize this entire concept, bring
people together and discuss these things jointly, we will
not be able to develop a commonality of views on this.
That is important, and although I did not cover it in my
statement, I think it is the most important challenge.
The last question was from the representative of
Togo, concerning cooperation between UNOCI and the
Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI). I assure
the representative of Togo that such cooperation is
wide-ranging. It is in the field of operations, training,
logistics, and security operations. I have 29 different
bases that I occupy throughout all of Côte d’Ivoire.
From those bases, I initiate patrolling all over the
country. FRCI has about eight major bases that I
know of. We complement one another. Wherever it is
not possible for them to dominate the area, my troops
dominate that area. This is actually what I would call
complementarity in operations to dominate the area.
There is joint patrolling. Whenever there is a
problem, we run to assist them, even in terms of
information-sharing. We conduct training on a regular
basis. My force has conducted more than one session. In
fact, the Mission on its own is also conducting training
for FRCI troops. Our logistics support is phenomenal.
We have provided transport on more than one occasion
since I took over responsibility for the force. We have
even allowed commanders to use helicopters.
As I mentioned in my statement, we have provided
security in elections to different voting centres and
regional offices throughout the country. My entire
force was deployed as recently as April. I am sure the
Council received numerous reports on that. It was a very
successful operation. We provide security to strategic
sites. By the end of last year, the spoilers were attacking

strategic sites after the FRCI found it very difficult to
defend some of those sites, which were very important
to them. So we moved in and provided security to 11
sites. We are continuously providing security there to
VIPs.
For my last point, we are starting a partnership
project with the FRCI. I have a lot to say on this, but
I am constrained by time. It is a major project, and we
look forward to enhancing the capacity of the FRCI in
a big way if the project gets through somehow or the
other.
The President: In order to wrap up the meeting,
I now give the floor to General Gaye, in case any
questions went to other Force Commanders or to the
Office of Military Affairs.
Major General Gaye (spoke in French): There
were in fact two questions addressed to other Force
Commanders.
The first had to do with the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. The concept of operations
for the Mission consists of increasing the relative
size of the force by mobilizing reserve battalions.
That mobility must be guided by an awareness of the
situation. Situational awareness is therefore crucial to
the Mission. Following the crisis in December 2011,
it was the observations made from helicopters that
made it possible to alert Government authorities that
confrontations among the various communities were
about to take place in Jonglei. It was our action — the
very swift response by the Force Commander on the
ground to shift some troops — that made it possible
to keep the violence, which unfortunately nevertheless
took place, to a minimum. The Mission in South Sudan
is an emblematic case of where good knowledge of the
situation using modern technology makes it possible to
make maximum use of reserves, as well as to react to
deploy battalions.
The second question, concering the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), had to
do with the strengths and weaknesses of the support
we provide to humanitarian actors. Mandates usually
give a force responsibility for ensuring the security of
humanitarian actors and United Nations personnel. It is
up to the various Deputy Special Representatives of the
missions to coordinate the efforts of all humanitarian
actors and to ensure that they support the force. In
the specific instance of MINUSTAH, it was possible,
following the earthquake, to significantly boost an

13-3740927

S/PV.6987

engineering company. MINUSTAH is genuninely a very
interesting laboratory of what a military engineering
company can do in a post-conflict country. For all that
that company was able to accomplish, however, we
must nevertheless admit that, for several reasons, we
are still unsatisfied.
First, to be of most use, an engineering company
must be deployed on the basis of planning. Engineering
companies do not work on the basis of a couple of
days; they prefer to work on a long-term basis and by
deploying their its assets. That is why MINUSTAH
has established a quaraterly meeting to deal with the
planning and coordination of engineering unites. It
was the Department of Peacekeeping Operations that
encouraged the Mission to do so, and they did so quite
well.
We are also unsatisfied because, even with all
that planning, the use of engineering units entails
significant financial implications. Having the ability to
build a road out of asphalt nevertheless requires that
you crush the stone and so forth. At a time of financial
constraints, we certainly do not have an answer to that
problem.
Nevertheless, the issue of engineering units is one
that clearly illustrates the link between a mission and

28

all the humanitarian actors involved in benefitting the
population.
With regard to the regional aspect, on which
General Iqbal Asi place great emphasis, I would like
to confirm that that is indeed an aspect that touches
on many of the Council’s mandates. In particular with
regard to the Lord’s Resistance Army, we have asked
the missions to cooperate. That has led to a trend of
regular quarterly meetings among the forces. In some
regions that works well, while it functions less so
owing to the situation. With regard to Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia, as the Council is aware, there is a meeting
between the two countries and the two missions. That
four-way meeting illustrates the fact that there is a
trend to address the refugee issue on a regional basis. I
am sure that Mr. Koenders, who is at the centre of such
efforts, will lead the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali in the same
direction very soon.
The President: I thank General Gaye for his
answers. I would also like to thank the other Force
Commanders for being present and for contributing to
today’s discussion, which I think was extremely useful
for all Council members.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

13-37409
