General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

18

7. In the planning and implementation of social and economic devel­
opment activities, due account shall be taken of the fact that the conser­
vation of nature is an integral part of those activities.
8. In formulating long-term plans for economic development, popu­
lation growth and the improvement of standards of living, due account
shall be taken of the long-term capacity of natural systems to ensure the
subsistence and settlement of the populations concerned, recognizing that
this capacity may be enhanced through science and technology.
9. The altocation of areas of the earth to various uses shall be planned
and due account shall be taken of the physical constraints, the biological
productivity and diversity and the natural beauty of the areas concerned.
10. • Natural resources shall not be wasted, but used with a restraint
appropriate to the principles set forth in the present Charter, in accordance
with the following rules:
(a) Living resources shall not be utilized in excess of their natural
capacity for regeneration;
(b) The productivity of soils shall be maintained or enhanced through
measures which safeguard their long-term fertility and the process of or­
ganic decomposition, and prevent erosion and all other forms of degradation;
(c) Resources, including water, which are not consumed as they are
used shall be reused or recycled;
(d) Non-renewable resources which are consumed as they are used
shall be exploited with restraint, taking into account their abundance, the
rational possibilities of converting them for consumption, and the com­
patibility of their exploitation with the functioning of natural systems.
11. Activities which might have an impact on nature shall be con­
trolled, and the best available technologies that minimize significant risks
to nature or other adverse effects shall be used; in particular:
(a) Activities which are likely to cause irreversible damage to nature
shall be avoided;
(b) Activities which are likely to pose a significant risk to nature shall
be preceded by an exhaustive examination; their proponents shall dem­
onstrate that expected benefits outweigh potential damage to nature, and
where potential adverse effects are not fully understood, the activities
should not proceed;
(c) Activities which may disturb nature shall be preceded by assessment
of their consequences, and environmental impact studies of development
projects shall be conducted sufficiently in advance, and if they are to be
undertaken, such activities shall be planned and carried out so as to min­
imize potential adverse effects;
(d) Agriculture, grazing, forestry and fisheries practices shall be adapted
to the natural characteristics and constraints of given areas;
(e) Areas degraded by human activities shall be rehabilitated for pur­
poses in accord with their natural potential and compatible with the well­
being of affected populations.
12. Discharge of pollutants into natural systems shall be avoided and:
(a) Where this is not feasible, such pollutants shall be treated at the
source, using the best practicable means available;
(b) Special precautions shall be taken to prevent discharge of radio­
active or toxic wastes.
13. Measures intended to prevent, control or limit natural disasters.
infestations and diseases shall be specifically directed to the causes of these
scourges and shall avoid adverse side-effects on nature.
Ill.

IMPCEMENTATION

14. The principles set forth in the present Charter shall be reflected in
the law and practice of each State, as well as at the international level.
15. Knowledge of nature shall be broadly disseminated by all possible
means, particularly by ecological education as an integral part of general
education.
16. All planning shall include, among its essential elements, the for­
mulation of strategies for the conservation of nature, the establishment of
inventories of ecosystems and assessments of the effects on nature of
proposed policies and activities; all of these elements shall be disclosed
to the public by appropriate means in time to permit effective consultation
and participation.
17. Funds, programmes and administrative structures necessary to
achieve the objective of the conservation of nature shall be provided.
18. Constant efforts shall be made to increase knowledge of nature by
scientific research and to disseminate such knowledge unimpeded by re­
strictions of any kind.

19. The status of natural processes, ecosystems and species shall be
closely monitored to enable early detection of degradation or threat, ensure
timely intervention and facilitate the evaluation of conservation policies
and methods.
20. Military activities damaging lo nature shall be avoided.
21. States and, to the extent they are able, other public authorities,
international organizations, individuals, groups and corporations shall:
(a) Co-operate in the task of conserving nature through common ac­
tivities and other relevant actions, including information exchange and
consultations;
(b) Establish standards for products and manufacturing processes that
may have adverse effects on nature, as well as agreed methodologies for
assessing these effects;
(c) Implement the applicable international legal provisions for the con­
servation of nature and the protection of the environment;
(d) Ensure that activities within their jurisdictions or control do not
cause damage to the natural systems located within other States or in the
areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction;
(e) Safeguard and conserve nature in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
22. Taking fully into account the sovereignty of States over their nat­
ural resources, each State shall give effect to the provisions of the present
Charter through its competent organs and in co-operation with other States.
23. All persons, in accordance with their national legislation, shall
have the opportunity to participate, individually or with others, in the
formulation of decisions of direct concern to their environment, and shall
have access to means of redress when their environment has suffered
damage or degradation.
24. Each person has a duty to act in accordance with the provisions
of the present Charter; acting individually. in association with others or
through participation in the political process, each person shall strive to
ensure that the objectives and requirements of the present Charter are met.

37/8. Co-operation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/38 of 18 November 1981,
Having heard the statements of the Secretary-General of

the United Nations 17 and the Secretary-General of the Asian­
African Legal Consultative Committee 18 on further strength­
ening and widening the scope of the co-operation between
the United Nations and the Committee,
1. Notes with deep satisfaction the ongoing close and
effective co-operation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee in the field of
progressive development and codification of international
law and other areas of common interest;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the state of the
co-operation between the United Nations and the Asian­
African Legal Consultative Committee;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Co-operation between
the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consulta­
tive Committee''.
49th plenary meeting
29 October 1982

37/9. Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) 19
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands

(Malvinas),

17
Official Records ,,J the General Assembly, Thirty-.,eventh Sessio11.
Plenary Meetings, 49th meeting, paras. 2-7.
'" Ibid., paras. 9-17.
19
See also sect. I, footnote 10, and sect. X.B.6, decision 37/404.
