UNITED NATIONS

SECU
OFFICIAL

RECO

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

2344’”

MEETING:

1 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2344)

. . . . ,..,...,.......,,...,....I.......

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1

. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14917) . . . , . . , , . . * , ), . . . . . , . . , . . , . , . . , . *. , . . , . . . , . , , , . . . , . . . . . * .

1

S/PV .2344

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srlppletnc~nts of the C@kial R~cwds of thcj Security Corlncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisiwls
c!f the Security CoLrncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2344th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
1 Pwsident:

Mr. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire).

Pwscnf:
The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional
I.

/ 2.

Adoption

agenda (SlAgendal2344)

1 Aprii 1982, at 3.30 p.m.
meetings

on this item [233&h, 2338th and 2340th
I invite the representative of Israel to take
a place at the Council table. I also invile the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives
of Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic, India, Iran, Morocco, Pakistan, Senegal,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

meetings],

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14917)

Expression

of thanks to the retiring

President

I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jbrn Fren~‘h):
Since this is the first meeting of the Council in April,
I should like to begin by paying a tribute, on behalf
Council, to Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
representative of the United States of America, for ehe
great diplomatic
skill, the wisdom and the patience
with which she guided the work of the Council last
month and which have certainly won our admiration.
of the Security

2. For my part, I should like to say that it is with
feelings of deep humility, in view of the magnitude of
the problems
assailing the international
community
and the United Nations, and the scope of the various
threats to international
peace and security, that
I assume the presidency of the Council for the month
of April. I count on the co-operation of all members
of the Council for the successful conclusion of our
work.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpwttrtion from Fwnrh):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Bangladesh, Cuba, Iraq, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Viet Nam, Yemen and Yugoslaviain which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14917)

‘3. The PRESIDENT
(inlopretatiorz from Fresh):
In accordance with decisions taken at the previous

5. The PRESIDENT
(int~~t.prPtcrtion firm Fso7ch):
Members of the Council have before them documents
S/14938 and S/14939, which contain the text of two
letters dated 31 March from the representative of
Israel to the President of the Council.
6. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): As the first speaker in
a formal meeting of the Council to be held this month,
I have great pleasure in extending to our President

and colleague, Mr, Kamanda wa Kamanda, my most
sincere congratulations.
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda
has acted as chairman of the non-aligned caucus, and
I know what an outstanding job he has done in his
meticulous and incisive stewardship of the discussions
of that group. I wish him every success.

hands, the authority, the green light, the jurisdiction
which has been accorded us from the Government
of Israel. Therefore we are duly warning you that if
you do not heed our threat, these will be the steps
that we intend to take:
L. 1. You should refrain from preventing the
religious Jews who wish to do so from saying their
prayers in the Aqsa Mosque. Otherwise the consequences will be brutal: the blowing up of your
Aqsa totally and completely, as well as the Dome
of the Rock and all the surrounding area, ‘comprising schools, seminaries and so on,’ at a moment
when the maximum number of Arab civilian citizens
are present.

7. I wish to take this opportunity
to express our
appreciation to the President for the month of March
for the exemplary manner in which she conducted the
Council’s deliberations on its heavy workload.
8. I beg the indulgence of the members and nonmembers of the Council whose names are on the list of
speakers for this afternoon’s meeting for having asked
to make the first statement of the meeting. I feel that
the matter is so urgent that I must speak at the outset.

“2.
We warn you not to express indignation
against the Village Leagues in Israel and the West
Bank.

9. In today’s edition of The Nelv York Times there is
what seems to be a very innocuous piece of news.
The article in question says that: “Rabbi Kahane flew
to New York on Tuesday ‘to do something that can’t
be discussed right now’ “. His assistant, a leader of his
group, said: ” ‘But once they happen, you’ll know
about them’ “,

“3. We warn you not to encourage any action
against us or against the State of Israel by the Committee for National Guidance”which they call a terrorist organization.

10. Today we received a memorandum
in which
Zionist terrorist organizations which call themselves
“Trustees of the Temple Mount”
and Rabbi Meir
Kahane’s group issued a warning to the Director of the
Islamic Foundation
and the Director-General
of
Religious Instruction
and Guidance in the City of
Jerusalem. They threaten to blow up the AI-Aqsa
Mosque, the Dome of the Rock and the surrounding
area, with the attendant substantial number of Arab
dead and wounded.

“In case you fail to heed this, you will expose
yourselves to serious consequences-from
which
you can spare yourselves-including
the blowing
up of the Aqsa Mosque. We have given you our
last warning.”
It is signed by the Trustees of the Temple
the Kahane Group and so on.

Mount,

14. I need hardly state that that would be one of the
most heinous crimes in history; it would be an act of
aggression against humanity’s
legacies, holy places,
and a challenge to the entire international community,
which has adopted resolutions on this very question.

11. Council members might think that this is just
another one of those threats emanating from terrorist
organizations, but we know full well how blurred is the
line between so-called unofficial terrorist organizations and the Government.

15. I suppose that every mission in this city has
received
threatening
letters-heaven
knows how
many. But we know that in the occupied territories a
large number of the terrorist acts against the civilian
population are carried out by so-called civilian settlers
who go into villages and towns every night and fire into
the air or at the houses of dwellers.

12. What adds to our very, very great apprehension is that this is not the first time an attempt-not
merely a threat-has
been made to blow up the AIAqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock on a Friday,
when literally 80,000 to 100,000 civilians are saying
their prayers in the holy sanctuary. The earlier bomb
was discovered a mere two minutes before it was
detonated. It is just sheer luck that the massacre of
tens of thousands-let
alone the destruction of one
of the most magnificent,
beautiful and holy places
that are to be found anywhere in the world-was
averted.

16. We are certain that the destruction of the AIAqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock was a mere
two minutes away. The bomb was discovered by a
boy in the Old City of Jerusalem.

13. With the Council’s permission, I shall read out
the following text of the threats addressed to the
Director of the Islamic Foundation and the DirectorGeneral of Religious Instruction and Guidance:

17. I hope that the President, on behalf of the Council, will issue a statement warning that the international
community
and the Security Council will not, in any
circumstances, stand idly by and accept such a heinous
crime.

“We begin our message by giving you a warning
of our impending attacks and the power that is in our

18. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpwtcrtion .fiu,m French):
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam.
2

26. For two decades now, day after day, a selfsacrificing intransigent struggle inspired by the sublime spirit of patriotism has been waged by thousands
upon thousands of combatants
of the Palestinian
Arab nation for the reconquest of their homeland.
That struggle has won the ,admiration and respect of
mankind.

I invite her to take a place at the Council table and to
make her statement.
19. Mrs. NGUYEN
Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam) (interpretation from French): The delegation of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam would like to extend to you,
Mr, President, its warm congratulations
on. your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We should also like to express our gratitude to
you and the members of the Council for permitting
me to participate in this renewed debate on the situation in the occupied Arab territories.

27. Today the Palestinian cause has become sacred
for all men of conscience and feeling in the world.
The prestige and diplomatic position of the PLO have
been constantly on the rise at the international
level
in spite of the efforts of imperialism,
which seeks to
contain it.

20. Only from the beginning of this year, various
United Nations bodies-the
Security Council, the
General Assembly at its emergency special sessionhave held a number of working meetings on the overwhelmingly difficult situation in the Middle East which
results from the systematic annexation of Arab territories that is being conducted with increasing cynicism
by the Israeli authorities.

28. The PLO, universally
recognized as the sole
authentic representative
of the Palestinian
people,
enjoys the right to participate on an equal footing
with all other States in all regional and international
bodies dealing with the Palestinian problem and with
the situation in the Middle East.

21. This new act of defiance began on 18 March,
with the waves of repression in Al-Bireh Province,
-where the Municipal Council was forcibly dissolved,
and in Nablus and Ramallah, whose elected mayors
were dismissed from office and deported. Terror and
brutality are virtually daily events; the racist occupying
forces are once again using tanks, helicopters and firearms against defenceless men, women, young people
and children in the western region of the Jordan.

29. We are pleased to note that the PLO has established diplomatic and other relations at various levels
with many countries in the world and has contributed
effectively to the work of conferences and debates on
the problems of the Middle East, work aimed at
bringing to fruition the exercise of the fundamental
national rights of the Palestinian people.
30. In recent days the Council has been seized simultaneously of urgent problems in Central America,
where there rises the imminent
danger of military
aggression against Nicaragua by the same belligerent
Power which backs the aggressors against the Arab
lands. It is no coincidence,
therefore, that those
supplying the Fascist regimes of Latin America with
arms should turn out to be the very people who have
been supplying tanks and guns to the perpetrators of
genocide against the Arabs now. The objectives of
those sinister, thinly veiled adventures, whether it be
in Asia or in Latin America, are one and the same
-the taking over of the natural resources of those
peoples and the search for strategic military positions.

22. Israel’s criminal objective, which has been SO
often denounced by the Arab peoples and world
public opinion, is to annex once and for all and methodically the occupied Arab zones. These operations of
illegal annexation of land on the West Bank of the
Jordan followed the quite recent annexation of the
Syrian territory of the Golan Heights, which occurred
after the annexation, in the midst of universal condemnation, of the Palestinian holy capital of Jerusalem last
year.
23. These criminal, lawless acts are clear evidence
of the consequences of the strategic co-operation
agreements between Tel Aviv and Washington, which
cynically protects the aggressor-in
defiance of all
morality,
all international
jurisdiction
and all the
resohitions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

31. With regard to this policy of international
terrorism, I should like to refer to what has happened in
my own country and in other countries of the SouthEast Asian region, Over the past few decades, the
people of Viet Nam and the neighbouring
peoples of
Laos and Kampuchea have seen more than a million
of their sons and daughters mowed down by weapons
stamped with the same label.

24. This policy of terrorism is aimed at eliminating
Paiestinian
resistance, the freedom fighters of the
PLO. There can be no denying that oppression has
always called resistance into being. It is the immoral
acts of brutality committed by the Zionist occupation
forces which have ineluctably led to the valiant, selfsacrificing struggle of the PLO fighters.

32. Now once again there is an influx of these devices of death and destruction,
coming from the
military-industrial
complexes of the same Power, into
countries neighbouring Viet Nam, rendering the situation there most alarming. But Viet Nam and the other
peoples in the world have, in the period of contemporary history, learnt well the lesson that whatever
the size of the forces committed
against oppressed

25. The strikes and demonstrations of protest which
have now broken out an the West Bank of the Jordan
and which have been drowned in the blood of repression are irrefutable evidence of this.
3

peoples, it is inevitably
life that finally triumph
war and death.

the forces of justice, peace and
over injustice and the forces of

iarity about them. Their repeated occurrence, even
routineness, should in no way detract from their
sinister significance. The implications and potential of
these events far exceed their actual dimensions as
they are the manifestations of a malady that is deeply
embedded in the region. Indeed, it is in recognition of
the underlying complexity and significance of these
events that the Council is currently considering the
entire situation in the occupied Arab territories.

33. The people and Government
of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam are therefore fully confident of
the victorious outcome of the struggle of the Arab
peoples and consider the cause of those peoples to be
their own, They wish to assure them of their wholehearted solidarity until they have entirely recovered
the occupied territories.

39. The recent eruption of violent turmoil on the
West Bank was the direct consequence of the intensification of Israel’s annexationist measures aimed at
colonizing Palestinian land and terrorizing the Palestinian people into submission and worse. ,The Israeli
military authorities on the West Bank had never been
tolerant of the slightest voice of dissent among the
Palestinians there. Whenever there was a protest
against the brutalities of the military occupation, even
in the form of peaceful demonstrations,
a reign of
terror was unleashed and repression and destruction
became the order of the day. Time and again the sovereignty and territorial
integrity
of neighbouring
States, particularly Lebanon, were threatened. Expulsion of duly elected mayors and attempts at assassinating them had also been part of the known Israeli
strategy to terrorize the rightful owners of the occupied
territories. The occupation of the municipality
of
Al-Bireh, the ejection of the duly elected mayor and the
councillors from their premises, the dismissal of the
elected Palestinian mayors of the towns of Nablus
and Ramallah and the repression of Palestinian demonstrators-all
these senseless acts follow a pattern
long established by Israel and contain no element of
surprise. Like the expropriation
of land, the establishment of colonial settlements, the closing of educational institutions and the disbanding of unions,
these acts, perpetrated deliberately by Israel, are in
flagrant contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations, the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’ and
numerous Council resolutions, including resolutions
465 (1980), 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 497 (1981).
These acts of Israel deserve universal condemnation
and censure.

34. In the statement made by the spokesman for the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, on 30 March, it is said that the Government
and people of Viet Nam condemn most vigorously the
criminal acts committed
by the Israeli occupying
forces and demand their immediate cessation. Those
forces must respect the fundamental,
inalienable
national rights of the Arab and Palestinian
peoples.
The delegation of Viet Nam firmly supports all the
proposals put forward in the Council by the PLO and
the Arab countries. We wish to associate ourselves
with the speakers in this debate who have called upon
the Council to adopt all appropriate measures to ensure
compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international
instruments,
and to
put an end to this very urgent situation in the Middle
East. Let us hope that the lives of innocent people in
the occupied Arab regions can be saved in time and
that the Council will truly prove to be an effective
instrument in the service of international
peace and
security,
35. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j%m Frewh):
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
36. Mr. PURUSHOTTAM
(India):
Sir, I should
like at the very outset to felicitate you on your assumption today of the office of President of the Council
for the month of April. Your diplomatic
skill and
intellectual incisiveness are well known to all in the
United Nations and do credit to the great country you
represent, a country with which my own enjoys cordial
and abiding relations of friendship and co-operation.

40. The solution to the’ problems on the West Bank
and in the other occupied territories cannot be found
by the mere reinstatement of a city council or by the
reappointment of the mayor of one city or the other.
The rights of the Palestinian people who inhabit the
occupied territories to their own State in their homeland has long been recognized by the international
community.
Their oppression and subjugation must
end.

37. I am grateful to you and to the members of the
Council for affording my delegation an opportunity
to present its views in the current debate on the situation in the occupied Arab territories. It is the gravity
of the recent developments
on the West Bank and
Gaza that has prompted us to add our voice to the
appeal being made to the Council to take prompt and
effective action to stop the bloodshed and to prevent
the exacerbation of tension in West Asia.

41. It is the firm policy of my Government that the
occupation and annexation of their land should cease
and that Israel should unconditionally
withdraw from
all the Arab territories occupied since 1967, which
would pave the way for the establishment
of the
Palestinian State. Instead of seeking security for
itself through aggressive and expansionist policies,

38. The recent events on the West Bank, in Gaza and
the Syrian Golan Heights which have necessitated
these meetings of the Council have a disturbing famil4

Israel should pursue a policy of peaceful coexistence
with its neighbours, including Palestine. There is no
dearth of concrete proposals formulated with a view
to securing these objectives; the most of those proposals is the nine-point recommendation
made by the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People,” of which India is a member.
But since Israel has treated these proposals and recommendations with contempt and persisted in its defiance of world opinion, the only option available to
the Council is to take punitive action as provided for
in the Charter. The longer such action is delayed the
greater will be the suffering of the peoples of West Asia
and the greater the threat to international peace and
security,

Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
whose presidency of the
Council in the month of March constituted a significant
contribution to the work of this body,
48. We have recently in this body, and in the General
Assembly as well, considered the consequences of
one of the gravest acts of Israeli expansionist policy
-the annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights. After
less than two months, we are again witnessing manifestations of this same policy. That is why we attach
great importance
to this debate, since the further
development of events not only in the Middle East but
also elsewhere depends to a great extent on the way
the Council reacts at this time in order to prevent a
protracted deterioration of the situation.
49. The Council is considering this issue in conditions
of the continuous negative development of the situation in the Middle East, the causes of which are em:
bedded in the unchanged Israeli policy of flagrant
violation of the norms of international
law and nonrecognition of the inalienable rights of the population
in the occupied territories.

42. My delegation has noted with attention the case
presented by the PLO during the current debate,
particularly the contents of the letter addressed to the
Security Council by Chairman Yasser Arafat. India
has consistently supported the Palestinians and the rest
of the Arab world in their legitimate demand for a
comprehensive and just peace in West Asia. We have
no doubt ,that the just cause of the Palestinians will
triumph eventually,
however intense their persecution may be and however great the sacrifice demanded
of them. But it will not bring credit to the Council if
it continues to remain incapacitated in the face of
Israeli defiance of the Council’s own resolutions.

50. In the most recent reprisals, particularly evident
in the occupied West Bank, Gaza and Jerusalem, a
further step has been taken. This has led not only to
the worsening of the already exacerbated situation in
the Middle East but also to the arising of new dangers
which threaten to result in a wider conflict.

43. The current conflict on the West Bank is a reminder to the Council that immediate attention to the
problems of West Asia is imperative. A wider conflict
and tragedy can be avoided only if the Council responds to the challenge promptly and effectively. We
hope that the Council will be able to generate sufficient
Political will and take immediate and effective action
to discharge its responsibility
to safeguard international peace and security.

51. On the other hand, this debate is taking place at
a time when the international situation has deteriorated
because of ever more frequent use of force, military
interventions and interference in the internal affairs of
small and militarily weak countries, and also because of
the denial of the right of peoples to self-determination
and independence,
the concentration
of military
forces, the build-up of arms and so on, particularly in
the Middle East region and other regions of blocrivalry. Such a development
of the situation places
even greater responsibility
on the Council for the
solution of the Middle East crisis-that
is, its duty to
compel Israel to respect and implement the principles
which represent the foundation of contemporary international relations and the basis of international law.

44. The PRESIDENT
(intrrprmtion
porn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.
45. Mr. LAZAREVIC
(Yugoslavia): I should like
at the outset to express my gratitude to the Council
for giving me the opportunity to explain the position
of my country regarding this urgent matter in connection with the violation of the basic rights of the Palestinian people.

52. As can be seen in numerous United Nations
documents, the actions of the Israeli occupying authorities testify to that country’s persistent attempts to
strengthen its occupation in the Middle East and to
legalize the policy of fuits crccornpfis
through the
systematic
alteration
of the geographical,
demographic, economic, religious and historical characteristics of the occupied territories and their population
to obliterate completely and permanently the features
of its national identity.

46. I take particular pleasure in congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the high post of President
of the Council for the month of April and in wishing
YOU success in this responsible task. We are convinced
that your well-known skill and experience will contribute to the Council’s responding fully to its role in
dealing with this particularly complex problem.

53. This has been clearly confirmed by the latest
examples: the dissolution
of the Municipal Council
in Al-Bireh and the removal and arrest of the mayors
of Al-Bireh, Nablus and Ramallah, as well as other

47. At the same time, I should like to pay a tribute
and express our appreciation to your predecessor,
5

elected officials. Such measures are contrary to the
norms of international
law, particularly
the 1949
Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection
of
Civilian Persons in Time of War,’ norms with which
Israel agreed to comply when it became a Member of
the United Nations or when it signed or accepted
these documents. The Council has on several occasions reaffirmed that these norms also apply to the occupied Palestinian
and Arab territories. Hence it is
redundant to stress that these acts, measures and
conduct of the Israeli occupying authorities are null
and void.

him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
59. Mr. MOHAMMAD
(Iraq): First, Sir, I should like
to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are sure that under your wise leadership
the Council will discharge its duties in respect of the
issue under discussion and the maintenance of peace
and security. Secondly, I should like to thank you and
the members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to speak today, on behalf of the Iraqi delegation, on the question of the situation in the occupied
Arab territories.

54. The non-aligned
countries have always paid
particular attention to all aspects of the Middle East
crisis, especially the Palestinian
question and the
development
of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories,
They have proceeded from the original
principles of non-alignment
which oppose any aggression, colonial and foreign domination, the use of force,
the denial of the right of peoples freely to decide on
their own destiny and so on. Therefore, the non-aligned
countries
have always supported
the Palestinian
people, the PLO and other Arab peoples and countries
in their struggle for the exercise of their inalienable
rights and a peaceful solution to the Middle East crisis
on a comprehensive, just and lasting basis.

60. The Council was requested to convene urgently
to consider a serious situation affecting the life and
property of the Palestinian people in the occupied Arab
territories, where innocent people are being subjected
to acts of State terrorism through the barbarous conduct of the Zionist army. Today the turmoil in the
West Bank has entered its third week. The Zionist
authorities have, since 18 March of this year, been
carrying out reckless and lawless acts in which the
military and so-called civilian Israeli authorities first
forced their way into the municipality
of the township
of AI-Bireh and then forcibly ejected the duly elected
mayor of the town and the councillors from their premises, replacing them by an Israeli military officer.
This action of provocation against the Arab Palestinian people in Al-Bireh, followed by the expulsion of
the mayors of the towns of Nablus and Ramallah,
caused a wave of protest among the Palestinian people
in the occupied Arab territories and a genera1 strike
was declared as a natural peaceful response to the
Zionist act of brutality and illegality. The terrorists
in Tel Aviv and their forces of occupation applied
repressive and criminal measures and opened fire
against civilian and unarmed Palestinian demonstrators, causing bloodshed in various parts of the
occupied Palestinian territories.

55. The position of Yugoslavia concerning this issue,
as well as the substance of the Middle East crisis, is
well known and constitutes an integral part of the
increasingly held view that Israel must withdraw from
all territories occupied since 5 June 1967, including
Jerusalem; that the Palestinian people must exercise
its right to self-determination
and the creation of an
independent State, under the leadership of the PLO
as its sole legitimate representative;
and that the right
of all peoples and countries of the region to a secure
national life and independent social development must
be recognized.
56. The Council is at this time facing two basic tasks:
first, to undertake all necessary and urgent measures
for the suppression and elimination
of Israel’s policy
of violence, denationalization
and national obliteration
of the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem, and
reprisals against their populations:
and, secondly, to
embark most energetically upon the creation of conditions favourable for the solution of the whole Middle
East problem.

61. What is happening now in the occupied Arab
territories is not a coincidence. The international community is confronted with Israeli defiance which, with
brutal consistency, pursues a policy of annexation of
the occupied Arab Palestinian
territories together
with a policy of aggression against the Arab States
and peoples. The annexation of Al-Quds and the decision to annex the Arab Syrian Golan Heights by
applying Israeli law, jurisdiction
and administration
to that territory: the savage Israeli aggression against
the peaceful Iraqi nuclear installation; the continuous
acts of aggression against Lebanon: and the violation
of the airspace of Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Iraq,
all these actions clearly prove the aggressive and
terrorist nature of Israel. Furthermore, the implanting
of the Zionist entity in the midst of the Arab nation
has been utilized to encourage aggression against the
Arab States. This is demonstrated by the volume of
military and armed support and co-operation which
that entity has given to the Iranian regime, therefore

57, We shall fully support the efforts to be undertaken in that direction, for we have always advocated
peaceful political
solutions which provide for the
recognition of the right of every country and people
independently
to decide on its destiny and which
support the active role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of peace and stability in all regions and in
the world in general.
58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
The next speaker is the representative

j?om

French):

of Iraq. I invite
6

encouraging it to continue its aggression and to refuse
to heed the calls of the international
community for
a just peace.

the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency. I am confident that the deliberations of
the Council will come to a satisfactory conclusion
under your guidance and leadership.

62.

The recent events in the occupied West Bank,
Strip and Golan Heights are not isolated incidents of repression but constitute another link in the
long chain of the Zionist policy of expansion, illegal
settlements
and annexation.
These actions follow
the Israeli actions, condemned in the past, aimed at
changing the status of the Holy City of AI-Quds and of
the Arab Syrian Golan Heights. The Israeli aggressors,
not satisfied with their criminal behaviour, have now
turned their attention to the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. There is no need to remind members of the
Council that the Israeli acts of aggression against
Al-Quds and the Syrian Golan Heights have been
condemned by the international
community and the
Security Council. Furthermore,
Israel’s decision has
been declared null and void. The racist Israeli policy
not only is aimed at annexation of the occupied Arab
territories but is determined to liquidate the Palestinian
people and their legitimate national rights and aspirations. The recent deliberate provocations, including
the abduction and torturing to death of Palestinians,
were not carried out for security reasons, as the
Zionists allege. Such allegations are used as an excuse
for the continued occupation when it is deemed necessary to commit more wide-scale atrocities in order
to induce expulsion. These acts of inhuman repression, which are entirely unjustified, violate all international norms and ethics and should be stopped.
Gaza

67. I should also like to express my deep appreciation to your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
for
her success in conducting the proceedings of the Council for the month of March.
68. The world community
has entrusted the Council with the primary responsibility for the maintenance.
of international peace and security. It is therefore high
time for it to fulfil its duties in a faithful manner, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
69. The Council has recently been meeting very often
to discuss the deteriorating
situation in the West
Bank, Gaza and the Syrian Golan Heights, but no
success has been seen. Previous speakers have put
before the Council the ominous details of the suppressive Israeli measures against the civilian population of the occupied Arab territories. The lack of goodwill on the part of the Council to solve the Palestinian
problem has led to the humiliation,
indignation and
suffering of a proud and dignified people. SuperPower rivalry has played a big role in delaying the
solution of world problems and has almost completely
prevented the Council from taking appropriate measures against aggression, in accordance with the
Charter.

63. In conclusion, it is clear that Israel has once
again, in complete disregard for international law, the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’ and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, created a very serious and
explosive situation in the area. We believe that the
United States of America bears full responsibility
for
the criminal acts continually committed by the Zionists in Tel Aviv, since without the United
States
military,
political and financial support Israel would
not have dared commit its aggressive and expansionist
acts and practices,

70. Speaking as a representative of a country which
adheres most solemnly to the principles of non-alignment, coexistence and mutual co-operation among
States, I should like to say that the veto power of the
permanent members, and particularly
of the superPowers in the Council, has often undermined the democratic ideals which stand behind the United Nations
as an institution for democracy.
71. It is high time, therefore, that the Council solemnly assumed its responsibility
and restored faith in
this great institution in the eyes of the world community.

64. The Council should bear due responsibility
for
protecting
the Palestinian
people who are under
occupation,
and should maintain peace and security
in the area. It should also take the necessary measures
to stop this Israeli madness before the whole region
explodes, thus endangering world peace. We call on the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibility
and
live up to its obligations towards international
peace
and security.

72. The question is, where do we go from here? This
applies especially to those small nations which have
no alternative but to resort to this forum to seek a
solution of their problems. Shall we leave it to the
natural law of big fish eating small fish? Shall we let
the law of the jungle prevail?
73. Taking into account the fact that the United
States has failed to recognize the PLO as the sole
legitimate
representative
of the Palestinian people
and has even refused to talk with it, taking into account
the fact that the Council has failed to find a comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question for the
past three decades and taking into account the fact
that what are called the Camp David accords have

65. The PRESIDENT
finte,pretatiojz porn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Yemen,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
66. Mr. SALLAM
(Yemen): Sir, as this is the first
time I have addressed the Council, I should like at
7

proved a faiiure even for those who have put their
signature to that agreement, I would propose that the
Council try to solve this question through negotiations among the parties concerned before an international peace forum.

Golan Heights, the continuous acts of interference in
Lebanon and acts of aggression against that country
have now been followed by the situation in the occupied territory of the West Bank of the Jordan.
80. All these actions are manifestations of a single
policy of force, occupation and aggression which does
not respect the will or the inalienable rights of peoples
and which is a mockery of the expressed opinion of
the international community-a
policy which, further
more, is openly encouraged by the Government of
the United States of America, the main economic and
military supporter of the Zionist regime, without whose
co-operation it would be impossible for Israel to disregard the decisions of the Organization as well as to
develop its aggressive, annexationist and predatory
policy.

74. The bases for negotiations are found in the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. However, my delegation wishes to affirm that
Council resolution 242 (1967) does not contain all the
elements necessary to solve the Middle East’s problems since it does not explicitly provide for the national
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their rights to self-determination
and independence,
nor does it provide a basis for a comprehensive and just
peace. The text of the Soviet-American
statement on
the Middle East of 1 October 1977, which states, Intel
din, that ensuring the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people is a key element for settling the Middle
East problem, could furnish us with a more solid basis
to be drawn upon in concluding a peaceful, comprehensive and lasting peace agreement between the
parties concerned, foremost among which is the PLO,
the sole legitimate
representative
of the Palestinian
people.

81. Conflicts, tension and the likelihood
of war,
with all its extremely serious consequences, canno!
be removed unless the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are restored and the Arab occupied terntories are returned.
82.

Policies based on racism, oppression, terror and
of international
law can only lead to a
growing exacerbation of conflict.
the violation

75. The PRESIDENT
(int~~rpwtation fiorn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

83. A few weeks ago it was said in the Organization
that the inscription from Isaiah on the wall of the small
park across the street from this building should be
changed. If those who promoted that idea dislike the
present quotation, to which only they have voiced
objections, we would suggest that they think of these
other words from Isaiah, which seem to have been
written today and to be addressed to the Zionist GOVernment:

76, Mr. LOPEZ DEL AM0 (Cuba) (intcrpwtation
f,orn Sprrnish): Permit me, first of all, Mr. President, to
thank you and the members of the Council for allowing
our delegation to take part in this debate.
77, At the same time, I should like personally to
congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of April. It is no
secret to anyone that your are a man of high qualifications and are responsive to the most difficult problems,
such as those that are now before the Council. We are
confident that under your presidency, as you are the
son of a developing country, of a non-aligned country,
well able to understand the essence of the problems
brought here in relation to Nicaragua or the Palestinian
people, you will make an important
contribution
to
the final result of the Council’s deliberations,
results
that will uphold universally accepted principles which
are claimed by the Palestinian people and the people
of Nicaragua.

“And when ye spread forth your hands, I will
hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many
prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood.
“Wash ye, make you clean: put away the evil
of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do
evil:

“Learn to do well; seek judgement, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow,”
84. As the Council meets, the people of Hebron are
facing, unarmed, the armoured cars and the guns 01
the Zionist occupiers. A general strike has closed dowa
shops and schools in the cities and towns of the West
Bank of the Jordan under Zionist occupation,

78. On many occasions, and in a short period of time,
the Security Council and the General Assembly have
had to meet to consider various actions of the Zionist Government in violation of the norms governing
international
coexistence that endanger peace and
security in the region of the Middle East and of the
world.

85. Flags of the PLO were flown in the north Of
Galilee. There is a wave of indignation and a call for
justice from Jerusalem to Nazareth. They are the Signs
of new times; they are the response to occupation and
repression; they are a call for the restoration of legitimate, unrenounceable rights.

79. The attack on the Osirak nuclear plant, the
attempts at annexation of the Syrian territory of the
8

86. We call upon the Council, in exercise of the
authority vested in it by the Charter of the United
Nations, to adopt the measures necessary to put an
end to the cause of the conflict. We hope that Zionist
occupation and annexation of the territories of others
will cease, that the Palestinian people will be enabled
unconditionally
to exercise its inalienable
rights,
that justice will be restored and the way opened to a
comprehensive,
just and lasting solution in the
Middle East.

the Israeli annexationist policy has been challenged by
the determined opposition of the Palestinian
people
and that the continuing brutal oppression and indiscriminate killing in the occupied territories have only
intensified their determination
to resist such acts of
oppression and State terrorism.
91. The United Nations, through the Security Council and the General Assembly, has tried repeatedly to
bring justice to the suffering Palestinian people. The
Council, in several resolutions-namely,
resolution
465 (1980) relating to all the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories including the Holy City of Jerusalem,
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) relating to the
status of the Holy City, and the most recent of the
resolutions, resolution 497 (1981) on the Syrian Golan
Heights-has
censured the measures taken by Israel
to change the character and status of the occupied,
territories,
declaring them to be without any legal
validity. The Israeli moves are in flagrant contravention of the Charter of the United Nations, the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949,’ the supplementary Hague
Convention of 1969 and Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which clearly underline the
inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by the
use of force.

87. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
88. Mr, SOBHAN
(Bangladesh): First of all, Sir,
I should like, on behalf of the delegation of Bangladesh,
to express our warm felicitations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
current month. We are confident that the deliberations
of the Council will benefit immensely from your
experience and proven diplomatic skill.
89. I should like also to take this opportunity
to
convey our deep appreciation to your predecessor,
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
the representative of the
United States, for her leadership in guiding the work
of the Council during the month of March. We have
all noted with what skill, ability and energy she conducted the work of the Council.

92. The recent Israeli move to disband the elected
Municipal
Council and to replace it by direct Israeli
rule also demonstrated Israel’s reluctance to accept
the very limited autonomy which exists at present in
the occupied territories.
There is another, equally
serious dimension to the recent events in the West
Bank and Gaza. Israel, it seems, is aiming not only at
annexing the occupied territories,
but also at liquidating the legitimate national aspirations of the Arab
Palestinian people, aspirations which have crystallized
into a desire for a separate independent State where
their basic human rights would be accepted and where
they could live as free people with a sense of dignity.

90. The Council is again seized of a crisis threatening
international peace and security that arises out of the
Israeli aggression in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories. The recent events in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip are not isolated incidents of repression, but constitute another link in the long chain of
the Israeli policy of aggression, illegal settlements
and annexation. After making its moves to change the
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem and the Syrian
Golan Heights, moves which were condemned unequivocally by the international
community,
Israel
has now turned its attention again to the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. On 18 March Israel carried out the
highly provocative action against the population of
the West Bank of dissolving, quite illegally and contrary to all canons of justice, the Municipal Council
of the town of Al-Bireh. The democratically
elected
Mayor, Mr. Ibrahim AI-Tawil, was removed by force.
Subsequently, they took similar action against Mayor
Bassam Shaka’a of Nablus and Mayor Karim Khalaf
of Ramallah. Members of the Council will recall that
Mr. Shaka’a earlier lost both of his legs and Mr. Khalaf
one of his feet, due to Israeli bombs, The international
press and news media coverage, particularly
the
series of articles published recently in The New York
Times, have given a graphic description of the continuing coercive methods applied by Israel against
the unarmed civilians who have protested against
the illegal actions of the Israeli occupying forces. It is
also evident from the international press coverage that

93, Despite the brutal repression, heroic Palestinian
youth has once again demonstrated that it cannot and
will not be subjugated through acts of violence. The
elected leaders in the occupied Palestinian territories
have stood firm in defence of the rights of their people.
The New York Times, in a dispatch of 3 1 March,
reported that for the first time the forbidden flag of the
PLO, the sole legitimate representative
of the Palestinian people, is to be found flying in the occupied
territories.
94. The will to freedom of the Palestinian
people
cannot be crushed. The oppression in the occupied
territories has reached such a stage that two members
of the Israeli Parliament,
according to the same dispatch, have denounced the Government of Menachem
Begin and demanded the formation of a Palestinian
State in the occupied territories and an end to the
current discrimination
against the Arab population-a
demand which has been clearly upheld by the United
Nations and the international
community.
9

9.5. These recent developments in the occupied territories have made it apparent that Israel, in complete
disregard of international
law and in particular the
fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, has created a highly explosive situation not only in the occupied territories but
also in the entire region.

99. During the month of December, the Council
adopted a unanimous decision [r.esolurion 497 (/98i)]
to condemn the Israeli action to annex the Golan
Heights and called on Israel to rescind the measures
taken by it. Instead, Israel confronted us with stubborn
non-compliance,
with words of belligerence and an
arrogant attitude which constitute the very antithesis
of what this body represents. Recent developments
in the occupied territories have once again proved that
lack of firm and expeditious action on the part of the
Council only contributes to an aggravation of the
situation. A particularly heavy responsibility
therefore lies with its permanent members to enable the
Council to carry out its primary responsibility to bring
peace to the afflicted region.

96. Bangladesh’s stand on the Middle East question
is unequivocal and consistent; it is not based on political expediency. Our consistent position stems from
our firm belief in the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is founded on our
enduring commitment
to the cause of oppressed
peoples all over the world struggling to free themselves
from the bondage of colonialism, aggression and exploitation-peoples
engaged in establishing their inalienable right to self-determination,
national freedom and
political independence.
It is rooted in the ideals of
tolerance and the conviction that men and women of
all religions and all races can live together in an environment of peace, justice and equality. It is geared to
upholding the right of every people freely to determine
and build its own social, economic and political system
by ways and means of its own free choice.

100. In conclusion, Bangladesh, in conformity with
the Charter, would like to reaffirm the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force and to reaffirm
once again that only the fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 can apply to the occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories. We urge the Council to demand of Israel,
the occupying Power, that it rescind forthwith its decision to dissolve the Al-Bireh elected Municipal Council, The duly elected Municipal Council of Al-Bireh
must be immediately reinstated. The Security Council
must also ask Israel, in firm and clear terms, to put
an end to its brutal repressive measures against the
unarmed civilian population of the occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories.

97. To this end, Bangladesh views the essentials
of any meaningful peace plan in the Middle East as
a composite whole, as a comprehensive
settlement,
every part thereof being integrally
related to the
other. We firmly believe that no solution in the Middle
East which does not fully take into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people can be
envisaged and that any examination
of the question
of Palestine must be based on the following fundamental principles. First, the question of Palestine is at
the core of the problem of the Middle East and, consequently, it is not possible to envisage a solution to
the problem of the Middle East unless one takes into
account the rights of the Palestinian people. Secondly,
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to return
to their homes and to achieve self-determination,
independence
and national
sovereignty
must be
implemented.
Thirdly, the participation
of the PLO,
the sole representative
of the Palestinian
people,
on an equal footing with all the other parties on the
basis of the relevant General Assembly resolutions is
indispensable. Fourthly, the acquisition of territory by
force is inadmissible and Israel must totally withdraw
from all the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem. And, fifthly,
there must be greater understanding
of the just cause
of the Palestinian people.

101. The PRESIDENT
(irzre~p~crarion~om
Fwnchb
The next speaker is the representative
of Algeria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
102. Mr. OURABAH
(Algeria) (inre~pwrafion
fi+rmt
French): First of all, on behalf of the Algerian delegation, I should like to convey to you, Mr. President.
my warm congratulations
on your election to the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am sure
that, thanks to your experience, this debate will
prove successful.
103. May I also congratulate
your predecessor.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
for having conducted with talent
the proceedings of the Council for last month.
104. Three times in less than four months the Council has met to consider the situation in the occupied
Arab territories, where a whole people has fallen
victim to an attempt at systematic liquidation.
The
frequency of the Council’s meetings with an agenda
which has become almost constant is evidence of the
continuous concern of the international
community
at an implacable endeavour to perpetuate the results
of aggression and to continue to negate the Palestinian
national fact.

98. As I mentioned
earlier, the United Nations,
through the Security Council and the General Assembly, has repeatedly tried to bring justice to the
suffering Palestinian
people. The Government
of
Israel, unfortunately,
on each occasion has taken
measures, in violation of the Assembly and Council
resolutions, to frustrate al1 efforts of the international
community to resolve this explosive issue.

105. Today the Council has to deal with an explosive
situation, With the Palestinian citizens clamouring for
their right to existence and refusing to bow to the
10

bullying and brutalities of the occupation forces, the
Zionist entity has developed fierce repression and is
setting in motion its infernal war machine against
unarmed persons,
106. The situation created by the decisions of the
Zionist entity to remove the elected representatives
of the Arab citizens of the occupied territories
is
nothing more than a further manifestation
of the
provocative use of force and aggression on the part of
the Zionist entity. This new outrage is by no means
an isolated one. For more than three decades that entity
has been constantly extending its occupation through
aggression and illegal annexation.

stitute a significant link in the chain of the gigantic
endeavour to uproot an entire people.
112. The exploitation of Arab labour that has affected
hundreds of thousands of workers, including tens of
thousands of adolescents, living and working in conditions of humiliation
and poverty, motivated
the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session to adopt
resolution 36/73 of 4 December 1981 in which it
“Condemns
Israel for the deteriorating
living
conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territories;
“Affirms that the elimination
of the Israeli occupation is a prerequisite for the social and economic
development
of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories”.

107. What is happening now in the occupied territories is part of a vast endeavour of methodical and
rational exploitation and plunder. It is by means of this
oppressive violence that we see emerging most clearly
the ultimate goal of the Zionist entity--that of removing
the Arabs once and for all from their homes and taking
possession of their goods and their lands to establish
new settlements in that land.

113. However, deaf to the repeated condemnations
by the international
community,
the Zionist leaders
have been intensifying their takeover of land on the I
West Bank, continuing to maintain the outflow of Arab
inhabitants
through impoverishing
and repressing
them, Yesterday, the non-renewal of the identity
papers of Palestinians was used at will to drive them
out of the country; today, we witness the promulgation of ever more repressive new laws in an attempt
to obliterate the Palestinian national identity and to
prevent any crystallization
of Arab resistance to
oppression.

108. The Palestinian people has come out once again
in the streets of their towns and villages to demonstrate to the occupiers and those that support them its
wholehearted opposition to the pseudo-civil administration in the West Bank and Gaza, a prelude to the
annexation of those territories by the Zionist entity.
Everywhere it has risen against the institutionalized
terror which has been unleashed against it and which
has been increasing for several years. The Zionist colanization of Arab territories conducted in the fashion of
colonial expeditions has now extended to almost half
the occupied territories in the West Bank, including
the Holy City of Al-Quds.

114. Palestinian cultural expression has also been
hindered by the “law on education” which permits the
Zionists occupiers to exercise control over schools,
to issue guidelines for Arab curricula, to ban hundreds
of books and to interfere with the functioning of higher
education by the losing of universities. This suppression of Palestinian culture has not spared historic and
religious sites, such as the Al-Aqsa and As-Sakhra
mosques of Al-Quds, which are subject to arbitrary
searches.

109. In order to drive the Palestinians out of their
territory, the occupation army has resorted to means
both illegal and inhuman-intimidation,
expropriation for so-called strategic reasons, arbitrary measures
and internment on a massive scale,

115, The Palestinian
people is being oppressed,
tortured, deported, stripped of its goods and driven oul
of its homeland in the name of a chauvinistic
and
exclusivist Zionist ideology.

110. Those practices have extended to the plundering
of ,the resources of the occupied territories. Thus the
Zionist authorities have taken measures to divert the
waters of the Jordan for the benefit of their settlements, thereby condemning to drought the pieces of
land still in possession of the Arab inhabitants. Furthermore, Arab farmers are being dispossessed of their
wells and prevented from digging new ones. In addition, powerful means have been used to dry up rhe
traditional sources of water,, thus forcing hundreds of
Palestinian families to emigrate. A large number of
Arab villages which subsisted on agriculture have thus
become veritable dormitory villages which in effect
are reservoirs of cheap labour for Zionist industry.

116. There are many examples in the report of the
Special Committee
to Investigate
Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories. These examples amply illustrate
the concentration camp universe in which the Zionist
occupiers have enclosed the Palestinian people. That
people today is exercising its legitimate right to resist
foreign occupation and is demanding control over its
own conditions of existence.
117. Recourse to individual
and collective reprisals
whenever there is a demonstration
of resistance to the
occupier serves only to maintain the drive towards
liberation in the occupied territories. In the face of the

II 1. Control of the sources of water together with
innumerable
obstacles to the creation and development of Arab industrial units in the West Bank con11

vitality of Palestinian national sentiment, the Zionist
war machine is sowing death among defenceless
civilians in defiance of the most elementary human
rights. The present situation in the occupied territories
is not an isolated phenomenon. It compels us to deal
with the very roots of that phenomenon.

of the immediate past. Restrained condemnations and
appeals to goodwill are quite obviously inadequate to
block the Zionist designs, which have clearly proved to
be those of domination and conquest.
125. We trust that the Council will be able to ensure
that right prevails and that it will do everything in its
power to put an end to the tragic violations of the
human rights of the Palestinians in their homeland,

118. The resistance of the Palestinian people reflects
its rejection of the status to which it has been reduced
in its own homeland. It also demonstrates the magnitude of its hostility to the Camp David accords and
the Washington treaty. It reminds us once again that
the intensification
of the policy of settlement of the
occupied territories stems from the same accords which
deny the Palestinian people the right to self-determination.

125. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntionflom
Frerlc)t),
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
127. Mr. BURWIN
(Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya):
Sir, on behalf of the Libyan delegation I wish to extend
to you congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. I should like also
to thank your predecessor, Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
who presided over the Council last month. I thank the members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to
address them.

119. In 1980, Al-Quds was annexed and proclaimed
the capital of the Zionist entity. In December 1981,
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights was the subject of
the same annexation measure. The goal of the Zionist
leaders is clear. They are attempting to perpetuate the
occupation of the Arab territories by a policy of annexation that is sometimes creeping and sometimes galloping.
120. In this very chamber,
Algerian delegation stated:

on 8 January

128. The Council has been convened to discuss the
grave situation in the occupied Arab territories, particularly in the West Bank and Gaza. The situation in
the West Bank and Gaza has always been tense owing
to the occupation and the brutal racist and terrorist
practices pursued by the Zionist authorities. Recently,
however, this situation has been seriously aggravated
primarily by the removal of Mayor Ibrahim AI-Tawil
and the dismissal of the Municipal Council of the town
of Al-Bireh and their replacement by an Israeli officer.
Moreover,
the Israeli soldiers, who seem to adopt
Nazi practices, broke into the houses of civilian officials of the Council and forced them to report to work.
Those officials had decided not to go to work in response to the general strike called for by the Palestinian people to protest the continuation of the occupation and the brutal and repressive policies pursued
by Israel.

1982, the

“Unless the Council draws the necessary conclusions from the obstinacy of the Zionist entity in
defying the United Nations, and unless it brings all
its influence to bear to impose justice and the restoration of law, its reactions will have no dissuasive
influence, now or in the future. We could then expect
further annexation measures by the Zionists. They
are easy to foresee.” [232&h jneeting, pcrrcr. 761
121. The West Bank and Gaza were part of the plan,
and the process of annexation is today already under
way.
122. Because of the previous positions it has taken on
the status of the occupied Arab Palestinian territories,
in its repeated injunctions addressed to the Zionist
entity, the Council has developed a coherent doctrine.
Thus more than once the Council has stated that all
measures taken to modify the physical character, the
demographic composition,
the institutional
structure
or status of all the occupied Arab territories are null
and void.

129. However, instead of complying with international conventions, Israel has maintained its intransigent attitude and dismissed the mayors of the towns
of Nablus and Ramallah, Mr. Bassam Shaka’a and
Mr. Karim Khalaf. Thus ends the last vestige of dempcracy so flaunted by Israel and the United States, In
order to make room for the military, authoritarian and
racist mentality to make its full odious appearance,

123. The gravity of the present situation and the
transparency of the intentions of the Zionist leaders
should permit no hesitation on the part of the Council.

130. Zionism is essentially a racist movement aiming
at forming a racist society solely on the basis of religion
and race. Therefore, a Palestinian Arab is not permitted to return to Palestine to live in his own house
with his relatives. Each kibbutz is nothing more ihan
an crpartheid institution and not a socialist instit”’
tion as the Zionists claim. From these kibbutzim they
launch their aggressive attacks on the Palest@”
people.

124. It is within the natural context of its responsibiIities that the Council should once again commit it,s
authority on the side of right and justice. In determining
the intensity of its reaction to the tragic events that
have been occurring in the occupied Palestinian territories, the Council should not lose sight of the lessons
2

131. It is indeed strange that a Jew who was born
and brought up in the United States should be given
the right to live in Palestine and to enjoy all the rights
of a native thereof whereas a Palestinian who was
born there and whose ancestors were there even before
the birth of Christ should be reduced to the status of a
refugee and be deprived of his citizenship and his right
to self-determination.

destabilize the Government
of any country which
should refuse to become a satellite of the United
States.
136. Each time an act of aggression by Israel or
racial South Africa occurs, the United States claims
that it is taking a neutral stance and asks both parties
to use restraint. This means that to the United States
the aggressor and the victim are the same and receive
equal treatment. This is obviously immoral, for one
cannot be neutral towards right and wrong alike,

132. The painful events which are currently taking
place in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the Syrian
Golan Heights and which have been the subject of
disinformation
by the media are a result of the Zionist
invasion of Palestine and the setting up of a racist
nation at the expense of its original Arab and Jewish
inhabitants. This atrocious terrorism has continued
and can be seen in the ousting of the Arabs from thei
lands, in the seizure of their lands and water, in the
harsh treatment meted out to them and in the constant
interference in the affairs of their daily lives. We also
witness mass punishment,
demolition
of houses,
desecration of Holy Places, closure of schools and
universities,
tampering with the systems of education, economic subversion and aggression against
neighbouring Arab countries.

137. All peace-loving.
States and organizations
condemn Israel for its acts of aggression against the
Palestinian people-the
last condemnation
being that
of the European Economic Community,
issued yesterday, which condemns Israel for its policies in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
138. The Council is now requested to act in accordance with the authority entrusted to it by the Charter
of the United Nations. We call upon the Council to
condemn Israel and to put an end to the acts of aggression and terrorism
which are being continuously
perpetrated in the occupied Arab lands. The Council
should adopt all necessary measures to uphold the
human rights and dignity of the Palestinian people in
all the occupied Arab lands by fuliy applying the
Articles under Chapter VII of the Charter to the current
occupying authority in view of its continued violations
of the Charter and pertinent internationa1 conventions.

133. Israel has persisted in its aggression and expansionism, its flouting of the resolutions adopted by the
Council and other United Nations organs and its disregard of world opinion. For its part, the Council has
occasionally
failed to adopt deterrent resolutions
against Israel because of the United States veto.
Everything considered, Israel would never have perpetrated and continued to perpetrate its actions without
the encouragement and economic, political and military
support of the United States. To cite only a few examples, in the January 1982 edition of Read&s Digest,
Rowland Evans and Robert Novak wrote that during
the period June 1967 to June 1980 American aid to
Israel amounted to $19 billion.

139. The Council should also ask Israel to put an
immediate halt to its repressive measures in the occupied Palestinian and Syrian territories and to revoke
its decisions concerning the municipalities
of the
West Bank.
(intcrprPfcrtionfr,o/n French):
140. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the representative
of Israel, on
whom I now call.

134. In its issue of 28 March, The New York Times
reported that the amount allocated for aid to Israel in
the 1983 budget will be $2.5 billion, which is tantamount to giving each Israeli $630, whereas the average
income of the individual in some countries of Central
America whose rCgimes are protected by the United
States does not exceed $120. Moreover, Israel receives
additional aid indirectly through donations to Zionist
organizations, tax deductions and so on. On the whole,
American officials come under concentrated Zionist
pressure and are therefore unable to do anything except
buckle under so that they can preserve their personal
gains and benefits. The ultimate losers are the American taxpayers and Arab-American relations.

141. Mr. LEVIN
(Israel): Sir, I should like at the
outset to take this opportunity to convey to you our
felicitations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. We have every confidence
that you will handle the business of the Council with
wisdom and expertise. I should also like to take this
opportunity to express to Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
the representative of the United States, our appreciation for her
great skill and for the exemplary fashion in which she
carried out her duties as President of the Council last
month.
142. Some time ago the representative
of Jordan
was warning all and sundry, through the Special
Political Committee, on the impending collapse of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. I should like to quote from his letter
that appeared in a General Assembly and Security
Council document in which he said, irzter trlicz:

135. Furthermore, the United States seeks to impose
hegemony over the Arab world and intimidate it
by using Israel as a threat. It also uses pressure on
some Arab rkgimes and it has escalated such pressure
since the signing of the Camp David accords took
place. Moreover, it seeks to set up military bases in
the Arab world and Africa by means of which it could
its

“The latest clandestine Israeli desecrations have
reached a stage where the AI-Aqsa Mosque is
presently in danger of total collapse.” [See S/14684]
13

149. I refrain from commenting on the sinister role
played by the German “Democratic”
Republic in
many countries around the world. However, there is
no doubt in our minds regarding the genuine solidarity
that exists between the German Democratic Republic
and its new handmaiden, the terrorist PLO, which has
now been graced by the recognition of both Moscow
and East Berlin.

143. The mosque in question having survived, we are
now hearing news of another imaginary doomsday
-and in what dramatic terms. Let the Jordanian representative rest assured. The Government of Israel will
discharge its responsibilities
in safeguarding
and
protecting all religious sites in Jerusalem and elsewhere, be they Muslim or other, This my Government will do contrary to and in spite of the sordid
record of the Jordanian Government,
which wilfully
destroyed some 57 synagogues within the precincts of
the Old City of Jerusalem over the 19 years of its
unlawful occupation there and made latrines for the
Arab Legion out of Jewish tombstones of the ancient
Jewish cemetery on the Mount of Olives.These
are
acts that have been committed by official organs of
the Jordanian rCgime.

150. We have been edified here regarding the socalled “Simple ideology” of PLO chief Yasser Arafat, the “non-vicious,
living-together”
formula, the
meaning of which has been made amply clear in the
PLO Covenant. Invaluable insight into the pIans formulated by the PLO for the Jews of Israel can be
gained from a look at article 6 of the PLO Covenant.
Article 6 explains with disarming frankness that only
the “Jews who were living permanently in Palestine
until the beginning of the Zionist invasion will be
considered Palestinians” [S/11932, annex]. The Zionist
“invasion”
is, of course, a euphemism for the Balfour
Declaration of 2 November 1917.J

144. Contrary to the preposterous
claims of the
Jordanian representative, the lines between the GOVernment of Israel and terrorist organizations are very
firmly drawn. One wouId hope that this example were
followed by the Government of Jordan, which is now
at some pains to prove its close ties with the terrorists
of the PLO, whose ranks they decimated in 1970 and
1971 and whom they later inflicted on Lebanon.

1.51. That is the essence of the “non-vicious”
ideology of Yasser Arafat, represented at the Council
the other day by the representative of Jordan.

145. Today the representative of Jordan, in spite of
his visible discomfort, often speaks in the name of
PLO boss Arafat-and
we know what King Hussein
thinks of him.

1.52. We have in the meantime also witnessed the
contrapuntal
incitement to hatred and violence in
Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District as well as a call
to arms in Galilee, in Urn El-Fahm and in the Negev,
broadcoast nightly over the radio networks of the PLO
and Syria. That is the primary reason for the violence
that has spread in Judea and Samaria during the past
few days. The PLO and Jordan have been engaged in
strenuous efforts at subversion. Lives of people are
to them expendable. But full responsibility
for what
has been happening lies squarely on the shoulders of
the PLO and of Jordan.

146. We had occasion to suggest at the opening of
these Council meetings several days ago that the
United Nations should proclaim the day of the opening
of this debate as an international
day of hypocrisy
[233&h meeting, pnrn. 981. The statements we have
been hearing over these last several days introduce
a note of urgency to that proposal.
147. We have witnessed here a curious procession
of self-proclaimed
“peace-loving”
countries wilfully
misrepresenting the issues and even admonishing Israel
on its desire to work towards an era of understanding
between Israelis and Palestinian
Arabs. Some of
these “peace-loving”
countries are actively engaged
in brutal acts of massive repression on several continents, while they parade before the Council in perfect
step with their self-assumed role as a foreign legion
of their Arab allies. All this shedding of crocodile tears
is undertaken in a valiant effort to divert attention from
their own acts elsewhere.

153. This effort at pitting Arab against Jew is true
to the well-known al-Husseini tradition. It evokes the
infamous anti-Jewish pogroms committed by the Haj.i
Amins in the 1920s and 1930s and will leave only
bitterness and confusion in its wake.
154. Beyond the dismal hypocrisy vented at the
Council lies a very real danger. Continued hatred,
enmity, terrorism and rejection have become the hallmark of many Arab leaders. If this attitude is allowed
to persist, if it is encouraged and condoned, it will
only perpetuate the abundant difficulties and obstruct
the peace process.

148. Is it any wonder that the Soviet representatives
maintain a stony silence about the on-going genocide
in the mountains and valleys of Afghanistan,
while
the heavy hand of Moscow is felt just across its border
in Europe? Viet Nam, Yemen, Libya and non-aligned
Cuba have also spoken here, the last one quoting
Isaiah, who could not have had but Cuba’s bloodied
hands in mind, although obviously he could not have
forseen to what end any Government
could go in the
service of an alien master,

155. As we had occasion to point out to the Council
on 24 March [233&h meeting], the constant provocations to subvert any movement
towards peaceful
coexistence in the region have never been more apparent than in the recent developments in Judea and
Samaria.
1.56. The Council is being used as an international
forum to engender additional tensions and to echo the
14

provocations inside those areas. Lengthy meetings of
the Council and their recurrent spillover elsewhere in
the Organization cannot change the basic fact that
hatred and negative thinking towards Israel will not
resolve the issues. It is high time to negotiate, to
understand one another and to put peace as the final
objective.

161. This was the genesis-terror
and crime-of
the State of Israel. But to go further-was
this accidental? Here I shall quote what Dayan said:
“The acts of terror are our vital lymph. They help
us maintain a high tension among our population
and in the army. In order to have young men go to
the Negev, we have to cry out that it is endangered.”

157. Arab leaders have in the past committed many
errors of judgement, the so-called moderates among
them tbo easily acquiescing to those who preached
violence and hatred. This has set back peace and
understanding between Israelis and Palestinian Arabs
for many years. The Council must allow reason to
assert itself. Israel, in any case, will not be deterred
from striving for the greater promise of Israeli-Arab
* understanding and co-operation within the framework
of peaceful coexistence.

And this was said in the 1950s. This was all reported
in the diaries of Israel’s Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Moshe Sharett. Mr. Sharett also
had some fears, and I shall quote what he thought of
these criminals acts.
162. On 29 March 1955, Mr. Sharett recorded the following in his diary: “What we succeeded in achieving
in 1948 cannot be repeated whenever we desire it”.
And this was written in 1955:

I58. The PRESIDENT
finterp~etcrtiolz~clm French):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has requested to make a statement in reply
and I call upon him.

“Today we must accept our existing frontiers and
try to relax the tension with our neighbours to
prepare the ground for peace and strengthen our
relations with the Powers. Finally, I proved that the
occupation of the Gaza Strip will not resoIve any
security problem, as the refugees will continue to
constitute the same trouble and even more so as their
hate will be rekindled by the atrocities we shall
cause them to suffer during the occupation.”

159. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): Mr. President, at the outset I should like to congratulate you on your assumption of this, may I say,
burden of leading the Council through such turbulent
moments. We do count on your skill, your sense of
justice, your dedication to the principles and moral
values of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
After all, you are a son of liberated Africa and we are
proud to see you guiding the deliberations of the Council during the month of April. In addition, I only wish
to say that our personal relationship is something
that I value very highly.

163. Thus, representatives
can see that even a
Prime Minister of Israel, who was leading the foreign
policy of the Zionist movement from 1933 to 1948,
and who was then Minister for Foreign Affairs for
many years, thought in this way about Zionist practices
and terrorist acts.
164. It is based on terrorism. Dayan says very explicitly that terrorism was a sine yarn no/z for the projection and implementation
of the Zionist plan.

160. In 1948 there were massacres and bloodshed.
I should like to read what was quoted in Davar on
9 June 1979 as the testimony of an Israeli soldier
who had participated in the occupation of the Palestinian village of Duheima in 1948. He said:

165. We are told that the line is being drawn between
the Government
and the terrorist organizations
[~NI’LI. 1441. What line? When Meir Kahane himself, a
few weeks ago, was dressed in an Israeli army uniform,
walked around the streets of Ramallah, picked up
young students, took off their pants and left them in
their underwear, saying “Go back home”, in the
cold-it
was some five or six degrees centigradewhere is the line being drawn?

“We killed between 80 and 100 Arabs, women
and children. To kill the children they fractured
their heads with sticks. There was not one house
without corpses. The men and women of the villages
were pushed into houses without food or water.
Then the saboteurs came to dynamite the houses.
One commander ordered a soldier to bring two
women into a house he was about to blow up. Another soldier prided himself upon having raped an
Arab woman before shooting her to death. Another
Arab woman with her new-born baby was made to
clean the place for a couple of days and then they
shot her and the baby. Educated and well-mannered
commanders who were considered good guys
became base murderers, and this not in the storm
of battle, but as a method of expulsion and extermination. The fewer the Arabs who remained the
better.”

166. But let us face the truth as to what Israel is
really afraid of: First, it is afraid of Christian, Muslim
and Jew living together in a good and friendly fashion.
Chairman Arafat made that very clear in his statement
before the General Assembly4-no
discrimination.
whatsoever, there is plenty of ground, we can all live
together in peace, he said. Of Course, some reference
was made to an article of the Covenant of the PLO.
But there is one thing that people seem to forget: that
Covenant was written by men in 1964, so it is a result
of the terrorist acts, not a cause of the struggle that is
15

now continuing. By dealing with the result in isolation
from the cause, people seem to miss the message being
conveyed.

Anthony Lewis ends his article with a very important
statement. The Council will recall that Shaka’a had
his legs blown off by terrorists-God
knows who they
were-who have not yet been apprehended or brought
to trial. An Israeli soldier went to him and said, “You
are only half a man,” -because he lost his legs as a
result of one of those criminal acts by the occupying
Power. And Shaka’a said-and I think this is a motto
that we must respect, and I honour it--“1 may have
lost my legs, but you have lost your mind.”

167. Ariel Sharon, in a conference held at the Institute
of Strategic Studies in Tel Aviv on 14 December 198 1,
summed up what he called the threats to Israeli security. He cited three factors comprising those threats.
The first factor, he said, was the national ideology of
radical Arab regimes. That is a threat to Israel. How
he deals with it, I do not know. But coming to the
point, the second threat is the PLO. And he says:

171. We are dealing with maniacs here-megalomaniacs. And they are wreaking havoc in the area.
What did I get in the mail today? I got a letter addressed to the PLO from someone called the National
Membership
Chairman,
Zionist
Organization
of
America, Now all that he says is of some relevance
here, but what is much more relevant for me is that
this Zionist Organization of America is bringing the
complex-the
psychology-of
Masada to the Jewish
youth of America, I only hope that American Jewish
youth will not be driven into a Masada complex, or a
Bar Kochba complex, because that would be disastrous for the United States as well as for the Middle
East. These things are 2,000 years old. To live in a
state of seige, commit crimes against oneself-suicide-that
is the Masada complex, that is the Bar
Kochba complex. Please, we are about to be liberated
from those complexes.

“On the challenge presented by the Palestine Liberation Organization,
I will say only this: the PLO
poses a political threat to the very existence of the
State of Israel and remains one of the main obstacles
to the resolution of the Palestinian problem on the
basis of the Camp David accords.”
168. Yes, we are a political threat. We have the
support of the world. We have the support of our
people. And that is why the Security Council and the
General Assembly have supported the PLO. It is a
political threat; it finds its constituency,
it finds its
roots, among the people-the
Palestinian
people.
Thus, we are a political threat. No one can deny that
fact-that
the PLO draws its power from the Palestinian people and the rest of the world; it is not isolated,
as are the Israelis and their friends.

172. But a word to the Council: we have been sitting
here for a long, long time, while people are being
killed. What is the Council about to do to bring to an
end these crimes committed against the civilian population? That should be our concern: we are not here
to deal with ideologies. We are not here to defend
what was done in the past or to condemn what was
done. The Council is faced here with an immediate
responsibility
and, because of the position of some
particular permanent members, the work the Council
should be carrying out is being obstructed.

169. Anthony Lewis, today, 1 April, in The NPW
Yolk Timc>s, comes out with certain revelations. He
tells us that Professor Milson-this
professor-general-is using a device that might have been expected
of a Roman proconsul. The Zionists in Tel Aviv are
taking us back 2,000 years, and they are playing the
role of the Roman proconsul, not of the people. Some
reference was made to those who collaborate-the
quislings, the collaborators,
the village leaguers.
Even the Jcnrsnlem Post, which is published in Jerusalem, describes those who are collaborating with the
Israeli authorities as follows:

173. I shall have the opportunity at a later stage to
show that the 57 so-called synagogues in the Old City
of Jerusalem were not Bestroyed by any Arab: they
were destroyed by a clear order from the Zionist Occupation forces, since June 1967, in order to make room
for a parking lot outside the area.

“The leaders chosen for the village leagues were
some of the most discredited persons in the West
Bank community,
even before they agreed to collaborate with Israel, and their adjutants regular
ruffians who commanded , . . plain loathing.”

The mvting
170. If the representative of Tel Aviv, sitting to the
extreme right here, thinks that these are the cream of
the nation, even the J~~~scrlerrz Post does not agree
with him. But of course, there is a mentality at work
here-the Zionist mentality.
And as Anthony Lewis
tells us, this is also the true Commentcrry
mindC’ommentn/y is the magazine that circulates throughout
the United States forming the opinion of certain
enlightened people. But I must state very clearly:

rose

crt 7.20 p.m.

NOTES

1 United Nations, Tretr(y Series, vol. 75, No. 973. p. 287.

2 QfJicirr I Records
q f the Gcwrrrl
A.wvn/~lv.
Thirty-sisth
SW
sion, Supplonent
No. 35 (A/36/3.5). sect. V.
J Ibid., Second Session, Strppletnenr
No. I I. vol. II, annex 19.
4 Ihid., Tll*enty-ninth
Session, Plenrrry Matings,
2282nd meeting.

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
est&n en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

004bo

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Ies agences
a : Nations

dtpositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Section
de Yentas,

88-60989-April

1989-2.050
