THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING: 29 MARCI-I 1977

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
, . . . , . . q. . , . . , . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . .

Page
1

..........,I,..,.,...,,...........I..,

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted under General Assembly resolution
3 l/62 concerning the Peace Conference on the Middle East (S/l 2290 and
Corr.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.., . . . . . . . I . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1997)
Adoption of the agenda

s/w. 1997

1997th

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 29 March 1977, at 3 p.m.
l+esident: Mr. Andrew YOUNG (United States of America).

invited to participate in the discussion of the question now
before the Security Council. Accordingly, I propose, in
accordance with the usual practice and with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, under the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following Statts:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 997)

Council table, I invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to

take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be invited
to take a place at the Council table whenever he wishesto
address the Council.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted under
General Assembly resolution 3 l/62 concerning the
Peace Conference on the Middle East (S/l 2290 and
Corr.1)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took the place reservedfor him at the side
of the Council chamber.

4. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, on behalf of
the delegation of Pakistan and on my own behalf it gives
me great pleasure to congratulate you on your appointment
as the representative of your great country to the United
Nations and on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. The warm welcome that has already been extended to you from all sides,
and in which I join my other colleagues, bears testimony to
the qualities of intelligence, candour and sympathy you
bring to your task. On behalf of my delegation, I offer you
our full co-operation and support in pursuit of the conunon
objectives of the Organization.

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p. m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General submitted uuder General
Assembly resolution 31/62 concerning the Peace Conference on the Miklle East (S/l 2290 and Corr.1)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Security Council at its 1993rd and 1995th
meetings, I invite the representatives of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization to take places at the
Council-table, and the representatives of Egypt, Jordan, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the usual understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they wish to address the
Council.

5. I take this opportunity to express my delegation’s
appreciation also to your predecessor, the President of the
Council for the month of February, Ambassador Murray of
the United Kingdom, who conducted our deliberations with
his usual skill, urbanity and unfailing good humour.
6. The Security Council now has under consideration the
report of the Secretary-General submitted by him under
General Assembly resolution 3 l/62 [S/l 2290 and Con-.11
on his contacts with all the parties to the conflict and with
the Co-Chairmen of the Peace Conference on the Middle
East in preparation for the early convening of the Conference,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. C Herzog (Israel)
and Mr. Z. L. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization)
took places at the Council table; Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. N. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. M. Allaf’ (Syrian
Arab Republic) and Mr. M. A. Sallam (Yemen) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. I should like to expressmy delegation’s appreciation of
the arduous efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General
and the meticulous care with which he discharged the tasks
assigned to him. His report describes in detail the steps
taken by him and his conversations with all the parties
concerned.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Saudi Arabia in which he requests to be
1

these areas. Repression
unabated.

8. We endorse the view of the Secretary-General that, in
the existing situation, lack of communication and uuderstanding presents a major obstacle in the way of efforts to
establish a just and lasting peace in the area. It was precisely
this consideration
which led the General Assembly to
request him to resume contacts with all the parties in
preparation for an early convening of the Conference. The
Secretary-General’s
mission of peace to the Middle East in
January and February last and his conversations with all the
parties concerned were a valuable effort to bridge the
communications
gap. It is encouraging that the SecretatyGeneral found that all concerned were earnestly desirous of
moving towards a negotiated settlement. However, the next
stage-and now the most important one-the commencement of a dialogue among all concerned at the Conference,
remains elusive.

of local inhabitants

continues

13. The situation constitutes a threat to international
peace and security and must therefore remain under
constant review by the Security Council. Above all, it is the
duty of the Couucil to promote efforts to bring about an
end to the underlying causes of this dangerous situation by
all possible means.
14. Promotion of a dialogue, through the Geneva Peace
Conference, remains the primary objective of the efforts of
the Security Couucil and of the Secretary-General. As I
said, the resumption of the dialogue will not in itself lead to
the achievement of a just and lasting peace. The existing
situation in the Middle East, with Israel in apparently
indefinite occupation of Arab territories, seems to be
considered advantageous by Israel. That is a short-sighted
view in the opinion of many enlightened persons in Israel
itself. The fact remains that the prevarications and preconditions of Israel regarding the Geneva talks are not
calculated to facilitate the holding of the Conference or its
successful outcome-quite
the contrary. It is therefore the
duty of the Council, while promoting all efforts for the
early convening of the Conference, to reaffirm the basic
principles which should govern the Conferknce, in accordance with its own resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
and with General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and
3376 (XXX).

9. How can this lack of confidence be removed and
mutual distrust and fear be allayed when one party to the
dispute, Israel, refuses to accept the participation of the
other principal party, the Palestinian people, represented by
their own organ: the Palestine Liberation Organization?
The General Assembly has clearly pronounced itself on this
question. The representatives of the Palestine Liberation
Organization have been participating in the debates on the
question of the Middle East in the Security Council itself.
Furthermore, when the General Assembly, by its resolution
31/62, requested the Secretary-General to resume contacts
with all the parties, the Secretary-General
very rightly
interpreted his mandate to include contacts with the PLO.

15. Mr. JAIPAL (India): My delegation had not intended
to speak on this item at present, because we were under the
impression that the Council had been convened for the
limited purpose of addressing itself to the report of the
Secretary-General and working out a consensus statement
of a procedural nature. But events have turned out rather
differently. A number of Member States, including all the
parties directly concerned with the situation in the Middle
East, have expressed themselves on a much wider range of
matters than those covered by the Secretary-General’s
report.

10. The refusal of Israel to sit with the Palestine Liberation Organization in the peace negotiations at Geneva is
unreasonable and justifies the mistrust and suspicion felt by
the Arabs about the eventual outcome of the peace
negotiations. The attitude of Israel towards the Palestinian
people must change if a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East is to be achieved.
11. It is our considered view that the resumption of the
dialogue among all the parties concerned would create the
basic conditions for achieving understanding and accommodation on all sides. But the dialogue by itself will not
lead to the achievement of a just and lasting peace. The
elements of such a settlement have been enumerated in the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions: First, Israel must withdraw from all the territories it
has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalkm. Secondly,
the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, including their
right to self-determination
and a sovereign independent
homeland of their own on Palestine soil, must be recog
nizcd and implemented. Thirdly, all States and peoples of
the region should have the right to exist in peace.

16. May I first of all pay a warm tribute to the
Secretary-General for his dedicated endeavours in the cause
of peace in the Middle East and wish him greater success on
his next round of discussions, which must come sooner or
later? His report is a model of brevity, precision and
lucidity; but, more important, it sets out both the
immediate and the long-term problems of building a
structure of enduring peace. The Secretary-General’s assessment is that if the present stalemate continues, there is a
grave danger that the situation may deteriorate again. He is
therefore of the opinion that we must maintain the
momentum towards negotiations and intensify the search
for the means through which the Peace Conference can bc
convened-preferably
in the second half of this year.

12. The situation in the Middle East is far from normal.
Vast Arab territories remain under Israeli occupation; their
inhabitants continue to suffer the rigours and humiliation
of foreign occupation,
in disregard of the applicable
international
conventions
governing the occupation of
territories.
The occupying Power, in violation of these
conventions and natural justice, is adopting and implementing measures, particularly by establishing settlements,
that are aimed at altering the demographic composition of

17. The Secretary-General states also thdt all the parties
are ready and willing to attend another Conference at any
time and to discus.s all substantive issues without preconditions. Our consensus statement should reflect this and
also, of course, express our appreciation for the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts and urge him to continue his discussions
and his journeys for discovering ways and means of
2

establishing peace in the Middle East. But that is perhaps
not enough for a consensus statement of the Security
Council. Something more has to be said in order to reflect
the sentiments expressed by the various speakers, as well as
the sentiments which were not expressed by others but
which are nevertheless well known.

the representative of a nation and of an Administration
which is particularly attached to our Organization; then as a
man whose experience will help us to prevent our house
from being divided against itself, and will help us to
overcome-by negotiation, by persuasionand by action at
once warm-hearted and well-considered-the divisions and
misunderstandingswhich separate us. In your struggle,
which is a struggleof man for man and not againstman, my
delegationand my country will be by your side.

18. Furthermore, General Assembly resolution 31/62 has
requested the Security Council
to promote the process
towards the establishment of a just and lasting peace. The
main obstacle, however, is lack of agreement on the
participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization at the
Peace Conference. Apparently, differences on this question
are too fundamental to be bridged by procedural devices.
Fortunately, in the Security Council this is no longer a
procedural problem, because the PLO has been permitted
to participate in our discussions. It is therefore now a
question of getting the agreement of ail the parties that will
attend the Conference to PLO participation. We feel sure
that the efforts of the Secretary-General and of the two
Co-Chairmen will be directed towards securing that agreement. Unfortunately,
some parties are at present disposed
to link the question of PLO participation with the future of
a Palestinian entity. These two questions are, in our
opinion, separate though they may be related.

23. I should also like to say, a few words to some older
friends: to Ambassador Murray, for the elegance and
authority with which he conducted our proc:edings in
February, to our colleague from Romania, to whom I
should like to extend our profound sympathy on the
occasionof the suffering of Itis country, a country that is so
closeto France,
24. When the General Assembly, on 9 December last,
adopted the resolution on the Peace Conference in the
Middle East [resolution
31/62/,
it expressed the desire,
largely shared by the international community, to see a
resumption in that area of the momentum towards peace,
the loss of which had been a source of constant concern.
The Assembly took that opportunity lo request the
Secretary-General to contact once again all the parties to
the conflict and the Co4Xairmen of the Conference, with a
view to convening that Conference without delay. It also
called upon him to submit a report to the Security Council
on the results of his contacts- and on the situation in the
Middle East.

19. We think that it is unrealistic to fear the worst and use
that as an excuse for doing nothing in a situation that is
untenable. Equally, we feel that it is unrealistic to use an
ideal objective as a precondition for commencement of
negotiations.

25. The Secretary-Generaldischargedwith diligence, dcvotion and ability the task which we entrusted to him. I
should like to take this opportunity to thank him very
much. I note with pleasurethat the missionthat he hasjust
concluded, in a region and among leaders he knows well,
was the first of his second term. My delegation cannat but
bc gratified to see the experience of so a distinguished
person, in whom we have unanimously renewed our
whole-hearted and well-justified confidence, once again
being put to the serviceof peacein the Middle East.

20. My delegation %as examined the results of two
attempts to formulate a consensus statement. We feel that
there is sufficient common ground to formulate a consensus
containing certain basic elements, elements that are well
known and generally accepted, such as recognition of the
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people.
21. It would be a pity, at this intermediate stage of our
consideration of the situation in the Middle East, to vote on
any draft resolution, with the attendant danger of its being
vetoed. We feel that it is necessary for the Security Council
to promote the process towards a negotiated settlement at
the Peace Conference. That is indeed the view of the
General Assembly, as expressed in its resolution 31/62. We
think that we could best maintain the momentum towards
negotiations by adopting a consensus and, if that is not
possible, then by adjourning until a more auspicious
moment.

26. It is only natural that the Organization should choose
such a highly qualified person to report to us in detail the
results of the contacts that he had with the parties to the
conflict at a time when there is hope that peacenegotiations may at last begin. Unfortunately, it has been cluite a
long time since the Council adopted resolution 338 (1973)
calling for immediate negotiations. The report which we arc
studying today contains a certain amount of useful information on the state of mind of the parties and provides US
with a framework for reflection. Its descriptive aspect is
supplementedby a number of observations and conclusions
expressingthe views which the Secretary-General hasbeen
able to arrive at on ways of resuming the momentum
towards peacein the Middle East. Ibis observationsencourage us to be optimistic, but we must add that our optimism
should be cautious.

22. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France)
(interpretation
fi-onz
l+ench): Mr. President, I should like first of all to welcome
you here both as our guide in our deliberationsand alsoas
the new representative of a great friendly country. 1 have
been here only two or three months longer than you and I
know what I am talking about when I sap how much I
admire the way in which, from the very moment of your
arrival, you dischargedyour functions as President.I really
do not seewhy you have asked us for our indulgence. I
should like to expressto you the confidence, support and
warm sympathy with which my delegationwill accompany
you until 31 March. And then, when you are again one of
US, you will remain our friend for many reasons:first, as

27. Among the reasonsfor satisfaction, WC find the &sire
affirmed by all the partics to progressalong the path of a
negotiated settlement and to see a resumption without
delay of the processof negotiation which seemsto us both
3

desirable and urgent. In a part of the world where, owing to
a state of war which has l&ted for almost 30 years, passions
and tension have built up, this is without doubt an
important sign, a trend which the Council should encourage. We should take particular pleasure in the fact that all
the interested parties have recognized that it is of vital
itnportance not to lose the momentum which has been won
towards the resumption of negotiations and to seeto it that
efforts continue to that end without interruption, Such
attitudes of mind testify to the sense of responsibility of
the interested parties.

recent efforts which all the parties-and I mean a&-nlusl
still make if there is to be a convening of the Peace
Conference. That prospect is now the dominant factorin
the whole question of the Middle East, which we are
considering today in the light of the report of the
Secretary-General. I hope that we shall not forget that. EIol
should we forget, as the report which servesas a basisfor
our meeting itself states, that: “Neither the ‘parties in 111e
Middle East nor the international community as a whoh
can afford a continuing stalemate.” (S/122YO md Cml,
para. 22.1

32. Mr. von WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President, our colleague and friend the representative oi
France has expressed our feelings on your joining (he
Security Council. He did it much more eloquently than I
could have. Let me therefore simply say that it is a grca~
pleasure for us to congratulate you on your assurnptiou 01
the presidency of the Council. Since your appointmen ai
Pennanent Representative of the United States of Americ;
to the United Nations, I have had more than OI\~
opportunity to participate in consultations with you 01
important issues facing the Organization. On those occa
sions 1 was impressed by your strong personal commitmen
to the attainment of constructive solutions, your insi&
into political developments and the friendly candour whisl
you have displayed as President of the Council in you
co-operation with us. You may be assured, Sir, of ~1:
delegation’s full support for your efforts.

28. Differences of opinion between parties, however, do
continue to exist both with regard to procedure and to
problems of substance. While the immediate impediment to
the resumption of the Geneva Conference is a proble’m that
concerns the participation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, and that in the view of the Secretary-General
is unlikely to be surmounted in the present state of affairs
by resort to procedural tactics, it is also true that the main
elements of the question remain extremely difficult to
tackle. In the light of this situation, the author of the
report is tempted to conclude that only a certain change of
heart on the part of all the parties is likely to improve the
chances of successfor the Conference. I should add, for my
own part, that among those changes, the idea of recognition
put forward by the ‘Secretary-General, and also the idea
that there can be many degrees of recognition which the
parties could agree upon, is important in the view of my
delegation, That was recentiy stressed by the French
Foreign Minister and it is among the elements which should
be analysed in the utmost detail in order to promote the
necessary dialogue.
29. I come llow to the feelings of France with respect to
the present situation; I should point out first that Mr. de
Guiringaud brou&t back from his own visits in February
impressions which are very similar to those of the
Secretary-General. ‘?he Arab representatives whom he met
seemed to hilti to be motivated by a great desire for peace.
Certain extreme. expfessions used in the past have disappeared fronl the Vocabulary. Progress towards realism
seems to be under way. The French Foreign Minister also
had the overall imfiression that conditions might now exist
which would prombte the search for a peace settlement.

33. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germ~l!
has carefully studied the report of the Secretary-Genea
submitted under General Assembly resolution 3 1162 co11
cerning the Peace Conference on the Middle East /S/IZ%r
and Co17:1J. On behalf of my Government, I should like tj
thank and commend the Secretary-General for his rcsourc@
ful efforts and to congratulate him on his valuable rcporl
ThBt report is, in the view of my Government, remarkabl
for being both imaginative and cautious, both honest 3111
constructive. My Government holds that the report, i
clarifying the positions of the parties ‘and in identifying 111
persisting difficulties and unsolved problems, as well :a
realistically outlining the possibilities and prerequisites for a
solution, has greatly contributed to the prospects of a
successful reconvening of the Geneva Conference.

30. Almost a year ago to the day, the President of the
French Republic reminded us that:

34. My Government is aware of the great diffiicultics of
the task before US. In the interests of a just and durable
peace, all parties to the conflict are expected to assume
constructive positions. Only if both sides-the Arab side
and Israel-are willing to approach the negotiating process
in an atmosphere of growing trust and confidence, will
progress towards peace become possible. It is one of th?
merits of the Secretary-General’s report that it made tliis
point perfectly clear,

“ . . . if ,it is to be, just and lasting, a global settlement
necessariljr should take into account what is fundamental
in the legitimate asljirations of all the parties to the
conflict: for Israel, the right to live in peace, Iike all other
States of the area, within recognized secure and’guaranteed borders; for the Arab States, the right to recover
their territorial integrity; for the Palestinian people, the
right that is enjoyed by all’ other peoples, the right tb
their own homeland. These rights”-as was stressed by
Mr. Ciscard d’Estaing-“arc, in our view, of equal value
and should all be taken into account.”

35. During his recent visits to Arab countries neighbouriy
Israel, my Foreign Minister found an increasing willingllc$s
011the part of their leaders to arrive at a settlement whi&
cduId _be accepted as an honourable solution. 111 m!
Government’s view it is of great importance that the Arab
countries involved, including Saudi Arabia, have adopted a
common position which facilitates the search for a just and
lasting peace. During his recent visit to Israel, my Foreign

31, In conclus;on, I should like to say that the dearest
wish of France is to see a strengthening of the timorous
hope which w’e feel this year. 1 would mention the most
4

Minister conveyed this to the Israeli Government. The talks
in Israel have strengthened his conviction that there is a
greater chance of a settlement of the Israeli-Arab conflict
than ever.

excellent report which we have been considering as well as
the very helpful oral introduction which he made earlier in
our debate (1993rd meeting/.
The report provides an
extremely clear and helpful analysis of the main problems
and issueswhich now face us in the months mnning up to
the resumption of the Geneva Peace Coriferencc, which
everyone now seemsto agree should take place in the
secondhalf of this year. It sets out clearly and objectively
the positions of the parties on those questionsand the main
areasof agreementand disagreementbetween them. It also
suggestsin generalterms in its conclusionsthe way in which
some of those disagreementsmight be bridged. Webelieve
that this report can only be helpful in preparing the ground
for the resutnption of negotiations and that the SecretaryGeneral and his staff deserveour most profound thanks and
congratulations.

36. On the substance of the matter, it is well known that
the nine States of the European Community have developed a joint stance within the framework of their political
co-operation. The Federal Republic of Germany has actively contributed to this common policy, on which jt
continues to base its own Middle East position.
37. Without going into well-known* details, my Govcrnment, with regard to the central question of the Palestinian
people, would like to stress and reiterate only one basic
aspect: it continues to be our firm belief that, just as Israel
should be ready to recognize the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people within the framework of a comprehensive settlement, so too should the Arab side be I-eady to
recognize the right of Israel to live in peace within secure
and recognized boundaries. It is gratifying indeed to see this
basic and necessary attitude finding its expression also in
the report of the Secretary-General.

43. In our view, there are two main conclusionsto be
derived from the Secretary-General’s report. On the one
hand, it concludes frankly that, on a number of important
issues,the parties remain seriously divided in their approach
to a resumption of the negotiations and that there will have
to be significant changes of attitude on both sides if
substantial progressis to be made. On the other hand, it
also brings out no lessclearly the general desirethat now
exists on all sidesfor an early resumption of the negotiating
processand, more than that, the realization that the present
time offers an opportunity to make progressthat may not
occur again. We have been much impressedover the past
few months, following the restoration of peaceto Lebanon,
by the demonstration which the leadersof the Arab world
have given of their earnest desire, indeed their determination, to get negotiations going againand to bring peace
at last to the Middle East. We have alsobeen very pleasedto
note the readinessshown by Israeli leadersto resumethose
negotiations. Surely now that there exists, perhapsfor the
first time, this willingnesson all sidesto make progress,it
should be possible to find a way of overcoming the
remainingobstaclesto a resumption of the negotiations.

38, In underlining and supporting the need for an early
resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany appeals to the
Secretary-General to continue his mission of good offices
with all the parties concerned, with a view to enabling them
to bridge the remaining gap. My Government continues to
be ready, individually and collectively within the European
Community, to contribute actively to the achievement of
that goal.
39. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, first
I should like to join with previous speakers in offering you
our congratulations on your assumption of the presidency.
We are delighted to welcome you here, both as our new
colleague on the Security Council and as our President for
the month of March. If I may say so, in the past few weeks
you have already amply demonstrated the great skill which
you bring to our consultations and your deep personal
commitment to helping to solve the problems at present
under discussion in the Council. We look forward to
continuing to work in close co-operation with you not only
during the closing days of your presidency but also in the
months to come.

44. This is not the time for me to set out the viewsof my
Government on the requirements for a settlement. These
are, I think, sufficiently well known and have beenspelled
out on many occasions in the past, for example in the
statement made by the representative of the Netherlandsin
the General Assembly on 7 Dcccmber last1 on behalfof the
nine countries of the European Community and in the
staten?entmade in the General Assembly on 5 October* by
the then Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, Mr. Anthony Crosland. Nor do we think that it would be helpful
for the Council now to try to provide its own solution to
the problems set out in the Secretary-General’sreport.
These are matters on which discussionsarc still going on
among the parties, and which will have to be decided
pritnarily by the parties themselves. What, however, the
Council can and, we believe, should do now is, first, to state
our conviction that the negotiations should be resumedas
soon as possible and, secondly, to urge on the partiesthe
need for moderation and a willingness to compromisein
overcoming the remainingobstacles.

40. May I also say how sorry I was to miss the
opportunity to preside over the activities of the Council
during the month of February and to participate in its work
during the month of January. I was travelling somewhat. I
am grateful to my Deputy, Ambassador Murray, for so ably
filling that position and I should like to acknowledge on his
behalf the kind tributes that have been made around this
table to him.
41. I should also like to join with previous speakers in
expressing our deep sympathy to the Government and
people of Romania on the tragic earthquake which they
suffered earlier this month.

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session,
Plenary Meetings, 9 I stmeeting.
2 Rid., 17th meeting.

42. Turning now to the business before us, I should like to
begin by congratulating the Secretary-General on the
5

45. 111the final paragraph of his report, the SecretaryGeneral states his intention of remaining in contact with
the parties and the two Co-Chairmen. We welcome this.
Even in the short time that has elapsed since the SecretaryGeneral’s visit to the area, some significant developments
have already taken place. A number of important meetings
have taken place, and others are scheduled for the coming
weeks and months. A series of high-level visits is already
under way. Finally, elections for a new Government in
Israel are to take place on 17 May.

Heights are an indivisible part of Israel, Jerusalem is not
negotiable, the West Bank and Gaza are Judaea and
Samaria, and Sharm el-Sheikh, along with other parts of
Sinai, are indispensable to the territorial security of the
Zionist State. Furthermore, the lsraeli leaders are propagating the position that Israel is not willing to meet with
the Palestinians until the Palestine Liberation Organization
recognizes the existence of Israel.
52. We are all aware of the prevailing situation in the
occupied Arab territories: boys and girls are pulled by their
hair and dragged through the streets; students are beaten,
arrested and put into crowded gaols without trial. Religious
and cultural shrines are being desecrated; land and propcrties are being confiscated; the historical and demographic
characteristics of the land are being changed; educational
programmes arc being distorted and Jewish settlements in
the occupied Arab land are being established.

46. For all &se reasons, we are now inevitably at
something of an interim stage. In view of this, we were very
pleased to have the Secretary-General’s assurance that he
intends to continue his efforts, and that he will keep the
Council informed of further developments.
47. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yemen, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
48. Mr. SALiAM

(Yemen): Sir, allow me first of all, on

behalf of the Y’emen Arab Republic delegation, to welcome

you and congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of March.
In welcoming YOU to this world Organization and to the
presidency of this august Council, we are welcoming a
devoted and rebognized leader in human rights, Your
religious background will certainly influence the taking of
decisions which, in your belief, represent right and justice,
It gives me great pleasure, therefore, to see you presiding ’
over the Council. It is, my deep conviction that the Council,
under your guidance and leadership, will uphold the ideals
of justice and human rights.

53. Does Israel expect that the population of the occupied
Arab territories will stay calm and content? Of course it
will not. Innocent prisoners go on hunger strikes and the
people demonstrate against their oppressors to voice ;1~1
appeal to the world community to relieve them of their
accumulated grievances, The Israelis react by exposing:
children to the most barbaric and humiliating terrorist acts.

54. Daily newspapers print accounts of the grievances of
the Palestinian people under Israeli occupation. A detailed
testimony was written by Mr. William Farrell in the 3-S
March issue of The New Yorlc Times. I need not repeat it,
since it was mentioned yesterday by the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic [1995th meeting/. Listening to
and personally reading that testimony, makes me disdainful
of thk abhorrent actions which are practised under the
49. The essence of the Middle East conflict is a case of
obstrvant eye of those who believe in the dignity of ma11
1~um11~
rights. The Palestinian people, who hare been
tid champion the cause of human rights. Perhaps the
clisplaccd and uprooted% from their ancestral homeland, are
Zionists learned those practices from their Europea 11
calling up&* ihis $qrld Council .to do them justice in
persecutors, but to use such humiliating methods on Arab
restoring .!o ilie&’ their inalienable rights, which are. k children will only result in spite and hatred.
guaranteed bp,‘tlle ,ptiriciples of thd Charter of thy .U$ted:
55, The record of the United Nations speak3 for itself: the
Nations, the $rihci$les of international- law, the. Tl)tbrGenerBl Assembly and the Security Council have repeatedly
national Coven’aSlt on C,i$l and Political Rights and the
condemned Israel for its violations of the Charter of the
Universal Declakatidn.of Hdnran Rights.
*
‘United
Nations and the Hague and Geneva Conventiorls.
I.
The International Conference on Human Rights has cited
50. The Uh%d’,~dtiotls
his been discussing this is& ‘toi;
ISrael’s violations of human rights in the occupied Aral-,
the last 29’, ye&s. Hugdrkds of resolutions h&‘e ’ bken
territories.
The Human Rights Commission has charged
adopted by the General Assetibly and the Security Cduticil ,I
Israel with war crimes, and Amnesty International has
calling ‘upon Israel t’d vjithdiaw from all the Arab territories,
reported that its own investigation disclosed the existence
occupied ‘by ,Is?aaelati! to iecognize the inalienable rights bf
of practices “abhorrent to the conscience of mankind”.
the Palestiniati keople. The world community has c’onEven the Israeli League for Human and Civil Rights 1~1s
de~r~rled the Isfaefi aggression and upheld the principles df
repeatedly charged that Israel has ill-treated its own Arab
ri$t and justice.
citizens and the inhabitants of the occupied Arab territories, in flagrant violation of the Geneva Conventions. In
51. Now provisional steps are being taken to gather
Illomentum
for a comprehensive settlement in the Middle ” ‘short, no Government represented in this world Organization has ever shown greater contempt for world opinioll.
l:ast. Arab lcadera have expressed their readiness to attend,
in good faith, the Geneva Peace Conference. The new
56. Confronted with the Arabs’ genuine desire for peace,
Administration
in tllc United States has voiced concern,
Israel refuses to accept the fact that the Palestine Liberaexpressirtg the view that resolution of the Arab-Israeli
tion Organization, whose representative is sitting in the
dispute
iS dcsemec{ly
at the
top
Of its list in foreign affairs.
Security Council, right beside the Israeli representative-the
y-he most outstanding difficulty is the ilitralx+3It
Official
PLO which is the sole representative of the Palestinian
Israeli policy, articulated by the Israeli leaders to their
people-is the main party concerned in the question of
population and Parliament, according to which the Golan
,’
6

Palestine and one of the main parties concerned ‘in the
Middle East conflict. It is only the PLO that can speak for
the Palestinian people if it is desired that real peace and
tranquillity should prevail in. the Middle East. But if Israel
chooses to continue ignoring the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and pursuing its policy of expansion,
intimidation
and humiliation
of the Arab people of
Palestine, Israel, which was created on the basis of a
mythical account, should recall that history repeats itself
and that its existence can only retain material form through
justice and respect of the rights of others.

63. I have been addressing myself to this question for over
three decades at the United Nation;, and I was not inactive
with regard to the Palestinian question between the two
world wars. When in 1922-I was 17 years old-we found
that the victorious Powers of the First World War had
partitioned part of the Arab world amongst them in the
form of mandates-and a mandate was colonialism in
disguise-many of us rebelled. I thank God that my
rebellion was not with arms but with words. But I am
finally realizing that the word is not mightier than the
sword, in spite of what an Arab poet said many years ago.

57. It is my delegation’s conviction that the Council, in
discharging its responsibilities, should act in accordance
with the Charter with a view to restoring to the Middle East
its peace and tranquillity by forcing Israel to withdraw
from all the occupied Arab territories and recognize the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their
right to self-determination, sovereignty and independence,

64. Today our work here is regulated by power. Those
who exercise power have their own way. We are sitting
around this horseshoe table to deliberate and argue a case,
but what do we find? We find that we are merely
window-dressing for those who elaborate the policies in our
respective capitals, and more so in the capitals of the
powerful nations, of the super-Powers. Do you think the
Chinese were the first to call them “super-Powers”? I did
so before the Chinese joined the United Nations.

58. Withdrawal from the Arab territories is not a concession, as the Israelis would like to call it, but rather a
commitment
that should be implemented in accordance
with the principles of international law and the Charter
whose provisions Israel pledged to respect when it was
accepted as a Member of this world Organization.

59. It is therefore imperative that the Council‘ should call
upon the Soviet Union and the United States to reconvene
the Geneva Peace Conference as soon as possible with the
participation of all parties concerned including the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the sole representative of the
people of Palestine, who have suffered for many, many
years-to borrow the words of Mr. Carter, the President of
the United States.
60. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
61. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): It heartens me to see
a young gentleman in name and in fact occupying the
President’s chair in the Security Council. Judging by all
appearances, we find that Mr. Andrew Young is far from
being highly strung. He has been taking the arduous task
before the Council in stride, without a vestige of the false
pride that sometimes characterizes the representative of a
super-Power. In other words, Mr. Young has struck me as
being a man adorned with innate modesty and one prone to
having a mind of his own. Comparatively young in years, he
is not lacking in native intelligence and a wide range of
experience derived from his multifarious contacts and, no
doubt, subtle negotiations with erstwhile fellow congressmen in Washington.
62. As an old-timer, I am happy to greet a newcomer who,
let us hope, will have a freer hand than his predecessors to
turn over a new leaf in the handling of international
affairs-a new leaf on which he will record a policy based
on fair play, peace and justice. Good luck, my dear
Mr. Young, because you certainly need it, no less than we
do, so that we may together iriitiate a new approach to
international affairs, lest we all ultimately founder and
leave the world worst than we found it when each in turn
makes his final exit from this earth.

65. Years ago when I lived in London, between 1929 and
1939, I marvelled when I went to Hyde Park Corner to
listen to the speakers who vented their emotions and
expressed their criticisms against the Governments of those
days. I marvelled and wondered, but then I understood that
it was a sagacious Anglo-Saxon ploy to let the people talk,
under the epithet of freedom of speech, so that the
Government might know what they had in mind and to let
them get it off their chests. In some of the northern
countries, they say “It is not permitted”. In German it is
“verboten “. I do not know the Russian. It is because of the
climate. It is the way they have to live. If the people rebel,
they reason with them. If they do not listen, they are
punished. In the so-called democratic world they are
punished too, but under the guise of the ritual of
democracy.
66. I am saying this not as a digression but because I want
to be forthright and come to the point. The First World
War allegedly was fought against militarism-then
it was
said to be the militarism of the Kaiser-but we found out in
the 1920s that it was fought against German mercantiiism,
because the Germans came late on the scene to colonialism
and had to depend on their discipline. They created an
industrial country that competed with the rest of Western
Europe. Of course there had to be a motivation for war.
Not that the Germans were angels-they were like the rest
of them-but there had to be a motivation. A great figure of
your own country, Mr. President, Woodrow Wilson, came
forth with the principle of self-determination in his 14
points, but did the late Clemenceau and Lloyd George heed
his advice when he went to Paris, before the League of
Nations was established? Finally, he was told to go back
home, and he came back a broken man.
67.. The Second World War was allegedly fought for the
four freedoms, (I remember Mr. Roosevelt, vp$ well; I
shook hands with him during his last inauyrri’tion.) They
were freedom from fear-that was laudable-freedom from
want and so on and so forth. There is more fear nowadays
in the hearts of men than before the Second World War.
Freedom from want? There are more impecunious people

illiterate. The Bible saysthere was a very clever serpent that
cameto Eve and told her “Eat of that apple”. We have no
applesin the Middle East. I do not know where they got
that apple in the translation of the King Jamesversion.
There are plants, there are cacti, but we do not have apples.
So we are not dealing with truth now, but anyway, they
called it an apple. The serpent said “Gain wisdom, eat”.
Then Eve gave it to our ancestor, Adam, and we fell into
sin; we are still in sin to this day. Theseare symbolic figures
of speech.They have a meaningthat wasunderstood by the
common people. I am not making fun of them. Symbolism
wasusedasa way of expressingcertain ideas.

in the world today. Time and again the right of selfdetermination has been called a principle, and I remember
when the principle of self-determination
was enshrined in
the Charter. I told the then Foreign Minister of Saudi
Arabia, none other than the late King F&al-may
God rest
his soul in peace-that if there was anything worth while to
us who were fighting against colonialism it was the principle
of self-determination.
That was in 1945, and in 1947 we
argued at Lake Success. 1 was present and was entrusted by
many of my Arab colleagues with the task of approaching
Mr. Warren Austin to see whether we could postpone the
partitioning of Palestine and place the Mandate, as it was
called, under the Trusteeship Council pending the finding
of a solution which would perhaps bring solace to many of
the Jews who were driven, we thought, by a religious
sentiment to go to the Holy Land of Palestine. Pressure
groups in the great United States of America were at work.
Although I am repeating myself, there is nothing that I
would invent. When the State Department advised Mr. Truman that the partitioning of Palestine would create problems which would not be in the best interests of the host
country-that
is, the United States-Mr. Truman said some
thing to this effect, and it can be found in the second
volume of his Mmoirs:3
“Gentlemen, tell me how many
Americans of Arab origin do I have in my constituency? “.
President Truman no doubt had many good qualities, and
far be it from me to touch upon his character. He was a
good l3rnily man and he served Ms country. However, with
all due respect for him, what right has a man hailing from
the Middle West, 7 or 8,000 miles fram Palestine, arbitrarily
to bring pressure in order to crcatc this problem? This is a
political aspect of the matter.

70. They came,and we know what happened.Those tribes
f>nally had the upper hand in Palestine. Joseph was sold
into slavery, and he endedup, asyou know, in Egypt. The
people we call Jews today were known as Hebrews.
“Hebrew” is a better appellation becausethe word “Jew”
derives from the fourth son of Jacob, Judah. But
“Hebrew”-what does “Hebrew” mean? It means the
people of the mules, It is not derived from “habarra”,
which means“to cross”, as somepeople think, believing it
refers to crossingthe River Jordan. The Hebrewscame in a
perpendicular line from the north down to the south. The
Jordan runs perpendicularly too, zig-zagging a little after
tfle Litani river. They dependedon mules,just asthe Arabs
of the desert dependedon camels,whosepadswere shaped
as though made for the desert. But where there were rocks
the hoofs of the mules were able to withstand the rigorous
terrain. I am talking about our Jews-not the Jews from
which the gentleman beside me is descended, but our
Semitic Jews. He is a Khazar, most likely. Yes, 1 can seehe
is a Khazar, a member of the thirteenth tribe asin the book
by Koestler. People came to me and asked“Did you read
Koestler?” I said “What did Koestler say?” I IUIOW
Koestler is a good author from England. IIe happensto be a
Jew, but I do not judge an author by his religion. One of
my favourite authors when I was young was Stcfan Zweig.
He was a Jew. 1 believe he was one of the greatest
biographers.I believe the Secretary-Generalwill agreewith
mc. Stefan Zweig hailed from Austria, did he not? He was
a humanist.

68. Mr. President, I have heard that you arc a man of
many parts and, inter alia, a minister of the Church, and I
respect you for that, because anyone who has the fear of
God in his heart is to be trusted and respected. The
Palestine question has to be looked at from three angles:
the historical, the religious and the political. Let us take
each aspect one by one.
69. WC shall start with the historical. As you well know, in
the OId Testament of the Bible, Palestine was called the
land of Canaan. The word “Palestine” as an appellation
came later in history. It sprang from the word “Philistine”.
The Philistines, incidentally, were not Semites but originated on the island of Crete and they had settlements in
what today is the Gaza region. The land of Canaan was later
called Palestine because of those Phjlistines, but the whole
of Palestine and also eastern Syria constituted the land of
Canaan, and the patriarch of all, Abraham, was from the Ur
of the Chaldees in western Mesopotamia, which is today
Iraq, Those people depended on the grazing of cattle.
Sometimes there was drought, and they had to move, as
certain tribes still move in the desert, seeking pasturage.
Jacob and his 12 sons were legendary characters and we do
not know their history exactly, but WC include the Bible in
that historical phase. The Semitic language that was used in
the Bible is very flowery, full of metaphors and figures of
speech. I would tell you, irzter ah,
how the words of the
Bible became intelligible to the tribal people, who were
3 Years

of

Trial

and

Hope

(Daubleday and Company,

Inc.,

71. 1 am talking of our Jewsand of the historical aspectof
the question. In the eighth century, when there was a
confrontation between Byzantium and the Arab world-let
us call it the Moslem world, becauseIslam had arrived on
the scene-there were tribes that hailed from the northern
tier of Asia, to the east, near Mongolia. They were of
Turko-Finnish origin--Turk@Finnish becausethe Finnish
language and the Turkish language have something in
comtnon and are derived from those tribes. They were
called Khazars. We know them from the Arab historians.
They c&me, and Byzantium wanted them to become
Christians,but they were sagaciousenough to know that if
they becameChristiansthey would come under the wing of
Gyzantiurn. They were hardy tribesmen; many of them
went as far as southern Russia,to what later was known as
Bessarabia.
This was ten centuriesbefore Rurik came on the
scene-Rurik, the king from whom a royal family descendedbefore the Romanovs.
72. But let UStalk about the eighth not the first century.
The Jews, our Jews, the Arab Jews, were rightly so called

Garde!1

City, N.Y., 1956).

8

by some of my predecessors. There is no difference
between us and the Arab Jews. They speak Arabic. We eat
the same food, we have the same customs and traditions.
They were later known as the Sephardic Jews-the real
Semites. They are real Semites. They had a Semitic religion,
Judaism An Arab who is a Christian is also a Semite and
has a Semitic religion, Christianity. And a Moslem who
happens to be Arab-and many of them embraced Islam to
get rid of Byzantium’s harsh rule-is also a &mite and has a
Semitic religion. But the Khazars are like the British or the
French or the Germans. They embraced Judaism because
they did not want to embrace Christianity or Islam and
thought that, from a political point of view, it would be
better for them to embrace Judaism. They have a Semitic
religion, just as a Frenchman, or a German, or a Briton
might have. But that does not make them Semites. A
Nigerian may be a Moslem. Most of the Nigerians are
Moslems. And Indonesians are Moslems. They have a
Semitic religion. But they are not Semites, And these
people want to make themselves Semites by force of
circumstance based on power.

76. I have researched the question of the Balfour Declaration.4 I lived in England between 1929 and 1939. I had
ample time to do this research when 1 was fighting-with
words, not with the sword-against
the French and British
Mandates in our part of the world.
77. In 1917, our British and French friends were losing
the war. They said it was because of German militarism.
But the biggest military Power at that time was France and
the biggest naval Power was Britain. The Germans, however,
were more disciplined. The French and British said that
they were fighting against the Kaiser’s militarism. 1 repeat
that they were stronger than the Kaiser, but the discipline
of the Germans was superior and that is why the Germans
almost won the war. The Zionists, who were well organized
in England and in the United States, railroaded the United
States into the First World War. That is what happened,
inter alia. Had the United States not entered the war, the
Germans would have won-and
we would not have had
Hitler. Indeed, I wish the Germans had won because we
would not have had IHitler and we would therefore not have
had a Palestine question. But that is hindsight. I remember
the post-war period in Europe and here, in the United
States. I came here in the late 1930s.

73. That gives you the background, Mr. President. You
are, I hope, going to be with us for at least four years now
that Mr. Carter is in office. If you want eight years, that is
your problem, I have to educate you in this matter, just as 1
was educated. Do not think I was born educated. You are
our President, and we are proud that, after all, the President
is not a “wasp” fwhite Anglo-Saxon Protestant]. They call
them “wasps”, I do not know why. It is to the great honour
of America that racism is dying out.

78. The Balfour Declaration stated-and
I am paraphrasing-that
His Majesty’s Government looked with favour on the creation of a national home for the Jews,
provided this did not prejudice or jeopardize the civil,
political or religious rights of the indigenous population.
Now, at that time, the indigenous population constituted
93 to 94 per cent of the entire population. Mr. Herzog talks
about the sacredness of Jerusalem. Let us leave aside the
sacredness of Jerusalem. The fact is that, for 2,500 years
before our Jew, Joshua, came on the scene, Jerusalem had
been populated by Semites, who were a hodgepodge of
Canaanites, Amorites and all kinds of other tribes. The
tribes, whether Jewish or non-Jewish, fought among themselves, but for 2,500 years Jerusalem had been a town of
peace. Indeed the word comes from Uru, meaning “town”,
and Sak~nnz, Sl~alunz or Saline-the words come from the
sameroot-meaning “peace”; in other words “the town of
peace”. That is the historical insight into Jerusalem.

74, Well, with the vicissitudes of time the Arabs had three
empires; they got drunk with power and wealth and fell.
And when they were at the nadir of their history there
came a wave from Europe. Remember that the Pope was
the spiritual as well as the temporal power of Europe. None
other than Urban II, in 1087, in order to divert nationalistic
feeling, diverted the attention of his vassals, who were
princes, into a war called the Crusades. To do what? TO
take the Holy Sepulchre from the hands of the infidel, and
by infidel he meant the indigenous people of Palestine,
many of whom had embraced Islam, There were Jews there
too, our native Jews, and there were Christians. He should
have known that the Koran mentions Jesus as being of the
spirit of God. So the Crusaders used religion as a motivation
for political and economic ends, There was a drought and a
dearth of food in Europe, so he diverted attention to the
Middle East. There were 250 years of misery. Even when
the Crusaders thought they were sinners and that was why
they could not consolidate their power in Palestine, they
sent the Children’s Crusade, and on the way the children
were sold into slavery. Do not think the whites sold only
black slaves. They sold one another into slavery.

79. But the Jews of Central Europe and EasternEurope
were being maltreated by the Christians.Mr. Theodor Herzl
witnessed what happened in France during the Dreyfus
affair. He had been sent to Paris by one of the major
Vienna newspapersto report on the Dreyfus affair. He was
a Hungarian by origin and came from a well-to-do family.
He was a Utopian, He saidto himself “Look at this civilized
country, France, and at these Frenchmen divided among
themselvesabout whether Dreyfus wasa spy”. And here I
would say that the free spirit of France really manifested
itself in personslike Emile Zola, who wrote “J’accuse”, the
famous article that swayed France towards examiningthe
justice of the case.Herzi felt that there was no life for the
Jews in Europe becausethey were being persecuted.What
happened’? He wrote a book entitled The JewishState, in
which he said that all the Jews of the world shouldhave
refuge in Palestine; in other words, a State based on

75. In fairness to the Christians, it must be said that the
Moslems too tried to use religion as a means to a political
end. The Caliphates, whether Arab or-later,
when the
Arabs gave way to the Turks-Ottoman,
wanted to spread
their temporal power over non-Semitic, non-Arab and
non-Turkish Moslem people. They failed. Now it is the turn
of our friends the Zionists. They are using religion as a
means to a political and economic end.

4 OfJ&l Records of the General Assembly, Second SeSSiOn,
Supplement No, II, vol. II, annex19.
9

religiotl. Incidentally, the Jewsthat lived in Spain and went
north to what today is the Netherlands were descended
from our Jews, and they had nothing to do with this. The
Jews Herzl had in mind were the Jews descended from
Klydzars, those ~110 embraced Judaism-the Hungarian
Jews, what would today be called the Polish Jews, the
Central European Jews. They were different from the Jews
of Western Europe.
80. And the Second World War came. We decry what
llappenedduring the Hitlerite period. I hold no brief for
Hitler, although I know that I will be called an Arab Nazi
for what I am about to say. I do not care; let them call me
whatever names they wish. Hitler had seen some of the
greedy Jews during the Weimar Republic. Of course, there
are greedy Gentiles too. But Hitler had seen that some Jews
with connexions outside Germany were breaking currency
regulations and so forth. Not all the Jews were,doing that.
1t is always the poor innocent Jews who suffer because of
what the greedy ones do. So I-Iitler developed a complex
against the Jews.
81. Many of my Gentile friends from Western Europe hdVe
told me “ln the post-war era we developed a senseof guilt
about the Jews”. All right; that is their problem. Why
should a new sense of guilt now be developed because of
the scattering of the Palestinians? That would be to go
from one guilt to another guilt. It is no answer to say that
the Jews suffered. It is only fair to say that the Christians
of Europe also suffered at various times in history. We all
know about the Inquisition-before Protestantism came on
the scene. WC know that people were burned at the stake.
That wasthe age of religious intolerance.

because some of them descended from Canaanites and
Aramaeans. Incidentally, Jesus was an Aramaean. That is
both the historical aspect and the religious aspect.
83. We come now to the latest development of the
political aspect. Why did this country, the torch-bearer of
liberty, freedom and self-determination, support the Jews?
It was because of pressure groups. Those Zionists are well
organised. We come from the south and we are a bit lazy
like the Mediterranean people. Whereas the Germans and
Russians are northern people and well disciplined. We
represent lnissezJhz. So what did they do? They used
Judaism as a motivation for a political end before the First
World War in order to gain ascendancy in an area which lies
astride .three continents: Asia, Africa and Europe. Rothschild, to whom the Balfour Declaration was addressed,
accepted the words ‘&national home”, preferring them to
the word “State”, which Mr. Weizmann wanted to see
included in the Declaration. I was told by friends of the
Rothschilds in France in the 1930s that the Rothschilds
were afraid that, if there were to be a State and if it were
successful, there might be a resurgence of anti-Semitism a.&
many people would say “You Jews go to your country”.
They were wise. They started in Frankfurt and became
money-lenders and branched out. They became the scions
of finance in Western as well as in Central Europe.
84. In the late 1940s and the 1950s it fell to me, with a
few friends, including Mr. Bokhari of Pakistan and
Mr. Pazhwak of Afghanistan, to elaborate the principle of
self-determination into a full-fledged right. As members
know, the right of selfidetermination appears as the first
article in both international human rights Covenants. Our
Latin American friends wanted to include economic rights
and I begged for it on their behalf, but I did not succeed
because the Western Powers were afraid that it might mean
nationalization without compensation. Finally, we worked
out a formula.

82. So, in order to get rid of the guilt about the Jews, the
remnants of these poor Jews who suffered at the hands of
Hitler are dumped in Palestine, displacing the indigenous
people of Palestine. Incidentally, one day I put the
following question to Mr. Kissinger, the former United
States Secretary of State: “Who left Germany in the days
of Hitler? ” And I told him that it was the affluent and the
influential who had left, although there may have been
some, like his father, who were not so affluent and
influential. I told him “You arc lucky”, Mr. Kissinger was
amazed when I put that question to him. And then I asked
him “Who left Palestine after the Remans destroyed the
Temple in the year 70 A.D.? “. You see, we Arabs are
tenacious; we are like the Jews-very tenacious, We thought
too much about religion, custom and tradition, The
Romans were like the British in Victorian days. The British
did not tamper with the traditions and ways of the
colonies; all they wanted was the power. The Remans got
fed up. Nebuchadnezzar was a Semite. He got fed up with
our Jews and with us. The First Temple was destroyed by
him and, in 70 AD., the Romans destroyed the Second
Temple. I asked Mr. Kissinger “Who left Palestine at that
time? “. The affluent and the influential. The rest remained-the tailors, the farmers. Then many of them
became Christians because they were fed up with the
Philistines. Then they became Moslems to get rid of
Byzantine rule. Those Khazars who came were the people
who, using religion as a motivation for a political end, drove
out the ethnic Jews. Ethnologically speaking, the latter
were the Jews of Palestine-a lot of them, not all of them,

85. In 19 19, barely more than 7 or 8 per cent of tile
population of Palestine were Jews and half of them, if nut
more, were of Semitic origin-Arab. The time came when
our British friends could no longer cope with the situation,
and the British had had a hard time illr Palestine. I
remember, in the 192Os, when they hanged British Tommies from the trees because they had told the Zionists
“Well, let us see how we can settle this question”. Tile
Zionists said “No, Palestine is ours”. The British felt that
they had made a mistake, especially Mr. Bevin, of the
Labour Party, whom I knew personally. If the Zionists
could have crucified him, they would have done so. They
killed Lord Moyne. Then when Count Bernadotte wasserlt
from the United Nations, he was killed-by the Arabs? You
know who killed him-the Zionists. Then, to intirnidatc the
Arabs, they hiped out Deir Yassin, a village. That explains
the exodus of so many Palestinians who became refugees.
Overnight, between 250 and 300 people were wiped out,
Joshua-style, as we called it, because they also killed tllc
animals and cut down the trees of the area. And now they
say that the Palestinian Arabs initiated what they call
terrorism.
86. As Mr. Nuseibeh said [I995th meeting], it was a land
If peace, a land of pilgrimage. Everybody was welcomed to
10

i
;

religion, is not sufficient motivation and has lost its
credibility-were
also doing their little bit in our area and
other areas. And who suffered? The people that were in
the spheres of influence. That is why in my preface I
mentioned that I hoped there would be a new approach to
international affairs. This is the old approach, which has
boomeranged and foundered.

Palestine because the indigenous people dep!nded for their
livelihood on the pilgrimages. Do not let the Zionists put
anything over on you, members of the Security Council,
and especially you, Mr. President.
87. We have been told again that, because of the political
aspect, this is a fait accompli. We are told about those poor
Jews-and I agree, they are human beings. What shall we do
with them? They are there. There is no such thing as a fait
accompli and there is no such thing as status quo, because
the world is based on change, What shall we do?
Mr. Herzog says “They do not recognize us; they want to
destroy us”. In the heat of war and conflict many things
may be said by anyone, whether Jew or Gentile, Arab or
non-Arab. I believe the mere fact that the Arabs want to go
to Geneva means that they are ready for negotiations. But
again the core of the whole question is the Palestinian
people. The Zionists ask “Why have they not been
dispersed in the Arab world? ” Suppose they do not want
to be dispersed? They want their land; they dream of their
land. Look at the Red Indians in this country. They put
them in reservations, which is unfortunate for the Red
Indians. But we are not Red Indians, with all due respect to
their chivalry and their illustrious history. As I have learned
from American books written by white men, it was always
the white men who broke the treaties with the Indians. We
are not Indians; we are Arabs, and we are tenacious. The
Zionists come here and tell us that we want to destroy
Israel. It is they who are in the process of destroying, but
they cannot destroy the Palestinian people.

91. There are pressure groups. Does the Council know that
75 Senators toed the line during the Nixon Administration
and did what they were “commanded” to do. By whom?
By the Zionists. I am getting poor; the United States is
getting poor. It now takes $5 to purchase what I could
purchase for $1 when I first came to this country. Why?
Because the United States sows its money freely. It has
given the Zionists $30 billion. And why? To lord it over us.
Currencies are now based on the dollar; they have to be
because there is no more gold. The United States, a great
nation, is impoverishing itself.
92. I do not blame our Russian friends because they are
using the same approach as was used by the United States:
you interfere in my sphere of influence and I shall interfere
in yours. That is why we need a new approach. They tell
me “If the Americans are not in the Middle East, the
Russians will come there”. But we do not want either the
Americans or the Russians. We shall respect each country if
it remains within its borders. Why should they make a
victim of us in their spheres of influence’? Look at the
British. They are happier now they have lost the Empire.
They are now happier and relaxed. No more of that pomp
and circumstance. With all due respect to my friends the
Russians, I would tell them to leave us alone, just as I tell
the Americans to leave us alone.

88. Here I want to say something which I have mentioned
before and which is significapt in dealing with this problem.
Believe me, I am known for my bluntness and frankness. I
am not doing anything to intimidate. Our respective Arab
Governments, from the Atlantic to the Gulf, would not
dare to act differently, even if they wanted to, because the
Palestinian people dispersed amongst them-the educated
and the informed-have permeated the Arab people, like
leaven, to such an extent that they would rebel against their
Governments if, so to speak, they were to sell Palestine
down the river. Believe me, because I have spoken to them.
They would topple our Governments and they are able to
do so; they are activists.

93. This brings me to what the Zionists want. They have
come out with it, but I have been saying it for 20 years.
They do not want only a political peace. The Zionists want
economic and financial peace, because if they do not trade
with the hinterland, with Africa and with Asia, they will
finally become insolvent-they are insolvent already. And
how long will your country, Mr. President, be able to
siphon, through taxes, hard-earned dollars to a people
which is lording it over the Palestinians? What sense dots
that make? Why? What have we Arabs done to you
Americans? We have many a time said that to the British,
but we do not repeat it to them any more because
nowadays we are in sympathy with them. What have we
done to you Americans that you should bolster up the
Zionists? We have opened our economic gates to you-our
oil, Ninety per cent of those who do business with us are
from Western countries. Why are the Americans treating us
like that? Are they afraid of the Russians? The new
Ambassador from the Soviet Union was very reasonable in
one of his statements. He wants to have an understanding
with the Americans. The only thing is that our Chinese
friends are afraid of some sort of accommodation between
both of them.

89. There are four categories of activists today. There are
those who espouse causes, wrong or right causes, but they
possessthe seeds of martyrdom. There are the politicians
-and there is no dearth of them-who activate the people.
There are the mercenaries, and we see them now in Africa,
in the Far East and everywhere, I do not wish to name
them, but members know who they are. And there are the
intelligence agents, subverters with money.
90. The big Powers cannot afford conrrontation because
that would mean a holocaust. So what do they do? They
subvert one another in the adversary’s sphere of influence,
so to speak. We sawit in 1956 in the Balkans. This country
poked its- fingers into the Balkans a little bit-to free
Europe. About 20 years ago, there was a large placard
acrossthe stree$ from Headquarters describing the plight of
the Czechs, the Ronanians, what were called the captive
nations. Of course, the Russians as such-and forget about
ideology, because we have found out that ideology, like

94. I do not know what is happening. It is the old game of
power politics and spheres of influence. All of us are
human. I am not a communist; I am a monarchist; and one
of my best friends here was Ambassador Yakov Malik. 1 did
not say that he was red, blue or what have you.
11

95. Please come together at Geneva, as our brother the
new Ambassador from the Soviet Union suggested, and let
us reason. He said “We shall guarantee the frontiers”. But
the Americans will tell our Arabs “Now, look, they will
communize the Arab world”. So, we shall ask the
Secretary-General to establish a committee in order to set a
code of ethics to prevent the injection of any jdeology into
the issue. We can find ways and means.

the framework of old political arrangements. Not “Scratch
my back and 1’11scratch yours”-no. “My country, right or
wrong”-no. As for human rights, if we examine Our
countries we shall find that many of us live in glass houses.
SO let us not throw stones at one another. Let us, as
individuals-and you as a minister know very well that this
is the way-restrain ourselves before trying to correct our
brother. Then we shall have a better society. Let us
collectively try to reform ourselves and repair the damage
in our respective countries, not barring mine. Then I think
we shall become a good example instead of preaching to
others, seeing the mote in our brother’s eye and neglecting
the beam in our own.

96. The Zionists can rest assured that they will not be
molested in the State that, as unjustly alloted to them by
partition, was much smaller. The partition gave the Arabs,
who in 1947 comprised two thirds of the population, only
44.21 per cent. And is the Council aware of how much was
acquired by the Zionists after the armistice in 1947,
beyond the lines of partition? It was 77.47 per cent; the
Arabs were given 22.53 per cent. They have been disobeying the United Nations from the beginning, although it
was the United Nations which created their State because
certain groups brought pressure to bear on the Western
Powers, the Latin American Powers and others,

101. Let us be frank: this question of human rights which
is being dragged into the First Committee and here should
not be discussed there or here. There is a Third Committee,
for
social, humanitarian and cultural questions. That is
where we deal with those questions. I have suggested several
times that we should have national committees for human
rights that would be protected by the United Nations, and
then regional committees-not a high commissioner, sucl~ as
your President has been told to mention. All the United
Nations buildings here would not be able to accommodate
the thousands of pieces of mail from every part of the
world, including your own country, about violations.

97. Let us be reasonable. Mow can the Palestinians
recognize the Zionists when the Zionists have scattered
them? If the Zionists talk to them at Geneva, there will be
a possibility-and,
as an old-timer in these matters, I shall
personally encourage the Palestinians to live side by side
with them. But let it be on record that the Zionists want to
impose a condition: they want the Arab world to trade
with them.
98. The following is a quotation
information press release:

102. Let us set our house in order. I happen to be-not an
expert, because I do not like that word-a little knowledgeable on these matters and the mechanics of them. So, for
heaven’s sake, you Russians, leave the Atnericans alone, and
I am sure they will leave you alone about human rights.
Try, each one of you, as we try-1 try too, in my own
humble way-to reform your countries, to the extent
possible, and do not inject these remarks here. Of course,
our Zionist friends are always wont to say “Those Russians
are ogres”, and this and that, Everything should be judged
on its own merits. Do not make scenes together.

from an Office of Public

“Mr. Herzog said that it was sobering indeed to reflect
that one day’s oil production in the Arab States would
suffice to resolve the entire Arab refugee problem.”
But the Palestinian refugees do not want to settle in Arab
lands. I have already said that if we should try to tell them
to settlc in our lands we would incur their enmity. Let me
say that there is nothing worse than the enmity of brothers.
To incur the enmity of a stranger is bad enough, but
nobody dares make an enemy of a brother. They are our
brothers and they want to return to their land. Let the
Zionists recognize them, and we shall take issue with our
Palestinians if they refuse to recognize the Zionists..

103. Sir, you have a sample now of my statements. They
say Baroody talks a lot. I can talk more: what is our stock
in trade if not talk? If we do not talk, we fight. You say
the big Powers talk less. They do not have to talk at all:
they have the power. I am reminded of the Ifyde Park
Corner speeches. By speaking we get it off our chests, so we
are not as dangerous as some of us sound. We just tell you
what we think. And you sitting in that chair as the
representative of a great country that exercises power, it is
up to you and your generation and the one that comes after
you to set an example for us so that we may set our house
in order and bring peace, and not base our policies on
makeshift expediency, That is the gist of my speech.

99. I said that I hoped the United States had turned over a
new leaf. Our politicians-incIuding
the Arab politicians and
your politicians, Mr. President, and you hobnob with them
in Washington-base their policies on expediency and not
necessarily always on justice, With all the personal goodwill
they may have, they always find an excuse by saying “Well,
there were circumstances that militated against doing what
we promised you”. They always have an excuse; otherwise,
they would not be politicians. But that is cheap politics;
that is the politics of the past; it cannot
be the politics of
the future. Because, should there be any miscalculation on
the part of the major Powers, we might have a holocaust by
miscalculation,,

104. I wish that the representative of the Israeli delegation
sitting here would convey to Ambassador Herzog that we
do not hate you; you are human beings like us. Anyone
who hates hates himself. He who hates his brother-and we
are all brothers in humanity-hates himself. We wish you
well, but we do not want to make despots of you; we do
not want to make usurpers of you. We try to reason with
YOU. YOU cannot put it over on us, you Zionists, by
continued pressure through your mass tnedia that permeate
the Western countries, and you cannot put it over on us by
pressure groups, which you use to influence the legislators,

100. For heaven’s sake, my dear friend--if you will allow
me to call you so-look into the matter objectively, not in
12

including in the host country. I could cite many quotations
as to what is going on in this country; how you try to
brainwash some politicans; how you can-1 do not like to
use the word “corrupt” or “bribe’‘-entice
them by paying
their expenses for election. YOU have a hundred and one
ways of doing things; we are tired even of enumerating
them.

109. The issuance of the Secretary-General’s report is an
appropriate moment to reflect on what has been accotnplished so far and on where we appear to be heading. We
believe that the Secretary-General has made a major
contribution to the negotiating process with his systematic
and thorough examination of the procedural questions
relating to the reconvening of the Geneva Conference., His
consultations have revealed substantial differences of view
on these questions and he has not minimized the difficulties
which lie ahead. None the less, the Secretary-General has
given us a kind of agenda of the work which must be done
in the next several months, and this should prove highly
useful to us all.

105. We feel sorry for YOU, because you cannot live in
peace, and YOU are afraid that you will be assimilated. And
one day you will be assimilated. What is wrong with being
assimilated? We shall all get to be one people. But in the
meantime, the Palestinians will recognize you if you let
them go back in accordance with the resolutions of the
United Nations. If YOU do not, the conflict will be
protracted and go on and on and on. The people of the
region have seen a lot of conquerors. I always start with
Alexander the Great and the Seleucids and the Romans;
then the Byzantines, the Mongols, our brothers the Turks,
and then the British and the French Mandates. Where are
they now? Gone. Are we going to be worried about this
han,dful of Zionists, for whom we feel sorry? I do not want
to use invective or the sardonic tone in which this central
European Khazar descendant, representative of Zion, political Zionism, has replied to a reasonable man like Ambassador Abdel Meguid or another very reasonable gentleman,
the representative of Jordan. No, I feel sorry for you. I have
tried to knock some sense into you and I shall feel sorry if
you continue to persist in that abortive policy, because in
. the end no power remains except that which is wielded in
the name of justice.

110. I need not recapitulate here the diplomatic activity
of the United States in recent weeks in regard to the Middle
East. These are matters with which representatives are
familiar. No interest of the United States is served by
stalemate or continued conflict in the Middle East Therefore this Administration will work vigorously and creatively
to assist the parties to move forward at the fastest possible
pace, consistent with the principle that nothing can be
achieved by any of us except through the efforts and with
the consent of all,
111. The Secretary-General has summarized in his report
his discussions with Secretary of State Vance as to the
results of Mr. Vance’s consultations with Middle East
leaders during the period from 14 to 21 February. 1 should
like to stress that we were encouraged by one fundamental
fact which emerged from those discussions: that all the
leaders with whom the Secretary of State talked believed
strongly in the need for peace; all agreed on the importance
of reducing military expenditures so that scarce resources
might be devoted to the economic and social betterment of
their peoples. With this common need and common hope,
we are launched on an effort to transform an area of
recurrent conflict to one of peace, progress and prosperity.

106. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further n‘ames
inscribed on my list of speakers in the general debate, but
before calling upon those whose names are inscribed to
speak in exercise of right of reply, I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
107. I should take this opportunity to thank the members
of the Council for their generosity and the kind words of
great hope expressed about my tenure as the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations. I have certainly enjoyed the friendship and
the warmth and wisdom which you have shared-especially
my colleague from Saudi Arabia. I thank him for that
generous lecture; I look forward to continuing it with him,
in private, on many occasions.

112. As representatives are aware, the United States is
continuing the intensive bilateral discussions initiated by
Mr. Vance’s trip. The Secretary of State is at present in
Moscow for talks which include consultations with the
USSR in its capacity as Co-Chairman of the Peace Conference on the Middle East. President Carter has begun a series
of personal meetings with leaders of the Middle East
nations. We hope, through these intensive consultations, to
identify common ground among the parties and find ways
to bridge the wide gaps that exist. If we are to achieve our
common goal of returning to Geneva in the second half of
this year, flexibility must be shown by all parties in the
weeks and months ahead on the key issues involved.

108. Seldom in the long history of the Arab-Israeli dispute
has there been a period of such intense diplomatic activity
as we are now experiencing. This in itself is a source of
hope. We believe it reflects a determination on all sides to
give peace a chance, as well as a hard-headed assessment
that there now exists a realistic potential for success
through negotiations. While there are voices in the Middle
East which reject peace, the creative forces of reason and
conciliation have never been stronger than they are today.
Wise and capable leaders on both sides have set in motion a
process of peaceful accommodation which could in time
yield the just and durable peace which we all so fervently
desire. Nevertheless, the passions remain. If we do not
quickly and forcefully seize the present opportunity for
Peace, it may be irretrievably lost.

113. We are now concluding our third day of debate on
this question. We have heard once again from both sides
and are convinced ever more firmly of the importance of
furthering the peace process through the early reconvening
of the Peace Conference. The Secretary-General’s report
makes an active and positive contribution in that direction.
114. My Government once again pledges its utmost efforts
to the goal of peace, which we recognize will only be
achieved through the sustained determination and cooperation of both sides. I should like to say that I,
13

\ .

personally, believe that the problems of the Middle East are
related to other global concerns. As we tackle one set of
problems, we can expect to see benefits in other areas. I
want all reprcscntatives to know that I personally shall lend
my time, energies and continued support, as a matter of
first priority, to a solution of these problems. I would urge
that, as we look ahead, we not let the problems cloud our
vision of the dream. The dream has been approached
before; it is not beyond our grasp now.

120,, However, I cannot leave some of the remarks that
were made without some form of reply, Not that I feel that
I can in any way change the attitude of the Arab
representatives, but I can at least endeavour to set the
record straight, especially having regard to the fact that I
have invariably to cope with not one Arab attack but a
parrotlike repetitive chorus with everybody trying to get
into the act.
121. As regards apartheid, the Government of Israel has
time and again made its position amply clear. Our position
has been completely straightforward and free from the
hypocritical overtones of those who accuse us. While my
Egyptian colleague feels so free to attack Israeli-South
African relations, I read with interest a report published in
the Sunday Times of South Africa some months ago:

115. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I call on the representative of Israel who has asked to be allowed to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.
116.. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): Mr. President, if you had any
doubts about what I meant when I said yesterday [I 995th
meeting/ that the Council’s time was being wasted, you
have just had, before your speech, a classic object lesson of
what I meant. I realize that the Council is entitled to its
lighter moments, but this is surely going beyond all limits
of reason.

“South Africa is believed to be building closer ties with
Egypt. A senior government official has made several
secret trips to Egypt in recent months and Cairo is
mentioned as one of the Arab cities to be visited later this
year by a top-level South African delegation . . . Covert
ties between the two countries have strengthened markedly since Cairo’s break with Moscow. . .“.

117. But, Mr, President, you have not only had the
opportunity today to be introduced to the realities of a
debate on the Middle East in the Security Council; you
have also had a taste of the inevitable surrealistic dimensions of these discussions. How else can one describe the
bizarre pseudo-historical aberrations which are invariably
imposed on this forum whose intelligence is being insulted.
And how can one describe Yemen’s self-righteous concern
for human dignity? I was indeed deeply moved by the
concern for human rights expressed by the representative of
Yemen, a country which is somewhat removed from the
concept of human rights as we understand it. I trust that
the weekly executions by beheading on Fridays no longer
take place in the main square at Sana’a, but have been
moved to a more secluded spot,. I must say, in this
connexion, that my colleagues will be interested in the
following item from the report of Amnesty International
about conditions in Yemen, which is of definite professional interest to all of us here:

I think it would be intriguing for the Council to receive
further details of the educational links between the
Government of South Africa and the Government of Egypt
which were referred to in Al Gumhywiya on 26 August
1976, when a statement made by the Minister for Education of Egypt, Mr. Mustafa Kamal Hilmy, was reported, I
think we are also entitled to receive more details from the
Egyptian representative about Colin Legum’s very interesting and revealing article in The Observer’s Foreign News
Service, entitled “Arabs expand trade with South Africa”,
which, inter alia, mentions the negotiations conducted at
Cairo by a well-known South African tour operator, TFC,
with the aim of taking tourists to Egypt. Indeed, the Arab
Governments’ duplicity on this issue has begun to arouse
the anger and protest of certain left-wing revolutionary
Arab circles. This was expressed as follows in A 1HadaJf; the
weekly newspaper of the so-called PFLP,,led by George
Habash:

“According to the information
available, it would
appear that non-violent political opponents or critics of
the Government are not usually subjected to long-term
imprisonment. Those in ministerial or official positions
are either dismissed from their posts or dispatched abroad
as ambassadors or placed under house arrest.”

“The reactionary Arab circles have achieved great
success in their attempts to conceal the fact that South
Africa is receiving Arab oil.”
The Egyptian representative then mentioned Israeli cooperation with South Africa in the nuclear field. That is a
bare-faced lie and the Egyptian Ambassador knows it. It is
but another indication of the degree of veracity we can
attribute in general to his words.

118. As we were being regaled with the speech just before
yours, Mr. President, I was reading a take from Reuters,
from Jeddah, describing how three men convicted of crimes
had been stoned to death and a fourth decapitated at
Al-Hasa, in eastern Saudi Arabia, according to an official
statement made today.

122. I really do not want to enter into any polemics with
the Syrian representative, but he seems to have a very short
memory when he says: “What is not true is Israel’s
description of the PLO asa terrorist organization” [I 995th
meeting, para 90/. Whom does he represent? Syria or the
PLO? Let me quote the following statement issued by
Radio Damascus on 26 September 1976:

119. I have decided to ignore most of the slanderous false
statements made by the representatives of the Arab States
before the Council, although it must have been obvious to
everybody that a debate such as this one must inevitably
deteriorate into an exercise in mutual slander and namecalling. For what purpose we are engaged in a debate in the
context of peace negotiations in the Middle East heaven
only knows. I do not, and neither do most members of the
Council.

“Before dawn on 27 September 1976, three PLO
terrorists, captured after they attacked the Semiramis
14

Hotel in Damascus, were hanged in a public square of that
city, where their bodies remained suspended for hours.
“The terrorists admitted under interrogation that they
belonged to the El Fatah wing of the PLO.”
Commenting on the attack, President Assad declared: ‘<We
condemn this act of terror, committed by a gang of traitors
and criminals. We refuse to bargain with them.” Referring
to those who sent the terrorists to Damascus, he added:
“The only thing these PLO leaders wanted was to attack
Syria, despite its sacrifices on behalf of the Palestinians.”
From an article signed by General Mustafa T’lass, the
Syrian Defence Minister, in the official Syrian Army
newspaper, Tishrin, dated 10 September 1976, I quote the
following:
“My Palestinian comrades, the Moslems of Lebanon
have begun to hate you because you are interfering in
their daily life and their personal liberty.. What then is the
aim of your liberation? Is your sublime target the
massacre of the Lebanon? Or perhaps your grand design
was to slaughter the residents of the Semiramis Hotel in
Damascus? You are mistaken, Palestinian comrades,
because you arouse nothing but disgust among all honest
Arab citizens . . .“.
Then he goes on to state: “no rCgime will ever accept the
illegal acts of the PLO within its borders”. That is a
statement with which Israel, incidentally, is completely in
accord and which reflects our position too. So, if Ambassador Allaf maintains that we are not being truthful in
describing the PLO as a terrorist organization, it might be
helpful if he were to reconcile such an assertion with the
official statements of his leaders.. I know what he will say.
He will pass it off as just an innocuous family quarrel which
is none of our business, despite the fact that it almost
destroyed the Lebanese State, leaving 50,000 dead,
100,000 wounded and over one million refugees. Somehow
I feel that the members of the Council are past buying this
sort of double talk and the sooner this world body makes
this clear the better.
123. Lastly, in reply to my Jordanian colleague, 1 would
say this. There surely must be a limit to the rewriting of
history such as he indulges in in this body, Let me again put
the record straight. It is untrue to state as he did:
“We did not drive the Jews out of the Arab countries.
In fact, the Arab States are willing today to welcome
back any Arab Jews with open arms, if they choose to
come.” fIbid,, para 223.1
The Jews who were driven out of the Arab countries
together with their children now number approximately
1 l/4 million. I have not noticed any inclination or
enthusiasm on their part to go back to the Arab countries.
They know what life for a Jew in an Arab country means.
They only have to look at the tortured existence of the
small Jewish community of 4,500 in Syria.. They can still
recall the public hangings of innocent Jews in the main
square at Baghdad. Two of those hanged in that dastardly
manner in public for the amusement of the mob at Baghdad
happened to have been relatives of members of my

delegation. So I say to Mr. Nuseibeh, please do not lecture
us about Arab solicitude for Jews in Arab countriesespecially you, the representative of a country whose
citizenship law No. 6 of 4 February 1954 states in paragraph 3, subparagraph 3: “Any man will be a Jordanian
subject. . . if he is not Jewish”” That is just another
example of the inherent Arab racism. I would ask Mr. Nuseibeh not to lecture us on these matters. Why does he not
meet the representatives of the Jewish refugees from Arab
countries who have now organized themselves world-wide
in order to press their claims against the Arab Govemments? They will clarify for him in what circumstances
they left the Arab countries,
124. He has the effrontery to deny the destruction by the
Jordanian occupying forces of synagogues in the Old City
of Jerusalem in 1948. Colonel Abdulla el-Tal, who then
commanded the Jordanian Arab Legion in Jerusalem,
describing the destruction of the Jewish Quarter when
Jordan, in defiance of the Charter of the United Nations,
attacked the city of Jerusalem in 1948, wrote in his
memoirs, published at Cairo in 1959:
“The operations of calculated destruction were set in
motion. . . I knew that the Jewish Quarter was densely
populated with Jews who caused their fighters a good
deal of interference and difficulty . . . I embarked, therefore, on the shelling of the Quarter with mortars, creating
harassment and destruction . u . Only four days after our
entry into Jerusalem the Jewish Quarter had become their
graveyard. Death and destruction reigned over it . . .
“AS the dawn of Friday May 28, 1948, was about to
break, the Jewish Quarter emerged convulsed in a black
cloud-a cloud of death and agony.”
That was a Jordanian description of exactly how
happened, written by the commander of that operation.

it

12.5. After the cease-fire had entered into force and
normal civilian administration had been restored at Jerusalem in June 1967, a shocking picture unfolded of the
results of that policy of wanton vandalism, desecration and
violation perpetrated during the period of Jordanian occupation from 1948 onwards. In the Jewish Quarter all but
one of the 3.5 Jewish houses of worship that graced the Old
City of Jerusalem were found to have been wantonly
destroyed. The synagogues had been razed or pillaged and
stripped and their interiors used as henhouses and stables.
In the ancient historic Jewish graveyard on the Mount of
Olives, tens of thousands of tombstones had been torn up,
broken into pieces or used as flagstones, steps and building
materials in Jordanian military installations and civilian
constructions. Large areas of the cemetery had been
levelled and converted into parking places and petrol-filling
stations. I myself, in June 1967, found the graves of my
great grandparents and my grandparents profaned and
desecrated on the Mount of Olives.
126. Finally, a word of advice to Mr. Nuseibeh. Please do
not put statements about Jordan into my mouth or into the
mouth of any Israeli representative. We do not suggest and
never have suggested the obliteration of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan. We have no plan of aggression against

\ .

the sovereignty
and people of Jordan, as he put it
yesterday. He is tying himself up with conflicting statements, becoming confused and forgetting who said what.
The statements on Jordan to which he refers were not made
by any Israeli spokesman.
They were made by the
spokesman of the PLO, in 1974, when Yasser Arafat said:

them, but with the Council’s permission I shall set the
record straight at least as far as some of them are
concerned.
132. The Zionist representativehastoday repeatedthe big
lie about the Arab Jews who, he says,were driven out of
their homes by the Arabs and obliged to leave their
countries. Everybody knows that the Arab countries have
always been a haven and refuge for all minorities, for all
groups. As a matter of fact, this excessof tolerance on the
part of the Arabs is the source of their tragedy today, the
sourceof their problems.We have always openedour hearts
and arms to all oppressedpeople from everywhere in the
world, and that is how we have so great a number of small
minorities, of groups of all faiths, of all races,of all origins,
who live in our countries in complete equality with our
peoples.If the Arabs werenot that tolerant or generous,no
Jewish Zionist problem would exist today in the Middle
East, As we heard from Mr. Baroody before the Zionist
speaker repeated his distortions, the real tragedy of the
Palestiniansand Palestinewas the invasion of Palestineand
the Arab landsby those refugees,who came to us in order
to escapediscrimination and anti-Semitism in Europe and
found open hearts and armsin the Arab countries, because
we feel we also are Semitesand ‘our land, which is the land
of the birth of three heavenly religions, is the land of
tolerance, of brotherhood and of love. But this the Zionist
mentality cannot understand.

“Jordan is ours, Palestine is ours, and we shall build our
national entity on the whole of this land after having
freed it of both the Zionist presence and the reactionary
traitor presence.”
-meaning his monarch, King Hussein. Or as Mr. Kaddoumi
put it, as I pointed out yesterday [ibid, para, 541, in the
Beirut weekly As Snyad, in which he made a statement to
the effect that the PLO “demands a political and military
presence in Jordan”, an objective which, in his opinion,
would ‘Lnecessitatea change of regime in Jordan”. Or we
may take the 10 point declaration of the PalestineNational
Council of 8 June 1970, point 5 of which calls for a
struggle againstthe present Jordanian re’girneand point 8 of
which reiterates that proposal.
127. Finally, I can only ask againwhat wasthe purposeof
this debate? Wasit for the Arab delegationsto score points
against us and for us to do the sameagainst them? Where
will it lead us? Does anybody here sincerely believe,
whatever his political instructions, for reasonsof expediency or otherwise, that this is the way to move towards
peace’?

133. That is how the Jews first came to our countries.
They lived there for centuriesin complete brotherhood and
equality. It wasnot the Arab countries which drove out the
Jews.It was Israel,the Zionists. As a matter of fact, the late
Ben Gurion consideredevery Jew who did not go to live in
Israel, in occupied Palestine,to be committing a sin against
his Jewishness,againsthis religion. And the Zionist r6gime
is still doing this very samething.. That is why they arenow
trying to ingather Jews from all over the world-Jews who
are Jews by religion alone, since they belong to different
races,to different civilizations. They want the Soviet Jews
to go and settle in Palestine;they want the EuropeanJews
to go and settle in Palestine;they want the South African
Jewsto go and settle in Palestine.

128. We are aware of an apparent internal struggle at the
highest level in Egypt on matters of policy. This was
highlighted by, inter da, conflicting emphasesin enunciations of policy made on the same day at Cairo by the
President of Egypt, on the occasion of the recent visit of
the King of Spain, and by his Foreign Minister, when
addressing a joint meeting of three parliamentary subcommittees. IF the Foreign Minister of Egypt wishes to
promote his independent policy, I suggestthat he should
find some other arena in which to do it and not usethe
Council chamber. As I saidyesterday, the Council doesnot
have to serve a domestic political function in Egypt.
129. Let us have done with this futile exercise in name
calling. Let us set out on the road towards peace by
reconvening the Geneva Peace Conference with its original
participants and by commencing the processof peacewhich
means face-to-face negotiations. There is, in the final
analysis, no alternative.

134. We do not believe that religion is a national identity.
Webelieve that religion is the relationship between manand
his God. We Moslems do not think we have to ask OUI
Pakistani Moslem brothers to come and settlc in Palestine
or in Syria in order to be good Moslems,nor do we askthat
of our ChineseMoslem brothers. We do not consider the
link between us and our Turkish Moslem brothers a link of
nationality. There is a certain affinity, a certain affection
between people of the samefaith. But religion is one thing
and’ nationality and race are something else. And that is
why WC cannot baseour policy on religiousdiscrimination.
We cannot discriminate against our citizens just because
they \appen to belong to the Jewish faith. We are, at least,
not accusedof doing that to our co-citizens of the Christian
faith. if we have to discriminate againstJews, why do we
not disiriminate againstChristians?

130. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic wishes to exercise his right of reply. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make a
stalement.
131. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): First of all I
should like to admit that it is very difficult to answerthe
lies and fabrications continually uttered by the representative of the Zionist rkgime. As a matter of fact, when I
asked to be allowed to speak to answer some of his
fabrications of yesterday, I did not know that minutes
before I did so we should again hear a new set of lies and a
new set of fabrications. I do not intend to answer all of

135. I have said before and I repeat now that the
Palestiniansstrugglingto liberate their country are, many of
them, Christians.And there are now Jewsstrugglingagainst
,
16

I
,
i
;
’
:
I
I

the Zionists. I have already said that the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization sitting to my left is
not a Moslem. He is a Christian. He does not distinguish
between Moslems, Christians and Jews. But all this the
Zionist mentality cannot understand.
136. The Zionist representative was even unable to avoid
contradiction in his very statement. On the one hand, he
said that the Arabs had driven out the Arab Jews-g00,000
of them-from their countries, and a few pages later he said
that Syria was imprisoning Jews and preventing them from
leaving Syria. How can we at once be accused of driving
out the Jews and of keeping them from leaving the
country? He has to choose one of the two lies, either one
or the other.
137. The truth is that Israel wishes to kill three birds with
one stone by engaging in all these fabrications about the
Arab Jews.
138. First, the Israelis want to settle the occupied territory. They need more people in order to uproot more
Arabs. They want to replace Arabs by aliens, just because
those aliens are Jews. Their plans for the future call for 5 or
10 million additional Jews in Palestine.
139. Secondly, they wish to make propaganda war against
the Arabs, They want to accuse the Arabs of engaging in
discrimination against the Arab Jews.
140. Thirdly-and
this can be seen very clearly from one
brief sentence in Mr. Herzpg’s statement-they
want to
avoid responsibility for this crime of uprooting the Arabs,
even Arab Jews, from their original homes, the responsibility for uprooting the Palestinian Arabs from their homes.
They want to say “We are not responsible. All that has
happened is a major exchange of population.” That is how
the Zionist representative put it. They say “We took the
Jews from the Arab countries and we drove the Arabs out
of Palestine; so let us just forget about our responsibility ia
regard to the right of the Palestinian refugees to return to
their homes or the right of those who do not want to return
to receive compensation.” That is their mentality.
141. I would make one other comment in this connexion.
The aim of the Zionist regime to drive the Arabs from
Palestine and ingather the Jews from all over the world is
not new. That has been the aim since the first Zionist
Congress, held at Basel. Even at that time, Jewish personalities present at that Congress admitted that the Zionist
leaders were making a mistake in trying to uproot the .Arabs
and replace them by Jews from all over the world. The
great Jewish philosopher Ahad Ha’am said the following,
after he had attendecl the first Zionist Congress:
“In Base1 yesterday I sat lonely among my brothers,
like a mourner at a wedding. . . This new enthusiasm is
an artificial one, and the results of treacherous hopes will
be despair. . . The salvation of Israel”-by th?t he meant
the Jewish people-“will come through prophets and aot
through diplomats . . . One thing is clear to me: we have
destroyed much more than we have built up.”

142. That same great philosop’her came to Palestine
himself as a settler, and wrote the following in the Jewish
newspaper Haaretz in regard to what he had seen with his
own eyes: “Our people wanted no part of this barbarous
life . . . What shall we say now if this is really true? ” He
was referring to the murders of innocent Arabs at Deir
Yassin and elsewhere. He continued:
“My God, is this the end? Is this the goal for which our
fathers have striven and for whose sake all generations
have suffered? Is this the dream of a ‘return to Zion’, to
stain its soil with innocent blood? . . . And now God has
afflicted me to have lived to see with my own eyes that I
apparently erp,d . . . If this be the ‘Messiah’, then I do not
wish to see Hia coming.”
143. In an article written by a number of Jewish thinkers
and philosophers and published in 1961 in the Jewish
magazine Ikuda5 Ner, the following was stated about the
uprooting of the Arab people-the Palestindian refugeesfrom Palestine:
“Only an intenal revolution can have the power to heal
our people of their murderous sickness of causelesshatred
[for the Arabs] . It is bound to bring complete ruin upon
us. Only then fill the old and the young in our land
realize how great was our responsibility to those miserable Arab refuge6 in whose towns we have settled Jews
who were brougkt from afar; whose homes we have
inherited; whose f&Ids we now sow and harvest; the fruits
of whose gardens, crchards and vineyards we gather; and
in whose cities thit we robbed we put up houses of
education, charity ald prayer, while we babble and rave
about being the ‘peolle of the Book’ and the ‘light of the
nation’.”
144. That is what happened to the Palestinian Arabs.
Nothing like it happened ‘o the Arab Jews. As a matter of
fact, the Arab Jews nowregret that, openly or secretly,
they left their original countries. The Arab Jews are now
regarded as second-class ciizens in occupied Palestine,
because they are Oriental Jevs and the leadership comes
from the Sephardim-the
Furopean Jews-from the
Khazars, to whom Professor Baoody referred.
145. That was what I wished tcsay in regard to the Arab
Jews.
146. The Zionist representative referred also to our
patriots, to the Arab prisoners who,?y the thousands, are
living in the ugliest and severest condiions in Israeli gaols.
He referred to them as “criminals” and as “common
murderers”. That is a real insult. It is ar.insult not only to
human dignity and human rights: it is an ilsult to every one
of us here. The only crime these people committed was to
try to resist the alien occupier, the oculpier of their
territory. Sometimes they resisted with thir bare fists,
sometimes with stones. Ninety per cent of then are in their
twenties or thirties, young boys and girls, tetiagers. The
sole crime they committed was to try to Lppose the
prolonged occupation of their own country. Ifthese people
are criminals and common murderers, then that is true of
every resistance fighter. It is an insult, really, to every
resistance fighter. These people are no different Zom those

heroic members of the resistance in Europe who fought
against the Nazis in the Second World War. They are no
different from our brothers who are struggling against
apartheid in South Africa. They are no different from the
people in your own country, Mr. President, who throughout their great history have fought against the invaders and
the foreigners. I think the real criminals are those r&gimes
that come and settle the territory of others., The Zionist
representative is himself an expert on this matter of
repression of innocent people. Mr. Herzog was the first
Military Governor
of the West Bank after the 1967
aggression. So I can well understand why he chooses to
leave this chamber every time an Arab representative
speaks. A criminal does not want to listen to a description
of his crimes.
147. I do not wish to enter into details in regard to the
other lies uttered by the Zionist representative, including
his further attempt to drive a wedge between Africans and
Arabs and between the Arabs themselves. He was at such
pains to go to the records in order to fmd a statement by
one Arab leader against a member of the Palestine
Liberation Organization or a statement by one Arab
country against another Arab country. Ambassador Abdel
Meguid of Egypt said that we Arab, countries did have
differences, but that most of these differences were the
result of the Israeli aggression, the’ Zionist aggression,
against our countries. The Zionist repfesentative mentioned
Lebanon and the stand that we haveitaken in Lebanon. We
are not like the Zionists, who are/afraid to admit their
mistakes. When we believe that so$e of our brothers are
not doing the right thing, we are ,hot afraid to say so. In
Lebanon we have tried to say to o{r Arab brothers from all
factions and all sides that they hre making a mistake in
fighting each other, that the onlibeneficiary
of that is the
real enemy, Israel. Israel wanted/the mnssacre and the civil
war to take place in Lebanon. /is a matter of fact, it is no
secret that when peace was rqjtored in Lebanon, with the
help of Syria and other Arab/ountries,
the Zionist leaders
admitted that now the dander to Israel was very great,
because the Arabs would
be/reunited again and would turn
their attention to the occ$ied territories and to the real
danger, which is the Ziopst aggression against the Arab
countries. The only on@ that benefited from what was
happening in Lebanon 6s Israel and it was Israel which
started it all. Israel’s 4 raids against the refugee camps,
civilian towns and vill, bs in Lebanon were the source of all
the trouble and all t4 conflict which erupted after that in
Lebanon. So let tl Zionist representatives not try to
benefit from what I+ kes place between brothers from time
to time.
r;l
14X. As Amb, sador Abdel Meguid, my brother from
I’
Egypt, said thqothcr day [1995th meeting], the mere fact
that we are llre sitting side by side-the representative of
the Palestine, t iberation Organization, the representative of
Syria, the presentative of Egypt, the representative of
Jordan, tl IP representative of Saudi Arabia, the representativc of, k emen-indicates
that we are one united front
against ,&ression. And we are not alone. We are supported
by our/African brothers, by our Asian brothers, by our
Latin .Anerican brothers and by freedom-loving people in
Europe, America, the Eastern countries and everywhere in
the world-

149. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
Of Saudi
Arabia has asked to speak in exercise of the right Of reply. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
150. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I shall not engagein
mud slinging or name calling. I am a man who can really get
angry, but I never lose my temper to such an extent as to
use invective and cast aspersions at members of the Council
or at those who are invited to address the Council. Our
upbringing is different.
Therefore, I must reply to
Mr. Herzog simply by saying that the Zionists are engaged
in a process of genocide, and not necessarily only by trying
to intimidate the Arabs, by having wiped out Deir Yassin,
to which I referred, by killing even the animals and by
cutting down the trees of that village, There is genocide by
attrition, when a people, who are used to living in homes,
are dispersed and their children suffer and die of typhoid or
any other disease. Genocide does not have to be carried out
by the sword or by the gun. I am reminded of a line written
by Oscar Wilde in his Ballad of Reading Gaol. As many
members know, Oscar Wilde was imprisoned for something
which was then a crime but which today happens to be
considered not too unusual. But we shall not go into that,
And in gaol he must have hobnobbed with all kinds of
criminals. He spoke about murderers and about some who
committed crimes that might not warrant their being
hanged at that time. This is the line: “Some do it with a
dagger; others with a smile”. In other words, some commit
murder with a dagger and others with a smile, Here the
word “smile” means that while a person may be smiling in
his brother’s face, he may cause him to be killed, not
necessarily by him, directly or right away, but by some
plot. The Zionists have caused the death of many Palestinians not necessarily only in Deir Yassin, but by having
evicted them from their country.
151. With respect to Mr. Herzog’s reference to capital
punishment, in some countries of the Arab world, including
my own-1 do not know how well versed Mr. Herzog is in
Islamic law, but if he has had the time to do research he
would know this-even a murderer is treated with mercy
and given a chance to live, if the relatives of the victim SO
decide. That is in Islamic law. He is allowed to live if the
relatives agree-if he has children and if he pays an
indemnity. In that case, the Government will not hang or
decapitate the man.
152. I am not making a comparative study of the
lab-books of Islam and the Talmud, but we know very well
thgt in the Bible the Mosaic law is “an eye for an eye and a
tooth for a tooth”. At least Islam tempered that. Christiariity prescribes something which is very idealistic,
althdugh unfortunately
the Christian countries do not
practise it: love thy enemy. It is the most practical thing
that Jesus said: if you love your enemy you will make him
your friend.
153. I do not know why Mr. Herzog should have delved
into suclz practices. Of course we kill. I personally do not
think that one should take the life of another. But
sometimes I wonder-if
you treat the murderer in the sort
of way that is advocated by the always-do-gooders, does it

not encourage others to murder and what about the
vi&&x? Are they not human? I shall not go here into the
controversy of whether or not we should have capital
punishment. This is not the place to go into the law of
nations pertaining to punishment-whether capital punishment or any other kind. Nor would we solve the problem
by pointing to the mote in our brother’s eye and not seeing
the beam in our own, as I quoted earlier from the New
Testament. That will get us nowhere.

160. But what if the host country, this great United
States, took it into its head to chastise us-because the
Zionists are very influential. We would rather have all this
oil go up in flames. That would be better for us. We should
be happier even if we had to go back to tents. We would
live the simple life. The United States would not dare to
send anyone. It tried that in Viet Nam. It tried it in Korea,
and now there is a stalemate.
161. What have we done that those people should egg YOU
on? I am speaking very frankly. Why should I keep it to
myself? I am speaking out man to man. Please tell them
that we do not hate the Jews. I started to tell Mr. Herzog,
but he made fun of me and did not understand what I was
saying. I think he has a psychosis. Since Freud, there have
,been many psychoanalysts. We will send him to one. I do
not hate him. I wish him and the Jews in Palestine well. But
let them restore the rights of the Palestinians and maintain
their Judaistic make-up.

154. Mr. Herzog’s attitude is, to say the least, aggressiveif
not arrogant. He said that we Arabs were liars, We are not
used to such invective. We may be wrong, but he calls us
liars, fakes and so on, I have never used such invective
towards him because I was not brought up in that manner.
But it is his right to use whatever language he wishes.
155. Suffice it to say that the Zionists have engaged in a
slow process of genocide, but they will not succeed for the
simple reason that the offspring of the Palestinian refugees,
who now number 3 million, are more intransigent than
their grandfathers and grandmothers who were evicted from
their land or who found that the better part of wisdom was
to flee, lest they be subjected to the fate of the people of
Deir Yassin who, as I said, were wiped out Joshua-style, in
the old tribal way.

162. The other day [1995th meeting] Mr. Nuseibeh men.
tioned the old story of how the Caliph Omar, the Patriarch,
refused to go and pray in the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre. I told this story of Moslem tolerance years ago.
He refused, saying “If I did, those who come after me may
desecrate this place, and I do not want this Church to be
touched.”

156. What does Mr. Herzog want? A Geneva Conference
or no Geneva Conference? 1 want to tell him humbly and
not arrogantly or with pretensions that there will be no
peace in the Middle East until the Palestinian people’s rights
are restored.

163. Mr. Herzog spoke of “democracy”. There are I billion Christians in the world, to many of whom Jerusalem is
a hallowed place. There are between 600 and 700 million
Moslems. There happen to be only 16 million Jews. By
what democratic yardstick should the self-styled leaders of
these 16 million Jews-and many of them are not Zionists,
many of them are good Americans and good Frenchmenhave suzerainty over the Holy Land? If anybody should
have suzerainty over Jerusalem, it should be the Christians.
But the Christians tried it and renounced it. It is the
indigenous people of Palestine who should have it. Many of
the Palestinians are Christians and some of them are Jews.
So why should the Jews have a monopoly? Because they
are the chosen people of God? Does God practise
discrimination?
God does not discriminate. We are all
descendants of the hominid. We know that. We are called
Homo sapiens. That is a misnomer, because I do not think
we act “supiens”. They say “On the basis of religion, we
want to create a State.” That was tried before and did not
succeed. Furthermore, many of the Jews in Palestine are
secular Jews. They went there because they thought that
they would find a refuge. And, as we know, because of the
depression in Israel, many are now leaving.

157. He always mentions mammon-money-what
we are
earning from our oil. Since he puts so much emphasis on
mammon, perhaps we should speak to our leaders and
suggest that they should collect money, and we shall buy
Palestine from the Zionists, although they took it, and then
give it back to the Palestinians. That, I think, is the only
way left.
158. There are many non-Zionist Jews in the host country
who approach me and say “Why are they behaving like
this? ” I tell them “Go and talk to your leaders”. They are
tired of paying taxes through the nose. The host country is
becoming like the communists, although it calls itself
capitalist. The communists are using the mechanics of
capitalism in order to service their debts, and the host
country is becoming communist by attrition. There is
nothing wrong with that. Be communists at once and be
done with it, and then perhaps our question will be solved.
Honestly, I am not saying this in jest.

164. And what about “a people without a land and a land
without a people”-that
rubric, that slogan the Zionists
used in the past when they sold the idea that Palestine was
a land without a people? I do not say that was a lie-1 do
not want to be impolite. But it is untrue that Palestine was
a land without a people, or that the Jews themselves were a
people without a land. Good Lord, did they forget the real
estate they owned in Europe, in the United States-everywhere? Many Jews are nationals of States to which they
are loyal; but the Zionists want an ingathering of all the
Jews. This is the philosophy of political Zionism. I say
“political Zionism” because I differentiate between that and

159. Do the Zionists want to drive the United States into
a conflict with us? Let me repeat what I said three or four
years ago. We have had oil for some 60 years only. Before
that time, some Arabs were urban and others were tribal.
We have had three empires, which fell, and rightly SO, when
we got drunk with power and wealth. Now we are
emerging, not only because of wealth but also because there
is an upsurge of Arab culture in all of us. In 1922, I was one
of the first pan-Arabs. Long live Arab unity and even Arab
union.
19

assure you that our Governments do not harbour the design
of leaving the Palestinians in jeopardy. But assuming they
did take the attitude that they were fed up with those
Palestinians, the Palestinians would get rid of our respective
Governments. I say “assuming”; I do not say it is a fact.

spiritual zionism. (I visited Mount Zion near Jerusalem in
1925.) They want every Jew to come to Israel. Yet the
Jews of Israel are leaving Israel because they cannot make a
go of it. The Zionists want to bring pressure on the Soviet
Union to release a million and a half Jews. I checked
privately with many of my Russian friends, who told me
that many Jews are in high places and enjoying a good Iife
in the Soviet Union. Many of them are better off than
many other Russians because they are technocrats. They
belong to a minority that loves science and they are
professors and academicians. Of course, there are a few
disgruntled ones. But there are a few disgruntled ones in
your country, there are a few disgruntled ones in Saudi
Arabia, there are a few disgruntled ones in Germany.
Everywhere, there are people who are not satisfied with
their lot. It is nothing unusual if some Jews in the Soviet
Union are not happy. Some people in other countries are
not happy, regardless of the religion to which they belong.
Therefore, that is no argument.

167. Now, please, I say to my American friends and my
Jewish-I do not like to call them “foes’‘-but,
rather,
Israeli trouble-makers: take into account that the Arabs
cannot afford to see their Palestinian brothers sacrificed,
because our Governments would be toppled. But our
Governments do not harbour any ideas of leaving our
Palestinian brothers to the fate of what one might call
European Zionist Khazar machinations. We cannot afford
it, and you cannot afford it; your Governments cannot
afford it; nor can the Western Powers afford it.
168. Now, what is the alternative? Come and make peace.
It is not a peace with the Arab Governments, unless they
are what you call “directly concerned” because of the
occupied Arab territories, the problem of which emanated
originally from the Palestine question. To speak figuretively, you do not kill the serpent of trouble by chopping
off its tail; the head is still there. In order to solve the
difficulty, we have to crush the serpent’s head. I am
speaking figuratively now, mind you. I say this so that
Mr. Herzog or his alternates will not think I am speaking
aggressively. We have, as you say in English, to take the bull
by the horns; we have to crush the serpent’s head. The
difficulty can be resolved if the people of Palestine are
allowed to exercise their right to self-determination. And if
he, or anyone wants to raise the question of human rights
and of what type of government each country should
pursue and what others should do, well, you know very
well, Sir, having been a minister of religion, that many
people worship only ritualistically.
Otherwise, people
would not hate one another or kill one another, especially
in Christianity.

165. Let us argue with the Israeli representative, through
you, Sir, and tell him: if they want peace, the Arabs-including my country-are ready to encourage the process of
‘peace, provided the Israelis recognize the Palestinian people
and restitute the land to them, preserving their entity if
they can. But here is the catch: they know that unless they
trade with the Arab States, with the African States and
with the Balkan States-all those States are in the area,
because Palestine is at the crossroads of three continentsthey will become insolvent, and they feel that the United
States cannot ‘keep feeding them with arms-which cost
money-and with aid; nor can the wealthy American Jewish
Zionists continue sending them tax-free dollars through the
foundations they form. Ask me about it, Somebody in the
Navy, not of Arab origin, told me 20 or 25 years ago “I’m
burned up”. I said “What’s wrong with you? Why? ” He
said that at 785 or so Fifth Avenue, the Zionists had
formed an American foundation of sorts to receive money
for research and development-as if we lacked universities
here-but that 90 per cent of that money was being
siphoned off to the Hebrew University. I said “Why are you
telling this to me? “-and I have never mentioned this; this
is the first time-“Go and tell it to your Government. You
are an American citizen of Anglo-Saxon origin, too. Why
are you telling me this? ”

169. The ritual of democracy cannot be used ,in order to
hurl invective at people who do not follow the same ritual.
Our democracy emanates from the tribal democracy: the
chief of the tribe is the servant of the people and, if he is
not serving the people, they replace him. And he does not
have to be of any party. Those who serve the people best
are their leaders. And their leaders are their servants.

166. This is to show you that we are approaching the
point of no return. I sympathize with the innocent Jew
~110 is a victim of that political movement. But the people
who consider themselves leaders in Israel should open their
eyes and ears and not let what is said in the New Testament
and also in the Koran apply to them: “They have eyes and
do not see; they have ears and do not hear”. They are
human. We do not want any harm to come to them. But at
the same time, we cannot afford, officially or unofficially,
as Governments, to see our Palestinian brothers sacrificed.
Even if we forget that they are- Arabs, they are human
beings; they have been living in our area since time
immemorial, and many of them, ethnologically, were Jews
and became Christians or some of them Moslems. We
cannot afford to see our Palestinian brothers sacrificed
because they will subvert us. I am the one who blurts this
out. My Arab colleagues, out of a sense of propriety, may
not mention it-as if we were weaklings. But I hasten to

170. But we are not here to show our wares. We have our
own system. We are not proud of it, nor can you be proud
of yours. Sometimes there are certain deviations, not
necessarily in the system, but in applying it. But we are
trying as human beings to live, to the best of our ability, by
respecting the human person and his dignity.
171. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Yemen has
asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of
reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
172. Mr. SALLAM (Yemen): The Zionist representative
spoke about Yemen and said that Yemen was very
underdeveloped. I cannot deny that. Yemen is an underdeveloped country, true, but we are fighting that underdevelopment. The country was neglected for a long time
20

during a past era under the Governments of that time. But
since 1962, the,Yemeni people have had a revolution. Since
then, they have been taking one step forward after another.
I wish to tell the Zionist representative that this year we
have a surplus of $600 million which came from our people
abroad-here in the United States, in Saudi Arabia and in
other countries.
173. I should like to remind the Zionist representative
that the people who left Yemen in 1947-our Yemeni
Jews-did so because the Zionists came to Sana’a and made
an agreement with the King of that time to the effect that
they should leave. The Yemeni people did not deny them
what they wanted. They wanted to leave, but the people
were weeping when they left the country because the
Yemeni Jews left behind so many things that they used to
do and which the Yemeni people did not-for example, all
the commercial businesses were in their hands-and we were
very sorry that the Yemeni Jews left the country at the
time.
174. The Yemeni Jews here in Brooklyn asked me to
come and see them during Passover. I went and met them;
we ate together; they played the same music that we play in
Yemen and we spoke Arabic. We have everything in
common with the Jewish people of Yemen but the
representatives of the Zionists have nothing whatsoever in
common with them.
175. The Israeli representative spoke about some people
who had been arrested by the Government. I have no idea
whatever from where he got his information. I am sure that
it is all fabrications and lies. There is no one under house
arrest and there are no political prisoners in Yemen. Those
people have become accustomed to telling many lies in the
Security Council.
176. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization who wishes to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.
177. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization): In
the course of my statement yesterday 1 mentioned that the
Palestine National Council had adopted a resolution, which
states:
“Bearing in mind the important achievements accomplished on the Arab and international levels. . . the
Palestine National Council decides:
“ . . . To affirm the right of the PLO to participate in all
international conferences, forums and efforts dealing with
the problem of Palestine and the Arab-Zionist conflict on
an independent and equal footing. . .” [1995th meeting,
para. 1421.
178. When we came to the Council, we were certain that
the Council would endorse the mandate given by the
General Assembly to the Secretary-General to pursue the
possibility of a conference in order to achieve peace in the
area. We did not come here to waste anybody’s time. Please
do not let us leave this place disillusioned.

179. The Palestine Liberation Organization was referred to
as a batch of terrorists. All I can say is that name calling is
no subsiitute for rational discourse. Name calling is an
admission of intellectual bankruptcy.
180. The reason why the Zionists do not want peace is
very, very clear. Moshe Dayan has said it, David Ben Gurion
has said it, Golda Meir has said it, and let me just quote this
statement by Moshe Dayan to some American Jewish
college students in the summer of 1968:
“During the last 100 years our people have been in the
process of building up the country and the nation, of
expansion, of giving Jews additional settlements in order
to expand the borders here. Let no Jew say that the
process has ended. Let no Jew say that we are near the
end of the road.”
18 1. It is quite evident that Tel Aviv is adamantly opposed
to any move towards peace.
182. I should like to make a passing reference to the
Nationality Law. In time I shall address a letter to the
President about the Nationality Law in the land where
Palestinians have become non-persons.
183. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Republic): I should like
simply to place on record a statement on behalf of my
delegation and Government.
184. My delegation has not participated in the current
debate in compliance with our previous position regarding
the item entitled “The situation in the Middle East”, a
position that we have explained on a number of occasions
in both the General Assembly and the Security Council.
185. We believe that the following principIes constitute a
suitable framework for reaching a just solution of the
Palestine problem:
-First, the Palestine question is the core of the Middle
East problem and, without a just solution of that question,
peace can never be achieved in the region. The Palestine
question can be solved only when the Palestinian people
regain their right to return to their homeland and exercise
their right to self-determination.
-Secondly, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) cannot in any way constitute a framework for
any just or lasting solution to the Middle East question.
They have been bypassed by events and developments in
the attitude of the United Nations and international public
opinion.
-Thirdly,
the General Assembly adopted a proper
attitude in dealing with the Palestine question in adopting
resolutions 3236 [XXIX) and 3237 (XXIX) reaffirming the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, resolution
3376 (XXX) proposing means designed to enable the
Palestinian people to achieve their national rights, resolution 3379 (XXX) condemning Zionism as a racist movement
and resolution 31/20 regarding the implementation of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to return to their

homes and properties and to achieve self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty.
186. Those resolutions of the General Assembly reflect
profound and important changes. Basically, they call for a
review of the entire question and of the ways of dealing
with it. For that reason, we did not participate in the -

debate concerning; the situation in the Middle East and the
‘eneral submitted under General
report of the Secretary-cl
Assembly resolution 3 l/C ;2-more particularly, since we
also did not participate in the debate or in the vote
concerning that Assembly resolution.
The meetirlg rose at 7p.m.
