THIRTY-THIKD

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

9 MARCH

1978

J

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2064)

Adoption

of the agenda

pggE

. . , . . . . . . . , . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

QLlcstion concerning the situatiorl in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge ’ d’Affaires a.[. of thr: ?crItlrfnent
Mission of tile Upper Volta to the Ullited Nations addrtlssed to the President
of;he Security Council (S/12578)
. . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -.

1

.

.

2064th
Held in New York

MEETING

on Thursday,

President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

&esenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia. Canada, China, Czechoslovakia. France. Gabon.
&rmany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius:
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
nf&nerica, Venezuela.

3. In vie@ of the limited number of places at the Council
table, I invite the representative of Botswana to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber
on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a
place at the Council table whenever he wishes to speak.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2064)
I. Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the Plesicient, Mr. Tlou (Botwano)
took the place reserved fbr him at the side of the Gxmcil
chamber.

?. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the ChargC d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Uppr
Volta to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12578)

4. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
Mr, President, I should like first to perform a pleasant duty
and extend to you the warmest congratulations of my
delegation upon your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. My pleasure in
seeing you preside over the meetings of the Council is
particularly great inasmuch as your beautiful country, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and
my country, the Republic of Gabon, enjoy excellent
relations of coWoperation based on friendship and mutual
respect. I am convinced that your qualities as a statesman
and as an accomplished diplomat, together with your
knowledge of the question on our agenda, will ensure that
the Council, under your presidency, will find a wise
solution acceptable to the communit~of nations.
I.
5. I should also like to say how mu&we appreciated the
competent leadership of your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

Themcctirry was called to order at 4. IO p.m.
.,
:‘.‘:I:

9 March 1978, at 3.30 pm.

Adoption of the agenda
ne agenda WQSadopted.

estion concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
.. Letter dated 1 March 1975 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i.
?,
Of the Permanent Mission of the Upper Volta to the
’ 4.
, I,’ United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12578)
*a The PRESIDENT: 111 accordance with the decisions
takcn by the Council at its preceding meetings, I invite the
resentatives of Angola, Benin, Kenya, Mozambique,
na hone, the Sudan, the United Republic of Tanzania,
UPPer Volta and Zambia to take the places reserved for
m at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Once again Ian Smith has committed a flagrant act of
defiance and rebellion against the administering Power, the
United Kingdom, by brazenly short-circuiting the negotiations on the plan sponsored by the United Kingdom
together with the United States Government. Once again
the illegal racist minority regime of Ian Smith, which has
been in power in Rhodesia since 11 November 1965, has
proved to the international community that it is not
prepared in any real sense to modify the particularly
dangerous
situation which exists in that British colony.

& the invitation of the President, Mr, de Figmired
“qola),
Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Maim (KW’a),
’ “i;’ &, cbujanla
Mr. Medani (Sudan),
(Sierra Leofle),
,“tP~“‘~ Lobe (Mozan~biqlle) Mr. &Em (United Republic of
‘,;>;pr )
LlrLamh) Mr Bamba iUpper Volta) and MiSS Konie
*Yh;:*&
‘bh)‘took’
the p/aces reserved for them at the side of
~:*@
i, @@Council charr,ber
,“;,*.

7. In the face of this new act of defiance, Why should we
continue to tolerate the arrogance of the illegal minority
has been
regime of Ian Smith? It is a r.&gime whkh
condenined and yet it continues to Spurn 311manifestations

““’ a The PRESIDENT- I should like to inform members of
::h CounciI that I’ have received a letter from the
aPresentative of Botswana in which he requests to be
lrivitcd to participate in the discussiorl of the questil)n. In
1

of goodwill. That is the Rhc~Icsian problem, a cu~~~pl~xand
distressing problem to which that part of the African
continent which lives in freedom cannot remain indifferent.
Jt is because we are an African country and because the
President of the Republic of Gabon, El Hadj Omar Bongo,
is also the current Presidentof the Organisationof African
Unity, that the delegation of Gabon will never ceaseto
declare the regimeof Ian Smith a rebel, minority andillegal
regimeandto proclaim that it is high time for us to bend all
our efforts to put an end to that situation which is a
continual affront to the sacred principles of the United
Nations.

1I . My dcJcgation’sposition on this problem is clear; it is
perfectly in keeping with that of the Orgarrizafion of
African Unity recently reconfirmed at Tripoli by the
adoption of a resolution by which OAU rejects the
Salisbury internal agreement and reaffirms its exclusive
support of the Patriotic Front, the principal liberation
movement in Zimbabwe. Thus, Iike aIl countries that love
peaceand justice, my delegationbelievesthat the Salisbury
agreement is unacceptable, because it k a devious ma.
noeuvre on the part of international imperialism and a
scheme aimed at setting up in Rhodesia not a majority
government but a government devoted to the defence of
the objectivesagainstwhich we are all fighting.

8. In the face of this fresh act of rehelhon,the reaction of
the international community must at least match Jan
Smith’s conduct, that is to say, it must be firm and
effective.
*h.
9. Without wishingto open a debateon the entire problem
of Zimbabwe-which strictly speakingis not the purposeof
our meetings-.?.should like to recall that the processof
decolonization was perforce halted in Southern Rhodesia
be&usc of the will of a minority of about 270,000 white
diehards who, in ‘order to preservetheir selfishinterests,
decided to usurp the authority of the colonial Power,
namely, the United Kingdom, by proclaiming unilateral
independenceand imposingtheir rule on the majority of
6 million Africans. The latter cannot take charge of the
destiny of their country, because of the political and
socio-economicsystem which prevails and becauseof the
blind stubbornness
of the white settlerswho aredetermined
to go againstthe tide of history sincethey wish to ignore
contemporary developments.There has been no Jack of
effortsin variousquartersto end the impassecreatedby Ian
Smith. Among them
are the Anglo-American proposals.
Without wishingto passjudgcment on the Anglo-.4merican
plan, I should simply like to say that my delegationfeels
that it at least makesroom for all the interested parties,
without any exceptions.

12. Our interest in a just and final settlement of the
situation in Zimbabwe, in other words, our determination
to put an end to this thorny problem, and the efforts being
exerted by all to come up with a genuine solution should
have a single aim, namely the achievement of a truly
independent and prosperousZimbabwe, in which all its
sons-without any exceptions- wilI live in peace. To de.
nounce the Salisbury agreementand refuse to rccognize it
will enableall who still believein those principlesto remain
consistent. Indeed, it would be difficult to imagine an
independent and calm Zimbabwe under the terms of an
agreement that flagrantly excluded the Patriotic Front,
which is the principal liberation movement
and which is,
moreover, waging a genuine armed struggle against the
illegal minority regimeof Ian Smith.
13. On the contrary, the statement made by hlr. hsllua
Nkomo on the agreement to the effect that “the \~a1
continues, things are now clear, Smith and his puppets are
but one enemy”, is proof of this, as are the bombs that
have exploded in various places at Salisbury since the
signingof the agreement.On the other hand, to rccognize
the agreementor not to take a stand openly--which would
in reality be the same.-is to practise ambiguousdiplomacy;
it aggravatesthe presentsituation, which remainsdangerous
and might very well give carle blard~c
to Ian Smith and his
clique, enablingthem to continue along the samepath.

10. The first questionthat comesto mind is how doesIan
Smith intend to deal with those Anglo-American proposals? While the world was setting its hopes on the
negotiationshcing Pursuedin variousplaceson the AngloAmerican plan, the illegal minority regime of Ian Smith,
comfortably installedin authority, yet losirigpower day by
day, wasdoing what it could to deceivethe international
community. For example, last week it was learnt that a
so-calledinternal agreementhad just beensignedbetwccn
Ian Smith and the three moderate black leaders.That
agreementisin fact no suchthing and no oneis deceivedby
it, except perhapsSmith and his cronies,Onedoesnot need
to be particularly clever to understandthat that so-called
agrermcntgivesIcgaI rrcognition to the domination of the
while minorit) in all areas,although
they
representsuch a
small pcr~rni:~gc of the entire pupulaiion of Southern
Rhodesia.I low+,then, could one endorsesuchan agrecmcnt
which gives 50 per
of the land--and very rich land at
that-.18 per rent of the scatsin the National Assc~tlhly
with power to block legislation, the most important
ntinistcrial posts and the maintenanceof the oulragcous
praclicc of mcismto that minority white population?
TO
tile a term usedby 3 jclurnalist: how can one endorsean
agrccmcntwhich rccogriizes“parliamenta~ U~u?Yhcid”?

14. When was a rebel ever allowed to define the termsof
his own surrender? Everybody here recallsthat Ian Smith
arrangedhis own negotiationswithin a framework which hc
personally defined and with negotiating partnersof his own
choice. In the circumstances,he could not fail to securethe
resultshe was seeking.To approve the agreementor refrain
from criticizing it is tantamount 10 recognizing that th
rebel Jan Smith has the right to dictate the conditions for
his surrender to the international community, That wonId
alsoretroactively confer legitimacy on all the criminal acts
performed by the iIlegaI Smith regime.
15. After so much jnvective, must we endure this further
affroni from Jan Smith? We would rather hear that certain
States, anxious to intervene militarily, were tllrCatCI1iIlg
th
JanSmith regime, which has never failed to thrmtcll pcacc
in sovereignindependent neighbouring African Stales Such
asZambia and hlozantbique. Doesnot peacein that Prt of
Africa have the samevalue aselsew%cre?

cent

I

16. The international community must not be an accoJ11’
p]icc in thjs final desperate effort by Ian Smith. TIN
2

,
hleqation of Gabon is convinced that it is a manoeuvre
u,~$imously
condemned by aU African States; it is a
tmfloeuvre to divert the attention of the entire warld from
tic armed struggle in Southern Rhodesiawhich, plainly,
will overthrow the: Smith re’gimeif he doesnot negotiate
sjthin the framek4.orkof the Anglo-American plan, which
providesa basisfor agreementleading to the creation of a
&ynuinemajority Government.
17, By virtue 0f our devotion to equality and human
clignity, free and independent Africa CategoricaIIyrejects
lhc internal agreement, because it does not include an
[mportantelementin the Zirnbabwe equation; I refer to the
Pltriotic Front, the only arbiter of peaceor war.

23. As is well known, in Southern Rhodesiaall African
nationalistpartieshavebeenbannedfor over a drc:~de,and
their leadersimprisonedor detained.Throughout
that
titne,
the harshestpenaltieswereimposedfor any refusalto bow
to the authority
of the illegalminority
ndmirlistrstion.
24. The pressis rife with reportsconcerningthe security
situation in Rhodesia,as nationalistsare hittirlg targets
within a few milesof the capital. Therearealso reportsof
whites continuing to leave the country and of how the
economyis nearingthe point of collapse.
2.5. The fact that Smith hasbeentalking about majority
rule is due to the armed strugglecarried out by the
liberation forces and, to somemeasure,to the sanctions
imposedby the internationalcommunity. A rCgirnewhich
is totally wedded to racism and the maintenanceof
privilegesfw’r the few cannot overnightbelievein equality
and democraticrule. Smith is, at the moment,in a rut, and
nothing on earth will extricate him Fromhisrutted roadof
segregation.That is why the dealhis re’girne
istrying to sell
is not a genuinechangeof heart but merely a changeof
tactic.

18. The Security Council is the supremebody in our
(Jrganizationas concerns international peaceand security
md it shouldface the problem squarelyand fully assume
its
Nsponsibilities.We could effectively do this if we were
&nply to reject the agreementreachedin the British colony
and if everyone at his own level were to bring pressureto
bearon Ian Smith w that genuinenegotiationscould begin
on the Anglo-American plan leading to a real settlementof
lhc Rhodesianproblem. Furthermore, the Council must
make an urgent appeal to all StatesMembersof the United
Nations, and others as well, and to all international
organizstionsnot to endorsethat agreementwhich underInincs the foundation of the anti-colonialist front in
Zimbabwe,wearsaway the unity of the blacksandseeksto
createan armed confrontation between the black nationdists, to the greatjoy of Ian Smith.

26. This sudden romance of the illegal re’gime-and
Mr. Smith, in particular-with majority rule gives rise to
suspicion.It alsodoesnot cut muchice in termsof logic.It
is obviousthat the illegalre’gimeis desperate.
Thisdealis a
desperateattempt to securelegitimacyand,subsequently,
the lifting of sanctions.It thereforehasmasterminded
the
so-calledinternal settlement,which is a far cry from a
genuine deal that would put an end to the bloody
hostilities.Henceit canbe seenthar the internalsettlement
is the last cardin Mr. Smith’shandfor pullinghischestnuts
out of the fire.

19. The delegationof Gabon hopesthat the Council,in its
decision, will tyke into account the very positive contri-

bution of the African States to this debate, in particular
ulose of the front line, whosecontribution should be of
@eatobjectiveenlightenmentto the Council.

27. The Council is meetingat a critical moment in the
history of the peopleof Zimbabweand of Africa in general.
The prime
responsibi.lity
of the Council is not to let Ian
Smith go Scot-freewith the spoilsof the dealhe hasstruck
with other African leaders.First and.forzruost for the
Council, is the continuedmaintenance
of s;mztionswithout
relaxation. After all, the illegalrCgimehasf-ixedits sightsso
high as to expect gradualrelaxation in the’applicationof
sanctions.This expectationshouldbenippedin the bud. ” *’

20. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Sir, it is a causeof great
Ptisfaction to us to take part in this debate while an
cnlincnt and experienced diplomat like you is presiding
Overour deliberations.The delegationof Kuwait would like
to congratulateyou on your assumptionof the presidency
Of the Council for the month of March. You have already
displayeda lot of positive qualities that will contribute
cnorrr~Ouslyto the work of the Council under your
QPthcy. Wewis]l you good luck and success.

28. Likewise,the Councilcannot abnndouthr ~e”plc of
Zimbabwein this time of crisis.An imperativestep is the
condemnationof the internal settlementand the rejection
of its provisions.The Councillongagodeterminedthat the
situation in Rhodesiaconstituteda threat to irtt~rnational
peaceand security.The natureof the Smithr&me remains
today what it hasbeenfor morethan a de:csde,that ofan
illegal usurpercontraveningthe righhtto self-determination
of the peopleof Zimbabwe.The passage
of time hasnot
altered its nature; neitherhasthe fact that it hasinchedits
way along for the past 13 years in a curious battIc for
survival.

2l. 1 should like also to congratulate the outgoing
president,AmbassadorTroyanovsky of the USSR, on the
mnner in which he conducted the proceedingsof the
Councillastmontll.

‘!* The Securityc ouncil hasbeen seizedof the problem
Of
IL!.SouthernRhodesiafor more than a decade.Its recordon
“Q Particular issue is on the whole, satisfactory. It already
’ dccided in 196s tha; the unilateral declaration of indepenj dcnce ;, I an S&it&.and
therefore, his re’gimc-had no
legal validity. ConsequentI; the Council imposed sanctions
I, , O1(the illegal regime as a minifestation of its opposition t0
the unilateraldeclaration of independence.It is true that
4
:“,
*
thereare some loopholesin the sanctionsthat have, in fact,
er’ab’ed
the Smittl r~grlle to survive, but if universally
: *
.’ aFp’icdthe sanctionscan be moreeffectiv?.

29. The truth of the matter
is that the i1lcg.drggirtleisINI
morelegaltoday than it was13yearsago.Conscquen
tly, all
its actionsare illegalandany internalsettlernctlL
CWlClLld~d
by it is also tailltcd with illegality. Tl~e &j&t elf th:lt
set[lcrlle,lt

3

is

EL) gi\!:

tile

illcgll

Ggirilr

d !,r<.~!‘I1~!;

,~lv:Il

111J

sllpcrvisc the ],,rIding
of a Icfclendum is indispensable. To
hold an election under the forces of the illegal re’gimc
would be nothing but a travesty of justice and a distortion
of the will of the people. The delegation of Kuwait believes
that no settlement can be internationally acceptable with.
out a test of the opinion of the indigenous people. No red
test of opinion can take place without a cease-fire and 3
United Nations presence. At the same time, no cease-fire
can take place so long as the Patriotjc Front is excluded.

30. Therefore, the Council is bound to act decisively. Its
duty is clearly to reaffirm and strengthen its previous
decisions and resolutions. It should uphold the principles
enshrined in the Charter. Furthermore, there is an inherent
danger in the abdication of responsibility. Apart from being
mosaIly untenable, the abdication of responsibility means
the escalation of bloodshed, the deepening of animosity
among black Africans and a continuation of instability. It
is, in short, the encouragement of horror instead of
harmony, and of fratricidal war in place of peace. This is
not, indeed, in keeping with the Charter; it is contrary to
the essence of the United Nations. Nothing encourages the
illegal r&ime in its endeavours to gain credibility more than
the Council’s inability to act decisively. It is not only a
betrayal of the mandate conferred on the Council by the
Charter, it is a clear licence for ,a horrible cycle of blood
shedding and blood spilling.
.* +.
31. Therefore, the delegation of Kuwait urges that there
should be no $lay in taking a decision commensurate with
the gravity of the situation in Rhodesia. No Member State
should succumb’to the fait accompli as a substitute for the
rule of law. A ccimmunity which is powerless to confront
illegality encourages violence instead of curbing it.

36. The leaders of the Patriotic Front have made their
position very clear. These leaders not only oppose the
internal settlement, which they have described as “the
greatest sell-out in the history of Africa”; they have aJsO
proclaimed their intention to prevent by force its app&.
calion.
Therefore, the deal wiIf not achieve the very
objective it purports to secure, that is, a cease-fire. On the
contrary, instead of a decline in hostilities, the world wil]
witness an escalation, and the bloodshed will not be
confined to Rhodesia but will spread to the territories of
neighbouring States. There have, in fact, been a series of
raids into neighbouring countries by Smith’s forces, and
some of them have been discussed by the Council. Rut the
world will see more of those bloody raids that reflect
Smith’s problems. In these circumstances, the stability of
the neighbouring States is endangered, for who can guar.
antee that those raids will not be so extensive as to trigger a
conflagration between the illegal re’gime in Rhodesia and
the invaded country? And hcrc the Council cannot shun its
responsibility.
These are but a few examples of the
complexity of the situation prevailing in Rhodesia.

32. The question of Southern Rhodesia is a colonial issue
and should be dealt with in accordance with the principle
of self-determination exercised under the supervision of an
impartial body. The deal which Smith is trying to sell to the
world is illegal. The white minority-which
is no more than
4 per cent of the population-would
continue to pull the
strings of power for many years to come. A deal which does
not ensure the emergence of a genuinely independent
Zimbabwe on the basis of universal adult suffrage under the
supervision of ali impartial body would be no different
from the pIesent arrangement.

37. The United Kingdom remains the Je jlrre Power
responsible for Southern Rhodesia. The Council cannot
accept a cosmetic transfer of power in which the admin.
istering Power does not effectively discharge its responsibility in accordance with past decisions of the Council.
38. The United Nations has a vital role in bringing about a
real settIernent in Rhodesia. The participation of all parties
concerned in a conference convened by the administering
Power with the assistance of the United Nations is a
prerequisite for the acltievemcnt of an acceptable settlement. The absence of any party from the negotiations
makes it impossible to agree on the essentials for the
transitional period. By the same token, the administering
Power must do its utmost to ensure tJle involvement of all
the parties in such a conference. M’e believe that such a
conference would alJay the suspicion that some of the
parties already harbour about the future of Rhodesia. In
this respect, the role of the Secretary-General is very
important. There is no doubt that the jnvolvement of the
United Nations would ensure the co-operation and the
goodwill of some of the parties that would otherwise feel
alienated and left out in the cold.

33. According to press reports, the main pillars of the
internal settlement concocted by Smith are power for the
whites in Parliament out of proportion to their numbers,
their continued tenure of the top echelons of the civil
service and the armed forces, and their domination of the
economy. If this is not a deal devised to perpetuate
privileges under the guise of a settlement, what is it then?
i
34. It is a deal that will divide the country befween a
prestigious minority and a deprived majority. It will provide
a fa$ade of unity behind which the while elite will enjoy
plain sailing while the majority struggle to eke 0Ut a mere
living. This is to all intents and purposes an attempt to
legitimize subjugation. Ian Smith is aware of the fact that a
genuine settlcmcnt would sweep him and his lieutenants
out of power. In the circumstances, the internal settlement
is netting
hut chains
of steel with
which to shackJe the
people of Zimhahwe and make the day of their liberation
more remote.

39. No Member State is interested in a confinuation of the
war in Rhodesia for its own sake, but the unmistakable
determination of the leaders of the Patriotic Front to
continue their struggle makes it amply clear tJ]at, instead of
a decrease in the shedding of blood, we shall witness an
escalation, and all wilI pay dearly because of a deal that was
devised to avert the very bloodshed that it is inviting.

35. The situatkw
in FUmdesia is a threat to world peace
and security. In view of the unusual circumstances prevailing in that hapless and uduckp
country, the presence of
a United h’:llions force to maintain law and order and to
4

c

.in fn view of this, the delegation of Kuwait
would like to
,tress three indisputably daryerous aspects of the deal in
Khodesia. First, it is irnmoral~ since it perpetuates
the
privileges of the minority-economically;socially
and polit1~~11~.It SOWS the seeds of turmoil; it entrenches racism and
kplixes aporflreid and it is a stab in the back to the
spirntions of the overwhelming majority of the peopleof
Zimb;rbwe.Secor~dlY,it is in violation of international law,
dncc it was concluded by an illegal regime deprived of
lntcrnal or international recognition with therefore neither
cndibility nor legitimacy to conclude an agreementand
face the world with a fait accompli. ThirdIy, this deal is
wdr-mongeringsince it.is an invitation to bloodshed,civil
war and fratricidal conflict. It will endangerthe stability of
the area rather than contribute to progress.It opens the
door to rivalry between Powersengagedin power politics
Ed is therefore a destabilizing factor in a region already
mplete
with conflicting interests.
41. The delegation of Kuwait believesthat such a deal
slmuldbe thwarted. It is an ignobleploy on the part of the
Ulegalregime and nothing but a brazen challengeto the
prestigeanddignity of the world Organization.
42. blr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President,I should like to
join the other membersof the Councilin extending to YOU
my delegation’sfelicitations on your assumingthe presidency of the Co.uncilfor this month and to offer you our
best wishesfor your successfulhandling of the difficult
problemsthat are before us. Your vast political and
diplomatic experience and your formidable skill as a
negotiator reassureus that you will safely guide us to
fruitful solutions in our collective quest for peace and
justice.
43. The item before us is entitled “Question concerning
the situation in Southern Rhodesia”. It is clear from the
Statementsof the preceding speakersthat what we are
concernedabout is the current situation in Southern
Rhodesia;a concern that is causedby reportsof an internal
Wrcementsigned by the illegal Smith regimewith certain
hfrican parties regarding the future political evolution of
ht colonial Territory. The detailsof this so-calledinternal
Weemerit are available to us only through the COUrteSY of
the Americannewspapers,and sinceno one hasdeniedthe
report we presumethat it is true and we must examineit,
therefore, irr the light of establishedprinciples and the
positionof international law.
44. At this stage,it is useful to recallthe mainfeaturesof
the history of Southern Rhodesiasince 1965, when the
whitemirlority usurped
power
and unilaterally declaredits
IndependenceThat act of seizure wascondemnedby the
Security Council as an act of rebellion having no legal
validity. Subscquentiy,
mandatory sanctiorlS
of
an
econotic
nature were iInpoSed
after it had beendeternurled
that the situation ul Soutfrern Rhodesiaconstituted a threat
to internationalpeaceand security. The Councilcontinued
lo recognil,ettle United Kingdom asthe legaladministering
‘Owerand called upon it to quell the rebellionandtake all
other

apprupriate

and

effective

mXISUreS

to

krmhte

the

ilh$Jl regime The United Kingdom was&O askedto take
stePsto allow the people
of Southern Rhodesia,to
dehutine ttlpir clWfl future ~1consistencywith the oblec-

tives of General Assemblyresolution 1514 (XV). Lastly,
the Councilcalled upon the Organizationof African Unity
to do all in its Power to assistthe implementationof its
resolutionsin conformity with ChapterVIII of the Charter,
andthis underlinesthe recognizedimportanceof the role of
the African Group and thz relevanceof its decisionsfor the
restof us.
45. This brief recitation of the law is necessaryin order to
determinethe extent to which it hasbeencorrlplied
with.
Unfortunately, however, the fact is that the illegal Smith
regimehasnot yet beenbrought to an end by the United
Kingdom, by the armedstruggleof the freedom fighters,
by the sanctionsof the UnitedNationsor by the actionsof
the Organizationof African Unity. On the contrary, the
threat to international peaceand security has increased.
Severalattemptsmadeby the UnitedKingdom to negotiate
an agreedprocessfor the free exerciseof the right of
self-determination
by the peoplehavesofar failed.
46. The last sucheffort wasthe so-calledAnglo-American
proposals[S/12393], which were taken note of by the
%xurity council in its resolution415 (1977). Theseproposals
were drawn up for the purposeof restoringlegabty
“after consultingall the partiesconcerned”.They envisage,
infer oliu, the end of the illegalregime,the introduction of
a United Nationsforceandthe establishment
by the United
Kingdom under its authority of a neutral caretakertransitional administrationbefore electionscan be held under
United Nationssupervisionand majority rule and genuine
independenceestablishedin 1978. They also envisageda
supervisedcease-fireand the creation of a Zimbabwe
NationalArmy basedon the liberation forces. The over-all
objectiveof the Anglo-Americanproposalsis to achievean
internationallyacceptednegotiatedsettlement.
47, My Prime Minister informed the British Government
that those proposalshad much to commendthem since
they sought to end the illegal regime and establish
independenceon the basisof the principlesof universal
adult suffrageand ajusticiableBill of Rightssafeguarded
by
an independentjudiciary. The crucialelementin the whole
processis, of course,the nature of the transitional set-up,
with the United Kingdomin the role-of guardian,backed
by a United Nations force. The Goverirmentof India was
alsoof the view that it wasnecessary
to win the confidtnce
of au the parties
andthat no effort shouldbe sparedto end
the hostilities,Wealsofelt that it wasabsolutely vital that
the F&ode&r forces shouldbe brought under the discipline
and control of the restoredlegalorder and that they
shouldbe madeto adjustto the inevitability of majority
rule andaccept
the spirit and letter of the Anglo-American
proposals.
48. Because the Anglo-American proposals had been
drawn up after consultationswith all the partiesconcerned,
wehad nourishedthe expectationthat all the partieswould
enter into negotiationson the basisof those proposals.
However it seemsthat only the Patriotic Front hasagreed
to do so.‘Mr. Smith appearsto haveblown hot and cold and
finally withdrawn characteristicallyto his manoeuvresand
attempts
to present
the world with hisrevisedversionof his
own vision of the future, In obtaining the suPPortof
certain African parties,Mr. Smith hasdone no more than
perPetustethe illegalregimeon a sc>nit’wh;rt
wider h:lsis.

.j (1.

Ji’!ic,r;

0llv

L,\.:l!i:iJlcs

the

!;.4li3’~l;r~

:igI~clIEIlt

in

r[?la-

it is
not dcsigncd to restore
legality. The transitional govcmnlcnt would rjot be under the authority of the United
Kingdom and Ihcre is no provision whatsoever for any
involve~nen t’ on the part of the United Nations, It simply
ignoresthe United Kingdom and the United Nations, and I
fail to understand, therefore, how anyone can appear
before the United Nations to defend an arrangementthat
deliberately defieslegality and ignoresthe Organization. In
essence,
it is an extension of illegality and no more
acceptable than the illegal Smith rCgimewhich committed
the original sin. Furthermore, under the Salisbury agreement, the white minority would have the veto in the
Executive Council, the Council of Ministers and the
Legislative Assembly. What could this portend but a
transition to prolonged domination by the Smith regime?
licm

(0

!Ile

?i:!:lo

AJl1crisdn

I)rOp<mlS,

one

finds

that

50. An i~q~oriant
section of the African people represented by the Patriotic Front has denouncedthis agree-Acnt, and for good reason, It is surely unreal to equate
legality with illegality. The United Nations will accept as
legal only a m’ajority government, freely elected on the
basisof universal.~adult
suffrage,in conditions of peaceand
under United NatJonssupervision.What we are dealingwith
is a situation tl;dt calls for both decolonization and
dcniocratization. Failure to achievethis would surely result
in the continuation of hostilities. No settlement can be
purely internal in the presentsituation; it has to take into
account the lcgitinlate
views
and aspirations of all the
parties concerned as, otherwise, it cannot be viable or
durable.
51. In OUT view the need of the moment is a new
approach, a constructive, creative andpositive approach,to
seekout the elementsthat arebroadly acceptableto all the
parties and that conform to the principlesand purposesof
the eAnglo-Amcrir:mproposals,and thereafter to bujld on
them through resumed negotiations the constitutional
edifice of African reconciliation, aswell asthe restoration
of legality.

of the United Kingdom, a iollnfry whose
intricate involvement in Southern Rhodesiapredates the
advent on the scene 12 years ago of the illegal minority
rfgime. That, coupled with your personal qualities as s
seasoneddiplomat and your conversance
with
the Zirn.
babwe problem, gives us confidence that you will steertlte
deliberationsof the Council to a successful
conclusion.
pr~xidency

55. The Council is currently meeting to review the
situation in Zimbabwe following the claim by the iIlegal
minority racist r8gime that it has reached an internal
settlement and the resultant call for an end to the
mandatory United Nations sanctions against the Smith
rebel rCgime.That would be followed by recognition of the
rdgimeby the international community.
56. Such a claim leads us to ask whether
the conditions
which led to the ostracism of the Smith r@me by the
international community have now been removed. ,4
cursory glance at the provisions of the so-calledinternal
settlement
does not support that contention. The so-called
internal setffement does not provide for the removal of
Smith’s instruments of domination embodied in the army,
the police and the security forces. Indeed,it is under those
very security forces that the so-calledfree electionsleading
to majority rule would be conducted. Furthermore, the
establishmentof separatevoting rolls for whites and blacks,
and the fact that the whites would have virtual veto power
in all parliamentary decisionsleavesmuch to be desired.
57. In our view, the so-calledinternal settlement doesnot
adequately addressitself to three main issues,namely, the
legitimization of the new rigime by the United Kingdomthe administering Power-the ending of the war with the
freedom fighters and the lifting of the mandatory United
Nations sanctions.

58. In a genuine
settlement it is only the administering
Power-the United Kingdom-that could furnish the necessary legal instruments for the independenceof Zimbabwe,
It is our earnest hope that the United Kingdom will
continue to hold that independencecan be granted to all
citizens of Zimbabwe irrespective of the pigmentation of
52. I hope that, for the reasonsI have outlined, the
their skin, With the present “settlement” stiI1weightedin
Security Council will reject the Salisbury agreementas
illegal, and lay down instead the basic principles of
favour of the white minority, we hoId that the reasonsfor
procedure and la\v for a revival of the negotiationsalong
which the rebel rdgime was denounced by the United
the right lines; in this task the United Kiilgdom will
Kingdom and isolated by the international community still
necessarilyhave to play the leadingrole, with the assistance remain valid today. No stretch of the imagination could
of the Security Council and also of the Organization of
make the present internal settlement an improvement on
Africah Llnity. .4 pcaccful negotiatedsolution, eventhough
the situation that has obtained in Southern Rhodesiafor
it may”involve someadjuslment of preconceivednotions,
the last 12 years.
would be far better,
in our view, than a continuation of the
armed conflict with all its uncertainty, bloodshed and
59. As mentioned before, the so-calledinlernal settlement
bitterness.
does not address itself to the question of fighting in
Southern Rhodesia.According to Smith, the ending of the
53. The PRCSIDI:NT: The next speakeris the represen- armed conflict would be handled by the so-callednew
lative of fhc Sudan.
I ijivitc
him to take a place at the
goverJlJI)ent.
This is a prescription for the esc~atiorl
Of the
COlJJKil
tabtc
and t0 Ill:lhc
his StatCJllUlt.
fighting. Indeed, it is an invitation to what Ambassador
Andrew Young has rightly called a “black-on-black civil
war”. It is inconceivable that a government which excludes
54. hlr. hlED:1NI (Sudan): hlr. President,I thank you and,
the Patriotic
Front, which controls the freedom fighters,
through yot~, 111~
c.tltcr Jiicmhers
of the Council for making
it possiblei$Jrmy dclcgarinrl to participate in the deliberacould ever end the fighting. We believe that a meaningful
IioJls
on the
situation
in Southern
Rhodesia.
It is only
way of stopping the fighting would be to involve the
Patriotic Front, the only legitimate representative of the
firtin& that the Cuuncil should now be meeting under the
-.

j;,,llt,oddt‘n pmple
in Zimbabwe. It is For that reason that
kl:F organisation of African Unity has recogniLcd the
pJlriotic Front.
I Finally, it is narve for the authors of the bogus
&lent
to Cd
for
the liftirlg
of the JnandatoryUnited
piqljorl~sanctionswithout curing the malady that caused
I!ltm to be invoked in the first place. By maintaining the
x?A,ufquo, under whatever new guises,the rebel Smith
$J’giJne
remainsa threat to international pace andsecurity
ulJ thusdeserves
continued international isolation. Besides,
rho recent attack by the Smith rCgimeon the State of
&&ia, in which 38 people lost their lives, is a manifestation of its continued arrogance and defiance of inter~~~~cIKII
legalnorms.
(rl, Werecommendto all membersof this augustbody in
prtlcular, and to the rest of the international community
b general,that they should denouncethe so-calledinternal
gftlcrwnt and recognjze it for the farce that it is. An
c~ultableand workable settlement involving all the parties
~wnocrnedshould be negotiated. The Anglo-American
ptoposals,in spite of some shortcomings, are still an
adequate
basisfor such a settlement.
$2. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the represntativc of Sierra Leone. I invite her to take a placeat the
Clcruncil
tableand to makeher statement.
&3, Mrs. GBUJAhiA (Sierra Leone): My delegationjoins
I)w rtprcsentativeof the Upper Volta and the Chairmanof
the African Group for the current month in thanking the
ttrmbersof the Council for their quick responseto Africa’s
callfat thesemeetingsof the Council at this delicatestage
of thesituationin Southern Rhodesia,in order to focus the
~wki’s attention once againon the grave threat to peace
wd securityin the southern part of our continent posedby
thedeterioratingsituation in Southern Rhodesia.
Ml Weexpect the Security Council, as the custodianof
\harldpeace,to seize this opportunity to take prompt and
lOli)stappropriate action to prevent further bloodshedin
h part of the world through concrete measures
aimedat
%‘ecdhgUP majority rule, independenceand the end of the
bd hnority rule in SoutJxxrr Rhodesia. Indeed, this
krics of meetingsof the Council was requestedbefore the
‘test attack on Zambian territory by Ian Smith’s forces.
‘hcJ\ suchrepeatedacts of aggressionagainstneighbouring
Statesby Rhodesia’srebcI forces are consideredin conj~~~~ction
with the sham internal settlcrnent which hasjust
ken reachedin &at Territory it cannot be denied that
thesenlectingsof the Council a;e most timely and that its
hcisionswill be fital tcj international peaceandsecurity.
f;s* Mr. President with y our wealth of experience and
Your distinguished’carcrr, the Council will always be in
*oJ. handswhen under your guidance.It is twice blessed
“‘3 time in that your leadershipof the Council coincides
“‘h the &b ate on the British colony of Southern
Rhodasia,
a debate which hasbeen prompted by the rebel
?girna’sdecision to deceive the world yet again. The
‘gnihKlce of such a CoirlciJenceis better seenii1 th Ii&t
Qf Your owfl personalinv0lvcrrlcrl[ irl your Government’s
tc’cnt effort5 to discllarg: iti respun:iibili[y iJ1 Southem

Rhodesia.We arc therefore convinced that, with YOU
presiding,the Council will conzl& its delib~;.Jti<~ns
$th
singul.irsuccess
for the peopleof %inlb:lhwr:by Jistcg&ng
any settlement that does not include all partics ad,
in
particular, the forcesfighting for liberationand by pursuing
insteadthe pathofgenuine majority rult and indcpcnd~nce
along the lines of the Council’s Iatr‘st resolution on the
matter.
66. In the latest discussions
on the questionoESouthern
Rhodesia,the Councilrespondedfavourably to art invitation to the Secretary-General
front you, Sir, asreprrscntative of the United Kingdom,and requested
him
“to
appoint
. . . a representative
to enter into discussions
with the British ResidentCommissionerdesignateand
with all the pattiesconcerningthe military andassociated
arrangementsthat are considerednecessaryto effect the
transition’to majority rule in SouthernRhodesiu”(r~soluriot! 415 (197711.

The operative phrasehere is “with all the parties”. The
Council alsocalledupon all partiesto co-operatewith the
representativeof the Secretary-Centralin the conduct of
these discussions.
We therefore presumethat, in keeping
with its own mandatein resolution415 (1977), the Council
cannot now be preparedto recogniseor even considerany
discussions
on majority rule or any srttleruent that doesnot
involve all the parties. To take a corttrary decision,the
Council will agree, would be bound to have serious
implications and consequencesfor peace, and for the
Chatter of the United Nations. Since the resolutionwx
adopted unanimously,we have no reasonto believethat
any memberof the Councilwill now retract that pOSitiOJ1
of includingall partiesin any discussion
011 transition to
majority rule under the leadershipof the United Kingdon
or with its full participation.
67. With direct referenceto the so-calledinternal settlement which hasjust beensignedat Salisbury,my Government finds it quite unacceptable,for.reasonswhich canbe
said to have, all at once, a moral, polifical, psychological,
legal mnd military basis--depending
op one’s particular
i‘
disposition.
68. My Governmentconsidersthat it is first the responsibility gf the United Kingdom, and not of the minority
rebel rt;gime, to hand over power to the Zimb:~hwe
nationals.The United KingdOrn,
since
1976-and, it would
seemfrom Mr. Smith’saction, until a few weeksago had
assumedfull responsibility for Southern Rhodesiaand
dischargedthat responsibilitywith dignity. My Government
looked forward to a meaningfulconclusionof the United
Kingdom’ssacredduty of preparingthe peoplefor orderly,
immediateand genuinesteps to independence,with the
United Kingdorn asserting its sovereign authority in
Southern Rhodesiaonce and for all, Instead, the rebel
leader is running the show.
My Government suppurts
whole-heartedlythe decisionof ttlc Organisationof Xfticun
Unity wtlich
recogriircs
the forces of tllc P4tric’tiCFront,
the political leadership of Mr. Nkon10 alld
unclt~ I
Mr, htugabe,ast/w figlltirlg force which haslately ha~.l:;~cJ
Mr. SnliI)l’s
arlrly
to sucll
311 uncolllf0l
t;lhlc
ICWI tht
it h:lS
fe*;~!ri~tl.111:11:1\.;
on 73rlhi;l
resultedirl, on ttlr c)rlf tl::lld,

dnd h’h:slllbjL~lic xnd, (Jn ftic ulhr,
3 c~~l;+~trcl!c ~ttenlpl by
the illegal rCginle to seek a scjuhlance of a genuine transfer
of power. In other words, the part played by the Patriotic
Front towards bringing about an end of minority rule in
Southern Rhodesia has been very crucial and cannot be
ignored by the Security CounciI.
69. Thus., while we know for a fact that Reverend
Ndabaningi Sithole and Bishop Muzorewa are Zimbabwean
patriots who once enjoyed the support of large sections
among the masses, we cannot accept any settlement
proposals that do not include the participation of the
Patriotic Front leaders; such a settlement, not having
included the leaders of Zimbabwe’s fighting force, wouid
not be able to stop the war but would only lead to its
escalation, resulting in a situation to which my Government
does not believe any member of the Council or the United
Nations as a whole would want to contribute.
70: +.We see, fhercfore, that, by this move, Smith merely
intends to deflect the bullets of the freedom fighters, which
at present are aim$d at the minority regime.
..
71. In addition td’&lI that, we take serious note of the fact
that the so-called internal settlement in Southern Rhodesia
aims at presenting the international community with a fait
accompli and seeks to restore a cloak of respectability and
legality to the unilateral declaration of independence. A
most disquieting factor, also, is that the so-called internal
settlement is indeed a test case, bearing in mind that, if
Mr. Smith is allowed to get away with this, it could very
well constitute a dangerous precedent for South Africa
against SWAP0 in Namibia.
72. The Council should not allow itself to be used in the
vicious circle of oppression against the people of Zimbabwe, but should legitimately continue to be a partner
with the Zimbabwean people in their attempt to liberate
themselves from the gods’ mantle of repression, self-love
and parricide, of which this so-called settlement is an
additional example.
73. Aspects of this so-called internal settlement are revolting to common SCJIS~,
to the Zimbabwean people-who
crave deliverance from the racist minority rc’gime-and to
humanity as a whole, and the settlement should be firmly
rejected. We believe that the international community
undoubtedly is prepared by now to grapple wit6 the danger
of the cynical realism which acceptance of this settlement
would mean, seeing that it is only peripheral to the real
issue of majority rule and fails to grasp its essence. Yet we
look to the Council to take the lead.
74. If WC yield to the temptation of looking d~sely
at the
settlement, we observe that it allows for the crcafion Of
certain fallacious mythologies. What “maintaining the
defence forces, the public service, the police force and the
prison service free from political interference” sctudly
means is that the structures of the so-called security forces
and the aggressive army, which over the years has carried
out aLercssion in nrighbouring territories and inflicted
enormous suffering on the poor, innocent, harmless populatit. n, including wo~ncm
and children, would bc preserved in
their status q~ro, in spite of the number of black faces in

,

‘J11eCo~~nr*il will ,ec;lll thnt iht ~Ju?>tirrn of’ the
R..hclJc\ian armed forces was the pnint of dep.lrture witi
the rebel rLzgime in the .4nglo-American proposals. This is
therefore significant, because Mr. Srnith can IIOW at last
have it his own way-or so he thinks. The judiciary and the
civil service, 99 per cent of whose top echelon is white, are
also to remain intact. To add to all this, 28 per cent of the
parliamentary seats are reserved for the 3 per cent making
up the white population, and 14 per cent of those seats wiu
be elected by an all-white electorate. So that in a SO-Called
general election the people will have no way of changing
the situation even if they desire to do SO. What is the
relevance of retaining 28 per cent of the seats as non.
multiracial seats? That is Mr. Smith’s interpretation of
majority rule! My Government cannot endorse that specid
protection ,of the rights of a minority which has continu.
ously violated the rights of the majority for decades.
Parli:lnrnl.

7.5. My Government and the international comm;nity
have enough evidence on which to reject even what may
seem like a genuine proposal by the Smith rCgime towards
majority rule; it must be rejected on the grounds of his
record of recalcitrance and insincerity. The Security Council’s experience of Mr, Smith’s utter disregard of its own
decisions is very wide.
76. For more than a decade now, Mr. Smith and his racist
r+ime have continued their acts of open rebellion and hi&
treason against the British Crown, and have nurtured such
acts in recent years with several betrayals of Britain’s trust.
You yourself, Mr. President, fell victim to such insincerity
when, as Chairman of the Geneva conference, you had
enough faith in Mr, Smith to put forward fresh proposals
for the transfer of power and your Government’s participation in an interim government, following the collapse of the
Geneva conference. Members of the Council will recall that
these new proposals were rejected outright, with Mr. Smith
saying that he would seek an internal settlement with the
Africans in Rhodesia. That was, of course, long after the
first attempt at internal settlement, when, thank God,
Mr, Nkomo was able to see right through the rebel rCgime’s
manoeuvres to stay in power indefinitely and at all costs.
Do we want to repeat these experiences?
77. Today the plot thickens, and Mr. Smith’s latest move
to confirm to the world that majority rule and indcpcp
dence in Zimbabwe are completely subject to his whims
and caprices has been to give the boot to the joint
Anglo-Amerjcan
proposals and to go about his oun
business. The Anglo-American proposals were accepted by
my Government-despite
their faults-as a basis for negotiations towards majority rule andindependence,
78. How can one take this move seriously, especially when
one knows that Mr. Smith’s whole political life has been
based on a stubborn policy of white supremacy-to the
point where he has often said that majority rule wouid no1
come to Rhodesia in his lifetime? It is against this
backdrop that the Smith-Muzorewa-Sithole-Chirau
agree’
merit should be viewed in order to see that it has no
meaning for the struggling masses and for the freedom
fighters of Zimbabwe and inust on no account be recW
nizrd by the Council.

.

86. Secondly, we consider it essential that maximum
efforts should be exerted to create a propr framework
within which all parties concertred can fully participate in
bringing to an end the illegal rdgimc and thus expr:di ting the
accession of Zimbabwe to independence.

put, hating done that, we cannot but ask OUCXhW
the
“Where
do
we
go
from
here?
“
It
is
important
that
,,cW
Council should note from most of the contributions so
made b fie debate that there is a state of war in
A certain Geoffrey TayIor’s account of the
&eSia*
Mttjon, as reported i,n The Guardiun of London on 24
bflary of this year, states that parts of Rhodesia are
sdy infiltrated by the forces of the Patriotic Front to
* point where travel is severely restricted. Further, in that
COunt it is stated that the African population in Rhodesia
,,+tical
about the settlement, which does not iflclude
,.,ir “external leaders”, whose inclusion they consider to
: ,.sn&ia]. The account also says that youths
have shown
rcir scepticism by joining the Patriotic Front forces in
rc;r thousands. Thus the armed struggle has been
:ceiented.

87. Lastly, being fully conscious that the task ahead
requires leadership, tact and exceptional diplomatic sk.ilI~,
we wonder whether the Secretary-General, who in the past
has been most generous with his time and energy in the
cause of the liberation struggle in Africa, might now be
called upon once again to make available his good offices in
helping to move things forward from where we left off
before Smith’s latest gimmick. .
88. I thank all the members of the Council profoundly for
granting my request to be allowed to participate in the
debate on a matter of utmost importance to my Covernrnent.
I

0. The rebel leader, on the other hand, while talking of
wjority rule, is strengthening his military machinery to
uppress guerrilla activities with the recruitment of civilians
nto the rebel army. That army continues to cross into
Eighbouring territories in so-called “hot pursuit”, the
i&e’s
euphemism for aggression against neighbouring
jlatcs, thereby inflicting immense damage on defenceless
rsllsges on the pretext that they harbour guerrillas.

89. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
90. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you upon your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. It is pleasing to see
you, a representative of a country with which Botswana
enjoys very cordial relations, presiding over this very crucial
debate. We are confident that your undoubted diplomatic
skill and experience will ensure the successful conclusion of
this debate, In a real sense, you have special responsibility
as representative of the colonial Power in Southern
Rhodesia, special responsibility so to pilot the debate that
the outcome will be applauded by Africa, by the internationa1 community
and, above all, by the people of
Zimbabwe.

8 1. In spite of the so-called settlement, laws similar to the
emthrid system, like the identity-pass legislation adopted
By Parliament in late 1972, still remain in effect.
al, The situation thus remains one that threatens internatinal peace and security, notwithstanding the latest agreejncats and settlements, just as it was more than 10
!@an ago. We therefore call upon the Security Council to
bke action to contain the situation by further effectively
-fa’!hting the illegal regime from the international corn.
ty through the application of all the provisions under
ter VII of the Charter.
r part, Sierra Leone will, in conformity with the
of the Organization of African Unity, COntirlUe
the armed struggle of the people of Zimbabwe
forces of the Patriotic Front as an effective way
n% Mr. Smith to abandon his racist policies for
uine negotiations aimed at the transfer of power to the
z4Rbabwe nationalists. We call upon all freedom-loving
“!‘S 10 do the same.
t
id that, my delegation feels obliged therefore
beyond the present debate. Of course, alot
i depend on the decisions of the Council and
ade in the past few days, those still being
those which may be made in the future. While
ot pretend to have any spw~ific
in our commitment to the promotion of
ttlement, suggest some ideas that

91. This debate is being held in the face of a rapidly
deteriorating situation in our region. I am not referring to
the atrocities perpetrated against the people of Zimbabwe
day in and day out, for with those we’Bre all familiar; nor
am I referring to the already well-knowri’attacks
against the
independent African States of the region. Rather, I am
concerned with the latest acts of brutal aggression perpe trated by the illegal minority r6gime on the eve of the
convening of the Security Council and again while the
Council was in session.
92. tin 27 February, the rebel regime’s forces ambushed
and killed 15 young Botswana soldiers while they were
doing normal patrol duty along our border with the rebel
colony. Eight others were critically wounded, and three
vehicles in which they travelled were totally wrecked. Two
civilians in a neighbouring village were killed also, bringing
the total of those killed to 17.
93. Once again, like all previous attacks, this one was
perpetrated well inside the country being attacked and
without the slightest provocation-a
clear violation of our
territorial integrity and sovereignty, The relevant details of
this attack were circulated in document S/12580 of
1 March 1978.

Piists Wefirmly believe that concrete incentives should
und as a demonstration to those who have co-operated
‘e illegalr@-ne in a so-called internal settlement that
w* ‘*e Yet possibilities for them to play more productive
conshCtive roles in a future independent Zimbabwe.
9

94.

l’lttw, as tilt? (*oylii]
:k:tr nlcrlin:, t11c~:,bclc1.11
ichrd
a b,lrb.~rclusi~J~pruv~\l\cd
dtt:,c’k against our rJcighb<Jur
the
SislCrRepublic of ?-arnhia.here sgainthe rebelsStruck
well
inside Zxnhian territory. Preliminary reports reachingus
indicate lossesof life and property. As always, Botswana
will sfand shoulder to shoulderwith her sisterStates who
suffer acts cif agpxsion at the handsof the rebelrdgime,In
this particular instance, Botswana wishesunequivocally to
condemn the dastardly acts of aggressionperpetrated
against the Republic of Zambia. The international comrnunity must rally hehind ZaJnhia in its hour of greatest
need. We congratulate the armed forces of ZaJnbiafor
repulsingthe recklessinvaders.

95. Those attacks have IreJncJldoussignificanceand bear
seriousimplications for our region. Timed to come when
they did, they are in fact a challenge to the Security
Council and to the international comnlunity. True to
fashion, Smith has demonstrated once again that he can
ignore the overwhelming wish& of the international cominunity with impunity and arrogance. It is important for
the Council to note that this evil man who ismasquerading
now as a harbi<jer of peaceis in fact what he has always
been, a man of,. war, an architect of destruction. The
international community must take hiJn seriouslyfor what
he is and act resolutely to stay his blood-stainedhand of
destruction. Thus, in this current debate,the Councilmust
aspire to take a unanimous decision which will give no
comfort to the rebels at Salisbury. It should vehemently
condemn those latest acts of aggressionagainstneighbouring African States.
96. Those attacks should also serve asa warning to those
who seeka lasting solution to the J?hodesian
problem. It
should be ahundantly clear that, so long asSmith stays in
power and possesses
physical force, that is, the rebel army,
not only will he continue to oppress the people of
Zimbabwe, hut he will also continue his acts of agression
againstthe neighbouring African States, with grave implicationsfor international peaceand security.
97. We appealonce againto the United Kingdomto move
wjih speedto decolonize its colony of SouthernRhodesia,
becauseonly a genuirletransfer of power from the minority
to the majority and the dismantling of the Smith army of
repressioncan end thoseactsof aggression
and the suffering
of the peopleof Zimbabwe.
98. I have dwelt for soJne time on the litest acts of
aggression
in the context of this debatebecauseessentially
these issuesare intertwined, linked as they are bY the
continued cxistcnce of the belligcrcnt illegal rdgime at
Salisbury.
99. If those attacks are aimed at forcing Botswanato
abandonits sacred duty to support the lcgitirnnte struggle
of ihe peopleof Zimbabwe,then Smith is deludinghimself.
Bol:<w;~n~
will continue, along with other African Stales
and :I11fh0.s~who cherish p?aLe;Jndjusiice, lo r;Jli). behind
the ~~oplc(lf Zimbabwe:md thciJ liberation 1110vc111c111,
the
I’;rtric>tic I~orlt.
ill their llour uf g~r;ltesl need.

10

tdsf~ily Of the I t%%ct in Zinlhdb.de.3evu1I;:‘:~‘ss,I think
certain aspectsof that tra& histow need 10 be hornc in
mind aswe seeksolutionsto the problem.Weare not about
to claim that knowledge of historical facts necessarily
makes men decide wisely at a~ times, But certainly a
judicious interpretation of histotical facts ought to illumi.
nate our path to the future andought to enableusto avojd
mistakesof the past, for those who ignore the lessonsof
history do SOaf their own peril.
101. MY colleague,the Ambassadorof the United Repub.
tic of Tanzania,in openingthis debate[2061sr nzeeting],
pointed to the tragedy of errorscommitted by the United
Kingdomasthe colonialPowerin Southern Rhodesia,and
cited as a casein point a StateIneJlt
made in 1965 by the
then Primehlinister, to the effect that Britain would not
use force to quell the rebellion even if Smith declared
independenceunilaterally. As we know, Smith went ahead
andnothing wasdoneto him.
102. In fact, thosetragicerrorsarethe most persistentand
dominant theme of British colonial history in southern
Africa. The record of British administration in southern
Africa, in the white settler coloniesto be precise,is full of
such errors whoseultimate result was the emergenceand
entrenchmentof white minority rCgimesin the area, with
all the attendantminority privileges.
103. In South Africa, Britain abandonedthe black majority to the merciesof the Beersby signingthe South Africa
Act in 1910, which transferredpower from the British
Government to the white minority, and expressedthe
misplacedhopethat, in the fullnessof time, that minority
would voluntarily sharepower wjth the black majority. We
all know the tragedythat decisionbrought upon the people
of South Africa. The problem of aparfhcid is a direct
outcomeof that tragicerror.
104. Taking the exampleof the South i\frjcan minority,
the Rhodesianwhite minority alsodemandedandgot from
Britain, in 1973, a constifution which gaveif all power in
the colony, againat the expenseof the black majority. AU
that was left of British influence were certain residual
powers which, throughout the long tragic history of
Southern Rhodesia,it never effectively usedto curb the
excesses
of t.bewhite minority.
105. Thus,since1923,the persistentthemein the 1liSfoV
of Southern Rhodesiahas been the recessionof British
influence there and the rise of a seriesof attempts on the
pad of the settlersto severthe umbilical cord with Britain
and rule Rhodesiain perpetuity, thus ensuring
a raCialI)
basedsocietyof unequalswith the whites colltrn~~il%
all h
commandingheightsof power.
106. The methodof achievingthis hasvaried from time lo
time in responseto various pressures,both internal and
external, but the main objective Of the ninoritY lo
doJIGnate all the institutions of power in Southern
Rhodesiahasremainedvirtually unchanged.NotlJingwhich
has happenedso far 1xt.schangedthis fact. We cite tlJcsc
l~storical facts not tb upen UP the wounds best left ‘O
tinle’s healinghand, hut becausethey have
relevaJJce
fur
this discussion,

,

._
1107. NOW,Ian Smith has not deviated from that. At least
:, this case,Ian Smith hasbeen most consistentand OIIIY
,?l:yBcwho ignore the realities and true intentions of
g,,lrthern Rhodesian white politics can be deceived by
$nilh’s

[T13fllXuVres-

114. In generaloutline, then, the proposatsrr<ocnile the
fact that conditions of peacesho&l be created-in order
that ZimbabweIII~Y movesmoothlytowardsmajority rule.
Furthermore, after years of neglect, the United Kingdom
hasnow pledgedto resumeits proper role as the colonial
Power with the sacredduty of decoloniringthe Territory.
Botswanastill holdsthe view that, to date, thoseproposals
presentthe basisfor further negotiationstowardsa settlemcnt. Botswana’s
supportstill stands.

log Those who deal with this slippery character‘arewell
r;l.iisedto be aware of his treacherousmanoeuvres.At one
I;~,;~, he tried, in vain, to use the traditional chiefs to
tliwnrt the legitimate aspirations of the people of
linlb;lbwe; now he has resorted to yet another trick-that
115. The so-calledsettlementrecently agreed upon beof usingthe so-calledinternal group againstthe so-called
tween rebel Smith and certain internal eleracnts in
txtcrnal group. TO this end, he is marshallinghis propa-. Zimbabwe conveniently,
as we can see, excludes
the
v& machinery to paint what he calls the external group
Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe.There are great dangersin
8%bloudthirsty messengers
of doom and the internal group
such an arrangement,dangerswhichare suchas to ensure
hb ~~sonablemen who love peace and harmony. Unforthat the peopleof Zimbabwewill be unlikely to enjoy the
lurl:ltcly, certain sections of the international press and peaceand tranquillity they so muchdeserveafter sotinny
mu3 mediaare falling for this bait and arejoining in the
yearsof whije minority dominationand brutal oppression.
propaganda
chorusemanatingfrom Salisbury.This can only
k damagingto the causeof the Zimbabwepeople.
116. Can the Patriotic Front be expected to accept that
fait
accompli in which it played no part? After all, those
l(JfJ, Smith is trying to drive an irreversiblewedgebetween
are the people who have fought far over 10 years now
~,JIcpeople of Zimbabwe. The administering Power, the
againstthe rebelsat Salisbury.They are the peoplewhose
h(ernationalcommunity and the peopleof Zimbabwemust
struggle
finally forced Smith to go to Genevato attempt to
~tist thosedangerousmanoeuvres,which can only lead to
negotiatewith the other partiesinvolved-for what that was
rtrifc andthe prolongation of suffering.
worth. It is they, as it were, who havepushedhim into a
tight corner out of which he is now trying to uriggle. It is
110, The Security Council, and in particular the United
they who have demoralizedthe racistrebelsat Srllisbuly, as
R~durn, the administeringPower, should not be tempted
evidencedby the large exodusof white racists from the
10repeat the tragic errors of 1910 in South Africa and
country.
1923in Southern Rhodesia,The United Kingdom has the
gppartunity now to reversethe unfortunate chain of events
117. It is likely that the Patriotic Front will continue the
El in motion by the tragic decisionof 1923. The United
war-and they havejust told usso--solong asthey are not
)Ein@lonl
shouldnot entertain any settlementwhich aimsat
party to any settlement. Under the circumstances,
Qittrrnchingthe white minority.
Zimbabweis likely to be plungedinto civil strife, a strife
ill+ 1 turn now to the question of finding an acceptable which one shrewdobserveraptly referredto as“black-onblack civil war” a strife whoseconsequences
can only be
@dQtiated settlement to the problem of Southern
ghastly. In that event, the suffering of the people of
bode&. Botswanawill always be guided by two broad
@“ciPles, namely, the principle of the unquestionable Zimbabwewould be prolongedand our region asa who!e
would be plungedinto a tragic era of yc! morebloodshed.
?Wtability of any solution chosen by the people of
QirlbabweBS a whole and the principle of democratic
“@ritY rule on the basisof one-man one-votein free and
118. We urge Her Majesty’s Government-the only one
bir elections We would find unacceitable any settlement
which can end the illegal situation in Rliodrsia-and its
allies in this exerciseto redoubletheir elforts to find a
‘af’ichdid no; meet those two broad principles.
durablesolution to the problemof Zimbabwe.To that end,,
the British Government should enter into immediate
‘I!* Indeed, we believe very strongly that in this whole
negotiationswith those concerned,for Smith cannot be
J”ihabwean prohlcrn the. final arbiter is the people of
7rtnhabweitself Botswanawill go by the freely expressed expected to end the state of illegality becausehe ishimself
illegal, Only the British can do that, with the concurrence
V’JUubtedcollective’ will of the people of Zimbabweasi
of the United Nations.
‘holct when it is expressedin an atmospherefree from
‘timidation of any sort and inspiring confidence in a
@QPlc so 10ng oppressedby a rigime with no respect
119, Until a lasting solution is found, the internJtionai
community mustrally behindthe peopleof Zimbabweand
‘liJtsoeverfor human life and dignity. That is what, under
a7ldar .*
their liberation movement,the Patriotic Front. The sanc‘Jrcumstanceswe would wish for ourselves,and we
tions against the rebel colony must be intensified and
“’ thc Peopleof Zihbabwe no less.
scrupulouslyobserved.
r1% Botswana, along with the other front-line States,
)c”Pted the Anglo-American proposds,
despite certain
120. Botswanain its humble way and for its part will
%liv2 aspectsin them as a reasonablebasisfor further
continue, to the best of its ability, to rally behind the
k”tiatiOns between tie administering Power and the
people of Zimbabwe in their strugglefor frec&nl and
Botswana supported those propos:lls justice.
8 judiciously handled and refined further, they
of the two principlesthat I
121. The PRESIDENT: The next sp:“kcr
is bfr.
Kubzrt
Mugabe,to whom the Councilexirnd4 311in+it.~li~.~n
a[ it<
,.

.

II

e

lQJ~~r]&sn settlctrs, under the leallership of Ian Dougla
Smith, seized power in 1965 and declalcd thcmselve
unilaterally independent of the United Kingdom. Sbc,
then, the efforts of the United Kingdom in connexjon \vit]
the United Nations attempts to end minority rule in o,,
country have taken the form of seeking to return th,
Rhodesian rCgime to legality-an aim that is not the samea
the liberation movement’s objective of liberating
t(
country from minority rule.

122. Mr. MlIGABE: Mr, President, on behalf of the
StJugghJg people of Zimhahwe and the Patriotic Front, the
spearhead of our people’s revolution, we wjsh to express
Our appreciation to YOU and the other members of the
sC2W'ity
Council for permitting us to address you on thjs
occasion in the history of our country.

126. We wish to stress the fact that the liberatio(
movement of Zimbabwe has never questioned the Unite,
Kingdom’s constitutional authority over the colony
O:
Southern Rhodesia. However, it is also true that the Britirl
objective of returning the re’gime to legality--particularly
when the administering Power begins to act as if it wantec
to bring this about through the efforts of the liberatior
movement-has flown in the face of the main objective Q
the liberation movement: total liberation from minorit)
rule.

123. Today we appear before this august body to discuss
the deteriorating situation in our country. The coincidence
of your presidency over this august body and your
country’s colonial responsibilities over our country makes
this series of meetings of the ,Sccurity Council a special one,
particularly considering the fact that you have had the
opportunity
to direct efforts to find a negotiated settlement to the problem of our country. We hope that your
own experience with the Snlith rCgime and its agents will
help the Council to find means of averting the catastrophe
thal hangs omin&sly over the heads of our people.

127. It is against this background that today the Patriotic
Front’s interpretation of the results of the so-called internal
settlement differs fundamentally from that of the British
Government, which seems more interested in returnin!
Smith to legality than in removing him. Hence, in 1966, the
United Kingdom and the illegal regime held what are
known as the Tiger talks near Gibraltar. The British had
two objectives in those talks, namely, to get Smith to
promise not to declare Rhodesia a republic, and to ask
Smith not to impede progress towards majority rule. Tht
following year, in 1967, the United Kingdom and the
tigime again met in what are called the Fmlcss talks. 1~
both those encounters with the rt!ginJe, the British Govern
ment was more interested in returning the rCgime to some
form of legality. Therein lies the difference in principle
between us and those who have been telling the world that
the results of the so-called internal settlement
represent “a
step in the right direction”.

124. Despite the”.violence, terror and brutality that we
daily experience from the terroristic despotism that is
“Rhodesia”, we appear before the Council in a constructive
spirit and frame of mind. Yes, wanton mass killings of our
people and of the people of the neighbouring peace-loving
countries of Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique by the
racist Rhodesian rPgime have reached genocidal proportions. Yes, JJJe11 and worJJcn, the young and the aged, in fact
whole families within the country are daily being uprooted
from their homes and taken to concentration camps, which
have neither sufficient food nor sanitation facilities. That
barbarous treatment of our people by the racist white
minority r@giJne threatens to destroy completely any
ch;rr~cc for racial 1JarmonY in our country. Despite the racist
rrcklcssw2ss
of the Smith I-L:ginle
against our poor people,
wr c~tntinuc to maintain the progressive position that in
%irnhahwe we are not figIJting white people but a racist
system whose continued cxistcnce poses a serious threat to
Ihe security of Africa as a \vhole. On our part, as leaders of
the Patriotic Front of Zinthsbwe, we hove been involved in
thjs tough struggle against the evil that is “Rhodesia” for
too. long now to respond enlotionnlly to Rhodesian acts of
barbarism. After so many ycxs of hard struggle, we have
come to appreciate the fact that any struggle whose
prjltciples are based on cll~otional responsesFto the evils
that it seeks to correct cannot succeed. Hence our position
that armed struggle is the only effeclive nJcans of bringing
about meanjngful changes is a well-considered position.
This is a position that we hold firmly and consistently.

128. As all the members of the Council know, even those
British half-measures to deal with the problem and other
subsequent
attempts to transfer power to the majority Of
he
people
of
Zimbabwe
have failed because the Smith
rigime would not contemplate any arrangement that sou&t
to alter its institutions of power. All these pointless
attempts
foundered on the same rock: the fOXY and racist
Smith.
129. Although the Patriotic Front and the British Govern*
Jmy
djsagree
on exactly
why the Geneva ConfereIJcc
failed, there is no blinking the fact that in Geneva
Smith’s
contempt
for Africans was unmistakably clear. After the
Geneva fiasco, the British and the .4mericans put together
what some people call the Anglo-American Plan fol
Zimbabwe. While the Patriotic Front agreed to consider dJl
proposals as a basis for negotiations, the Smith rigiJJJc
rejected those proposals outright and opted for negotiation!
with African elements opposed to the liberation moveJJ~cn(
We give [his brief resumi of Smith’s prevarications ant!
dcccitfd tactics not because we wint LO express anj
preference
for
the
Anglo-American
plan over the so-called
internal sett]eJ]mlt,
but to underline the fact that the Smid’
regime has never conceded the possibility of handing eve’
poster
to the Zimbabwean m;ljorilY.
JJjent

125. Since we first brotlght the colonial problem of
Zimbabwe to the attention of the United Nations two
decades ago, this proklcrn has continued to exercise the
Ininds of the international community. At tlJe beginning of
our intcrnnljL)nal c:jmp:ligrJ, p;irticularly before 1965, our
cif0rts lo make the i~~~crn:~li0~l:llcommunity
appreciate
the
gravity of 111~prc,]llcln p(,scd IJv minority rule in Zimbabwe
IVCIT s;thot;lg,ad by the Hritish, \\ho then argued that
SoullJcrn Rhodesia was :1 self-governing colony whose
dccohnizat;cw
fell outsic~c the normal United Nations
trtlslccship fi;lnJc of refcrcrKL>. En~ouragrd by this attitude,
12

Eighthly, with reference to white representation in
ParlianJent, in order to retain the confidence of the v,hi tes
in regard to the entrsnchtid safeguardsin the Constitution,
one third of the seatsin Parliamentwoidd be reserved for
direct election by white voters.

l;il, Understarldably, the fraud that the Smith r&me has
*;cn ablc to pefpetrate with the active assistance of African
&+
and trators has received a great deal of attention in
@,tJin world circles. This support for the so-called internal
g,,!E,ncnt from Western reactionary elements does not
f+Jft"& w~ because those are the same forces that have
t;Frt the Smith Ggime afloat, in flagrant violation of United
k~tioru unctions against that re’gime. At no stage in the
birlL,rYof our struggle have those forces given us encourage#iLIlt,let alone support.

132. in short, the eight-point agreementspeaksfor itself
with respect to how Smith and his puppets have sought to
entrench white privilege in our country. If WEconsider the
fact that the presentwar in Zimbabwe is the culmination of
a crisis built upon institutionalized racial separation, then
we can see that the creation of an apuwrtheid franchise
cannot solve the prob‘lemsof our country. It is’for that
reason that the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe has maintained the position that it is fighting for a non-racial
society, because we believe that any solution base{ on
racial lines is no solution.

1.31, What is the nature of the “settlement” conspiracy of
he Slllith rigime’? As can 6e expected from professional
rrM9, the “settlement” conspirators have predicated any
k’ttlcnvnt of the country’s problems upon
the principle
that blacks and whites in Zimbabwe shall remain separate
~V,~~\n~\~nities.
Hence the whole scheme seeks to devolve
r;lucr upon the Zimbabwean community through racial
&~nnels. This can be seen from the text of the eight-point
~~~ctwrnntsigned by Ian Smith and the three black puppets,
ricrrrly:

d

1lrst, on the subject of a bill of rights, there must be a
j~ticiable declaration of rights to protect the rights and
frt&rn of the individual. This mustprovide, in particular,
$wlection from deprivation of property unlessadequate
&!:lnpcnsation
is promptly paid. This, in truth, asit appears,
ii,s hill not of rights but of race.
badly,
as’regardsthe judicature, to make the bill of
fightseffective there must be an independentjudiciary free
hll political influence. To ensure a competent bench
ihr:r mustbe high qualifications for the appointment of
&J!lgcs,

‘lllird[Y, in connexion with a public servicesboard, to
mintain the confidence of the public service and also to
@*ilnt&ithe confidence of the people in the professional
@uttalitYof the public service,the public servicesboard or
“‘+;‘alissionmust be establishedas an independent body
atirk&Compositionand functions shouldbe entrenched.
F”:lrtlllY, as to the retention of the administration, ir:
r’3zr to Provide a smooth transition and to ensure the
“‘n’irlutd efficient administration of the country, the civil
?‘irc~ the police the defence forces and prison service
khl!J]d
&
retained in a high state of efficiency and free
fr :
“I Whal itlterfere~ice.
‘ifthlY~ Pensionsrepresenta most important aspectfor
” tctcrrtion of white confidence Pensionspayable from
” cQnsolidated
revenue fund must be guaranteedand be
J’rc’y rencttable outside the country. With regard to
,.hSl~
Pensionfunds, the rights of employeesand other
Xieonswho a
re membersof private pensionfunds must be
t’klnteed.
SifQ

yb in so far as citizenship is concerned, in order to
“‘ourage whites to remain provision for dual citizenship
!‘I bcretgneda
‘i ‘~%‘lltb, the af orementionedconstitutional provisions
‘“It be entrenched a majority of two-thirds-plus-oneof
’ ’ mc”‘bershipof & Parliamentbeing required for their
X’k%e,,

133. We believe that thosewho have found South Africa’s
apprfheid
policies morally indefensible and intellectually
grotesque cannot characteriseSmith’s creation of a constitutional homeland as “a step in the right direction”,
because there is no qualitative difference between South
Africa’s constitutional homelandsand Smith’s constitutional homelandsolution to our problem.
134. According to the eight-point agrrenlent signed at
Salisbury, the so-calledinternal settlement doesnot address
itself to the transfer of power to the majority with respect
to the institutions of power that are the linchpin of the
racist colonial system of the Rhodesianminority re’gime.
For a Fascist and colonialist re’gjme,those strategic institutions of power, namely, the civil service,the judiciary and
the security fo&es, are central to the effectivenessof the
tigime. In the so-called“internal” scttlemeot, thoseinstitutions will remain asthey stand at present. If one acceptsthe
centrality of those institutions for any government to
function effectively and if one considersthe fact that 100
per cent-of the Rhodesianjudiciary is white, 99.9 per cent
of its civil serviceis white, and the whoIe leadershipof the
security forces is completely white, thcr! OIIC understands
the fact that, in terms of real power, this agreementdoes
not settle anything. The agreementdoes nO;t constitute a
settlement becauseit cannot end the war‘,raging in the
country. The situation in Zimbabwe is a war situation. No, D
agreement that does not take into account the realities of
that war situotidn can produce a settlerncnt. The reality is
that only those locked in combat are capableof bringiing
about the desiredsettlement. Similarly, the composition of
the future army of Zimbabwe is a matter for those who are
in control of the fighting. It is only the liberation forces of
the Patriotic Front that can guaranteethe irreversibility of
the achievement of majority rule and independence.To the
massesof Limbabweanswho actively support the armed
struggle and form its rock base,the agrernlent is a betraya
of that struggle. Those massescontinue to pay heavily at
the hands of Smith’s terroristic assassins
who shoot them as
“curfew breakers” or summarily execute‘ them for collnbnrsting witI\ freedom figflters.
135. We know that the Security Council, as the guardian
of interrrativnal peace and security, must nods take a
seriousview of attempts by the Smith rL;gitliCto concuct a
“scttlcn1+:nt” that is boullll to JCLT~ICII L/I:* cr~tfl~~-t.
The

t.

13

Pdlri,3tic
Sl’ttlr

F:~dil
IllCllt

by

I\ll:llly
th2

I’CJ“cts
ill?gd

t;,r

racist

‘.,).C;+ljed

rigirne

and

“jntvrna]”
its

the Smith regimehasr;!tified this so-celled:rg,ecIntnt th
it can be regarded as an agreement,TJte puppet bJar
friends are but instruments;all power remainswith Mr, Ji
DouglasSmith. He remainsPrime Minister. Jt is saidth
the four leaderswill alternate in the presidency of tJ
so-calledCouncil of State, but it was made clear t
Mr. Smith that, althoughit appearsthat the four leadersa
equal,Mr. Smith retainshis title. What Smith hasdoneis,
usethesemen to perpetuatehis criminaJacts against0,
people and to try to hoodwink the international eea
munity.

African

PLJP~C~S.This lllC’YIlS fhat, as far as we are concerned, the
armed struggle wiu continue until ollr people’s demands for
a complete trader
of power arc met, .uld we shall work for
the complete

OVcrtlliwW

OF the

existing

colonial

re’gime

now

joined by a smallclique of black puppets.Jn this regard,the
Council should follow the example of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity which met
recently at Tripoli and repudiated the Salisburyagreement
as a fraud designedto protect guaranteesof privilege for the
white minority.

143. Jt is pleasingto us that the membersof the Count
and the representativesof other States Members of Q
United Nations who have spoken here have made
perfectly clear that they seethe so-calledagreementia a
samelight as we seeit, and therefore we hope that TV,
administeringPower, in this casethe United Kingdom,wi
realize that this fraudulent attempt by Smith to make
secondunilateraldeclarationof independencecanno long
be called by the BrJtish Government a step in the rig,
direction.

136. As we have already noted, the so-calledsettlementis
conceived within the framework of South Africa’s defimtion of African self-determination, as exemplified in the
obscene creation of the homelandsof the Transkei and
Bophuthatswana. In this connexion, members of the
Council should take note of the fact that Mr. Smith and
Mr. Vorster have designed a common strategy aimed at
concocting a similar “settlement” in Zimbabwe and in
Namibia. T-hisis to say that the agreementbetweenSmith
and his b&rck puppets at Salisbury will immediately
encourageSouth Africa to movein the samedirection with
regard to Namibia. Will membersof the Councilpermit the
creation of a belt of puppet rCgimesacrosssouthernAfrica,
whose chief purpose would be to make the world safefor

144. Jf the British Government believed that their prc
were a step in the right direction, then the SJ$!
proposal cannot be a step in the right direction. &I
cannot both be stepsin the right direction. Therefore
shouldlike to emphasizethat we hope that the Britishwi
reahzethat there can be only one step, andthat from nay
on, after what hasbeensaidin the Council,the Britishu~J
make active movesto bring about a settlementthat \viJ]b<
internationally recognized.
pods

apartheid?

137. We earnestly call upon the ,Security Council in the
name of peace and justice to repudiate the so-called
Salisbury agrcemcnt and to reaffirm its condemnationand
isolation of thr illegal r6girneof Rhodesia.In the meantime,
we want to reaffirm our position, namely,that any attempt
to find a negotiated settlement to the problem of our
country by by-passingthe liberation forcesof the Patriotic
Front, which now controls more than two thirds of the
country, will not solve anything. The masses
of Zimbabwe
are solidly behind us; hence, our capability of sustainingthe
war despitethe Salisbury fraud.
138. I thank you, Mr. President,and the other membersof
the Security Council for affording me thJsopportunity to
present our case.
139. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris Mr. Joshua
Nkomo, to whom the Council has likewise extended an
invitation under rule 39 of the provfsiona.Jrules of
procedure. I invite Idm to take a placeat the Counciltable
and to make hisstatement.
140. Mr. NKOMO: The casethat hasbeenlaid before the
&SecurityCouncil by my colleague,Mr. Mugabe,is the case
for the Patriotic Front. What remainsfor meis to underline
what wasmentionedin his statement.
141. Jt is important
to note
that
Mr. Smith, in hisattempt
to thwart the forward movement of the people of
Zimbabwe to genuineindependcn<eand self-dctcrniination,
IMS SOLJ~II~
to ux
the rime
of our pqJe by usingthe three
puppets. Jlcre J s]lould like to underline
our slatementby
recalling the nature of the so-called:rgreernent.
142. Jn this so-c:jJledagreementof Salisbury, tJre Smith
reginie’s Parliament rem3iilStlic authority. Jt is only after
I

145. What we seein this so-calledsettlementis an sttemJ!
by Smith to legalizehis unilateraldeclarationof indepcn
dence. And, after leg&zing it and getting the Sectnit)
Council to lift sanctions,Smith will move fast toa’ar&
Mr. Vorster. What we seein it is that, by retaining thefe.::
important elements of State-that is, the army, H+IL~~
remainspure white and whitecontrolled, the poljce, whir!
remainswhite andwhite-controlled,the civil serviceand~Jx
judiciary-Smith is preparingfor a secondunilateral~CC~SI%
tion of independence.Once he has been given indew
dencelegally, Smith will remainwith that indepcndcnce
fen
four to six months while preparing and working cut I
confederationwith South Africa, and will then conductI
secondstraightforwardcoup.
146. What will the international community do? ‘J%
United Kingdom will say that this is an internal affaird
Zimbabwe, and the world will witnessyet allOther
lnflr
towards consolidatingthe racistsand Fascistsin soutJrfl
Africa m preparationfor their assaulton African States.k
is a known fact that Mr. Smith and his friend, the Fa&
Vorster, are not happy about the independenceof Ihi&
countries,especiallythosesurroundingSouth AfrJca.Jtb’
fact that, jf Smjth is allowedto go on with thJsso-talk’
independence,we s,haJJ
seedangeremanatingfrom southera
Africa after South Africa and Southern Rhodesia,assist?
by the United Kingdom, have set up puppet rigirncJ!
Rhodesiaand Namibia and joined with South Africa ’
order to attack Mozambique,Botswana,AngoJa,andind’
Zambia, and other States not on the Zambezi.This isa
design
that Vorster and Smith are creatingby trying ’
establishpuppet rPgirnesin that part of the WorJd.

14
-.

.
ii’2 sh~ld like to Stress the importance of our having
:
i .?,I to negotiate with the British. AS a matter of fact, it
4i’x: tfls British Governmrnt that came to the Council and
,p,b.,SflCJit to give the Szcretary-General power to appoint
together with the British, would
d u:-p,e.urit3tiVe
Wh~J,
,;.,..::tj~te with the parties concerned in Southern Rhodesia.
irr the Patriotic Front \vcre engaged in those negof’;i:,.zr,s when Ian Smith defied the world community by
j -, i,‘b;off fronl what Was rt,>darded as an attempt to solve a
b+\.1&lrrn that has bedevilled the United Nations and other
ar.,:r]JorganiLation$.

announced his so-cslled agreement, welcomed that so-called
agreement. We hope that the United Kingdom realizes that
the so-called welcon~c agreement is not welcome in African
circles, or indeed in the world community as a whole. Can
we therefore hope that from now on we sh.4 move
together towards solving this prohlem, without wasting any
more time?

883, we therefore call upon the Council not to regard
vt,st 1arl Smith is doing by attacking Mozambique,
p :t~~Vv,rlnrand Z;lmbia just as an attack on those three
.+,::rl(ries. It is a preparation for wider aggression against
f’ (r~xrrden t Africa. Therefore the situation in Southern
$t,\;rh+sia is not just a problem of that colony but a
Er&]\rrn that may bring a conflagration not only in Africa
f-,d in the whole world.

151. The PRESIDENT: Mr. Nkomo, I know, would not
expect me, in my capacity as representative of the United
Kingdom, to agree with everything he said. I can only say
that in that capacity I will study with very great care
everything that has been said in this chamber this afternoon.
I

)$!I2 hty colle:~gue and I are satisfied by what has been
s.:i.l here and we believe that after the Council has taken a
d:il&>n, which we believe will be aimed at condemning the
FW~S at Salisbury-because, as 1have said, those moves are
I !!.~nc;ernot only to Southern Rhodesia but to the entire
(~~I:~lrntinent~-the United Kingdom will take heed of that
:;. I ]~n and move towards what we agreed in Malta. In
“4!:\ WC agreed that we would meet and continue our
:.“~~:uwiws
for the solution of this problem; but, to our
WriGe, the British Foreign Secretary, after Smith had

150. As I have said, these are just my remarks on the
statement issued joirrtly with my friend Comrade Mugahe,
and we thank the Council for having listened to us.

152. I should like to announce to the Council that during
the course of this afternoon’s meeting I received a letter
dated 9 March from the representative of Zambia, which
will be circulated tomorrow morning as document S/12589.
In her letter, the representative of Zambia, upon the
instructions of her Government, requests an urgent meeting
of the Security Council. I would therefore propose to hold
consultations with the Council on this matter tomorrow at
11 am.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

15
