UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

‘..

.

:
. ..A

2629’”

MEETING:

15 NOVEMBER

(

I.

“.

_-

_.

‘,

_

:

(’

1985
I,’ \F....l,. ,(../,.

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2629)

. . . . ..*..............................

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*............
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17618);
(b)

Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17619) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.............................*

1

WPV.2629

NOTE

,.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) arenormally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system ’
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and De&i&s
of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

;
:
..,

.:.,
I
:

.,

. . . .
I

:‘_

: :
; ,2629th’MEETING
‘-. I’ ,
.,
I. .,_.‘._
Held in New York i;n Friday, 15 November’
,.
. 1985, at 3. p.m.
President: Mr. Richard A. Wo&ott

(Australia).

At the ‘tiitation
of the President, Mr. Sinclair (Acting
President of the United Nations Councilfor Namibia) and the
other members of the delegation took a place at the Council
tabIe.

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Dcnniark. Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with a decision taken
at, the 2624th meeting, I invite Mr. Toivo ya Toivo,
Secretary-General of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO), to take a place at the Council
table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/262$)
I
1. Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Toivo ya Toivo took a
PIace at the Coun&I table.

2. The situation in Namibia:
/
Letter
dated
11
November-i985
from
the
Perma(4
nent Representative of India to. the United
Nations addressed to the President df the Security Council (S/17618);
/.

(4

4. ‘The PRES!DENT:
In accordance with decisions taken
at pre@iouS meetings on this item [262&h to 2626th and
2628th meetings], I invite the representatives of Cameroon,
Canada, Cuba; Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, the
Islamic Republic.of Itin, the Libya Arab Jamahiriya, Senegal, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic; Tunisia and
Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

Letter dated 11 November 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to’tlie President bf the Security Council (S/17619)

!Ile meeting was called to order at 5.30 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Engo (Cameroon),
Mr. Lewis (Conada), Mr. Oramas OIiva (Cuba), Mr. Char
(Czechoslovakia). Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic),
Mr. tiutenschkzger (FederaI RepubIic of Germany), Mr.
Gbeho (Ghana), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (rslamic Republic of
Iran), Mr. Azzaroirk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. &n-r&
(Senegao. Mr.. von Schimding (South Africa), Mr. EI-FattaI
(Syrian Arab @pubIic)),’ Mr. Bouziri (Twtisia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zombiir) took the pIaces reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.
._.
‘,
,‘..
‘.
5. The PRESIDENT:
Members of. the Council have
before theni document S/17633; which contains the text ofa
+ira’ft resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India,
Madagascar,‘ Peru and Trinidad and Tobago.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 11 November’ 1985 f&m ke Permanetr~
Representative of Indii to the United Nahns address&
to the President of the !&writy C$uncit (S/17618);,
(b) Letter dated 11 November ,198s from tbe Permaneht
Representative of Mauritius to the ‘Utdted Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17619)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with a decisidh taken
at the 2624th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a place at the Council table.

6. ‘The first speaker is the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. I invite hiti to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Seereekissoon (Mauritius) took R place at the CounciI table.

7. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): At the outset, Sir, I must extend my sincere congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency. I have
no doubt that under your leadership the Council will
achieve considerable success,particularly as compared with
its past record regarding the situation in Namibia. I congratulate you in advance on that success.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with a desion taken
at the 2624th meeting, I invite the Acting President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation of that Council to take a place at
the Council table.
.’

1
.‘I

1

8. I must also extend my sincere condolences :to the
Government and people of Colombia on the natural di&ter which has caused them so much suffering. I hope that
God will grant the survivors great patience and that the
international community will be able to help them and
alleviate their suffering.
9. There is a verse from the Holy Koran which is veti
suitable in the context of today’s debate. It reads:
“And soon will the unjust assailants know what &issitudes their affairs will take.“’
10. The decade of the 196Os,which began with theadoption by the General Assembly of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries atid Peoples [resdution 1.514 (xv], culminated in the acliievement
of independence by colonial Territories and by Territdries
under the trusteeship bf Othei States. Since then, 57 countries have become independent, the majoiity Gf them ;1 the
African continent. Although Namibia was o& 6f the’&
of those Territories tb be ,disc&ed in & United-Natioiis
in connection with the granting of indipendentie and’an
end to colonialism, unfortunately, for many reasons, the
people of Namibia have been prevented from gaining such
a victory.
11. Since 1966, and particularly with the formation of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, the international
consciousness optimistically
decided that an important
step towards freeing the people of Namibia from the heavy
yoke of imperialism had been taken, a step that would be
followed by easier, faster steps towards fulfilling a longheld international aspiration. The anxious oppressed all
over the world, who had been observing the situation in
Namibia for years, hoped that the ice had finally been
broken and that the journey towards the freedom of Namibia had at last started.
12. From then on, all anxious eyes were’ turned ‘1&j’
hope towards the United NatiotiS,-Coui&l
for Namibia.
Unfortunately, however, 19 years have passed since then,
and they are still anxiously waiting, but to no avail. To
their disappointment, the Security Council, the very Council whose name has created false hopes and so many false
expectations, has proved to be the malady, rather than the
remedy.
13. In the Council there are some who have remained
tod politely and too politically silent in the face of the
Namibian problem. We are absolutely convinced that such
courteous delicacy is so important to certain members only
because it pays off. When circumstances require, the same
courteous, polite gentlemen behave as savagely and bru:
tally as those in Sduth Africa.
14. To be brief, Iwish to &k all mdmbers of the Council
a few simple questions. Why is it that imperialism ‘i’s
treated like a property that can be inherited or passed from
one generation or country to another? Is it not the &s-e
that imperialism arid col&ialism and all their, Eaitetri and
Western, old and modern, manifestations must really die?

On what grounds is the South African clique still holding
thi: people of- Namibia in its sanguinary claws?
15., &e not those that claim that “the achievement of
peaceful independence for Namibia is of greater importance to the people of this country than it is to any organ
of the United Nations” and that hurl blatant invective
against States Members of the United’ Nations which
emphatically demand the independence of Namibia the
puppets and the servants of imperialism?
16. Why is it that, it spite of the will of the whole world,
the socalled interim government collaborates with the
plunderers? Why does it support the destroyeis of all the
national liberation Fovements? Why does it work hand in
harih with the aparrfieia.r&i~e
of Pretoria? Did not the
Council itseif declare that the establishment of the interim
government wa’s null and void? How, then, can we welcome the South’ African dilatory manoeuvres reflected in
document S/1!627?
*
17.. ‘-The’ ‘interim government is, as a matter of fact,
anothei device for prolonging colonial domination over
Namibia. @ is the multi-party system, which aims at the
assimilatiqn, and ,d+uction
of SWAP0 in a group of
surrogate parties that,,,the enemy, has invented for that
p&pose.:, ~~
18. Two days ago [262&h &ering], the representative of
the Pretoria rigime once again in this chamber linked the
independence of Namibia to the question of the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. Why is the independence of Namibia alway obstructed by a linkage
policy-by, let us say, a linkage excuse? It is most unfortunate that the supporters of that rbgime still defend such
excuses.
19. The statement issued by the United States Department of State on 19 April 1985 contains the following piece
of evidence:
.
“Wi note that the South African announcement from
Cape Town yesterday affirms South Africa’s intention to
pursue the current negotiating effort aimed at achieving
independence for Namibia under the United Nations
settlement plan. It is the United States position that these
negotiations involving Namibian independence and
Cuban troop withdrawal from Angola offer the best
prospect for a settlement leading to the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978):’ [See S/17119, annex.]
Again we :see traces of the well-known linkage policy.
20. Why is it that implementation of ihe Declaration on.
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples must be- de!ayed and delayed in spite of all the
support for, that Declaration and the subsequent relevant
resol$ions? _. .Y
I, ,.
21. Why .A it that after a lapse of 100 years since the
co!o.Gialization of Namibia, 40 years since the foundation
of the ,United Nations, 25 years since the adoption of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries, and Peoples and 19 years since the General

i

Assembly terminated the mandate ,of. South Africa over
Namibia we still must use step-by-step tactics? Is it not a
fact that some Members are too paGent and have good
reasons for being patient? Is it still’not time for comprehensive mandatory sanctions, as desired by the’whole international community? Should we wait so long as to allow
selective sanctions to be gradually replaced by consideration of comprehensive sanctions and then wait just as long
for the word “consideration’* to be deleted and -for ,the
actual execution of those sanctions to become possible?
.,.
’
22. I wish to request comprehensive’ mandato$sanc-:
tions instead of selective sanctions. The fadf is that selective
sanctions would entail many more-years of suffering for
the people of Namibia until the ‘#adual strengthening of
the Security Council decisions satisfies the requirements of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

the Government and people of Colombia our great sorrow
at this tragedy. To the families and relatives of those who
perished we send our sincere condolences.
29. The Council is once again seized of a matter the
importance of which is clear to us all. Settlement of this
question is important for’ the. interests of the people of
Namibia who; because’ of the’intransigence of the racist
tigime :i;lt Pretoria, are unable to- express their right to
seifdetermination.and
ito ‘develbp as a free people. It is
afso very ‘important to’ the. smooth”development
of the
States of the ,southern African region-the constant victims.of unprovoked acts of aggression by the South African regime -and, indeed, important to the international
community at large.
30. Can the Council, which was’charged by the whole
community of nations with maintaining international
peace and security, continue to stand irresolute while the
inhuman and abhorrent system of uparrheid still persists?
Can it remain unmoved when a trust which was reposed in
good faith, but obviously in error, to a Member of the
United Nations in respect of Namibia has been betrayed
and when the trustee, despite its sacred obligations, holds
fast to what is not its own and keeps in servitude the
peoples entrusted to it.

23. There are hundreds of questions and many more
quotations that could be brought before the Council, but I
shall omit them simply for the sake of brevity.
24. My Government proposes that the committee called
for in paragraph 12 of draft resolution S/17633 should
take charge of also preparing a report on the actual impact
and consequences of selective sanctions on the South African economic situation. Such a report may convince us
that selective sanctions fall short of inducing the racist
rulers of the Pretoria regime to comply with the will of the
international community.

31. What is at stake, therefore, is also the good name and
the credibility of the United Nations and of the Security
Council which are so crucial to the effective functioning of :
these bodies.

25. To appreciate why certain “respected” members of
the Council are bound to condone all crimes of the Pretoria regime against its own people as well as those against
the people of Namibia, the following quotation from The
New York Times of 3 August 1985 will suffice:

32. This is indeed a very serious question. The submission by South Africa to the Council in a letter dated 12
November 1985 [S/Z762n and the most recent intervention by its representative in the Council [262&h meeting]
are proof positive that whatever games the regime is playing, it is not cricket. Had it been, I remind my colleagues,
South Africa would have long departed the trusted wicket :’
and Namibia would now be batting with free and flourishing strokes to the glory of its own people.

“while American bank lending to the South African
public sector has been halved since 1982, to a total of
$302.2 million as of March, loans to the private sector
have soared. In particular,, loans : to South African
banks skyrocketed to more than $3.5 billion as of September, from less than $500 million in 1979.1’ .,
‘..
,
This means that those loans have increased sevenfold, and
I believe this explains why certain support for the crimes
committed by the criminals in South Africa seems to be
justified by certain members.
_ _“.I . I

33. Instead, we have South Africa attempting by a ploy
to impose upon the Council and the world a puppet
rigime, a so-called Transitional Government of National
Unity at Windhoek, which the international community in
all its forums had already rejected out of hand’for the fake
that ,it :obviausly was. ‘It reminds one of the stratagem
employed in certain circles ‘where, ‘in consideration of a
noble cause, there is tacked on to the main document an
unacceptable provision in the hope that it would ride piggyback, as it were, to acceptance and approval. Or it may
be a double .ploy to ensure rejection of the whole document, including the substantive question, in this case selection of the electoral system which would have triggered the
other steps preceding elections, such as the repealing of all
discriminatory
or restrictive laws and regulations, the
return of refugees, the withdrawal of South African forces,
and the release of political prisoners.

26. Mr. ALLEYNE (Trinidad and Tobago): ‘Mr. President, your country and mine have always,maintained the
most cordial and friendly relations and have cooperated
in a broad range of activities. It. gives me great pleasure,
therefore, to see you, a distinguished .dipldmat of Australia, presiding over the affairs of the Council for the month
of November.
27. Permit me also to extend our thanks and congratulations to Mr. Walters, of the United States, who directed
the deliberations of the Council in October.

34. Thp Council, by its resolution 566 (1985), specifically
condemned the installation by the racist regime in South
Africa of a so-called Transitional Government of National

28. A great disaster has fallen suddenly on our sister
nation of Colombia. I take this opportunity to convey to
3

-.,

..,

Unity at Windhoek, which constituted a direct affront to
the Council, and declared it to be illegal and null and void
and further declared that no recognition would be
accorded by the United Nations or any Member State to
the illegally installed regime or to any representative or
organ established in pursuance thereof.
/

L

40. .The ‘imposition
of mandatory sanctions against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter would be
one of the most effective ways to obtain South Africa’s
compliance with the relevant Council resolution. The
Government of Trinidad and Tobago urges the members
of the Council to act unanimously, support the draft resolution and help real& the goals of the Council with
respect to Namibia.

35. That South Aft-L&in the light of this, should issue
as part of an offtcial document of the,Security Council
[see S/17627, annex] a statement by the so-called cabinet
of that Transitional Government purporting to state its
choice on the question of an electoral system for Namibia
is an affront to the Council and a clear, unambiguous
manifestation of the utter contempt in which the Pretoria
regime holds the Council and the international community.

41. The PRESIDENT:
It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before us. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote.
42. I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.

36. Since the United Nations does not recognize the socalled interim government in Namibia, for South Africa to
attempt to give some degree of legality and credibility to
the collection of surrogates and puppets that comprise the
interim administration clearly indicates that South Africa
has embarked on a new phase of its obstructionist policy
with regard to Namibian
independence and selfdetermination.

43. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): The subject of this debate is a problem on which, as I said yesterday [2626zh meering], the members of the Council have
one view: we are all agreed on the ‘illegality of South African occupation of .Namibia and on the necessity of Namibia gaining its freedom and independence in accordance
with Security Council resolution 435 (1978) without delay.
We agree unanimously on the goal, but sadly it appears
that we are not agreed on the details of action.

37. The Council must clearly demonstrate to South
Africa that it has made a serious miscalculation of the
determination and commitment of the Council to ensure
the implementation
of its resolutions ‘and its resolve to
carry out its duties and responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations. It is clear that the introduction by
South Africa of extraneous issues such as “linkage” or
‘Lparallelism**, which seek to impose irrelevant prcconditions on the resolution of the problem; undoubtedly
undermines South Africa’s claim of desiring a peaceful
solution to the crisis.

44. This is sad .because unanimity is perhaps our best
means to achieve our common goal. Numerous speakers
in this debate have emphasized the importance of rellecting, in, the vote on the draft resolution, the unanimity
which unquestionably exists within the Council with
regard to South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia.
,.
45 I I .was struck, for example, by the remarks yesterday
by the representative, of Burkina Faso [ibid] about the
value .of consensus, At that same meeting, you, yourself,
Sir, joined me in drawingattention toth&ommonwealth
Accord on Southern Africa, adopted by the heads of
Governments of Commonwealth States at their meeting at
Nassau from 16 to 22 October last,’ and you hoped to see
a firm resolution which would attract unanimous support
and which ‘would send a clear and strong signal to South
Africa.,

38. The responses of the Council to the political and
diplomatic machinations of the racist regime must be firm.
In the context of Articles 39,41 and 42 of the Charter, the
Council should affirm that South Africa’s intransigence on
the Namibian question, by its aggressive acts against, the
people of Namibia and its noncompfiance with the Council resolutions on Namibia, constitutes a threat to intemational peace and security, and the Council must
accordingly decide what measures are to be employed to
give effect to its own resolutions; In its deliberations on
this question, the Council must always be mindful of the
fact that the illegally occupied territory of Namibia is used
as a springboard by South Africa for acts of aggression
against other countries in southern Africa in contravention
of the ’ Charter.

46.’ The representative of Canada spoke in similar terms
this ,moming 12628th meeting]. Both the representative of
Denmark and I strongly hoped for unanimity, and when I
said those things I believed they were achievable. In seeking to work with other members of the Council for a
unanimous resolution, the United Kingdom was not
engaging in empty rhetoric or looking for a comfortable
berth. It, was our belief, which I think is widely shared in
the’.Council’and throughout the United Nations, that our
best chance of influencing South Africa lay through a resolution which was at the same time firm, realistic and sup
ported by all 15 members of the Council. We felt that a less
than unanimous Council, .on the. other hand, would only
encourage South Africa and anyone else opposed to an
early negotiated settlement of the Namibian problem. It
would encourage them to play upon our differences. It
would mask our.common determination to procure forthwith the independence of Namibia.
,

39. The draft resolution before us provides a framework
for action by the Council at this time. By the draft resolution, the Council would decide to impose mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter, and in conformity with its responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security it must
act. It should, moreover, decide to adopt enforcement
measures against South Africa, including those outlined in
paragraph 8 of the draft resolution.’
4

,.

47. As I said in my statement yesterday, the United Kingdom has joined with other countries representing more
than one third of the membership of the United Nations in
a strategy designed to exercise firm and controlled pressure
upon South Africa through a number of agreed voluntary
measures. We proposed, both publicly and in private discussion with the sponsors of the draft resolution, that the
Council should adopt a resolution endorsing these measures and consistent with this strategy. We rnadti-abtindantly clear to the sponsors our readiness to vote for a
resolution which included a considerable list of nonmandatory economic measures. It is to our great regret
that this serious, realistic and constructive proposal
., has
not been accepted.

.

54. France has a clear and consistent position on Namibia. France voted in favour of Council resolutions 385
(1976) and 435 (1978), which, in our view,‘should be applied without any conditions or prerequisites whatsoever,
as 1 said last June [2589rh meezing]. hi particular, the linkage established by South Africa between implementation
of the United Nations plan and withdrawal of the Cuban
troops is not relevant.
55. The Pretoria Government’s obstinacy and its continuing intransigence are fraught with consequences for the
stability of the region. Measures must therefore be taken to
bring the south African Government to abide by the resolutions of the Council and put an end to the illegal occupation of Namibia. This is the concern which led the French
authorities to participate in the drafting and the adoption
of resolution 566 (1985). This same concern led us to adopt
an equally constructive approach during negotiations on
the draft resolution which is now before us, negotiations
which we would have liked to be able to continue.

48. It would have shown the South African Government
that it had no allies and could hope for none. It would
have shown them that if they persisted in their illegal occupation of Namibia, the consequences would have been
mounting pressures. It would have shown them that their
presence in Namibia was-and is-counter-productive
for
their own interests.

56. In this debate, as in all debates of the Council, France
is concerned with realism and effectiveness. Unfortunately,
while we agree with the feelings that lie behind this draft
resolution, it does not meet those concerns, The wording
does not seem to us the! most appropriate for enabling
progress to be made towards the sqlution,the international
community has outlined for the question of Namibia. That
is why my delegation will, regretfully, abstain in the vote.
However, I should like to say that France, on its own
initiative and within the framework of the European Eco,nomic Cdmmpnity, will continue to pursue its actions and
to exert increased pressure upon South Africa. France has
demonstrated its resolve through the measures it has
already taken, measures which have been recently added to
by the Prime Minister of Fence.

49. I cannot but feel, as a practical matter, that the rejection of our clear and principled advice will be unfoitunate
for the people of Namibia, and also for Angola. We &gret
this missed opportunity. It is worse than an error; ,it is a
blunder. Defeat has been snatched from the jaws of
unaiimity and a victory of sorts has been handed to South
Africa.
50. Having offered a better course, my delegation will be
obliged to vote against the draft resolution, because it is
likkly to be counter-productive and because it would have
the effect of preempting the strategy on which we have
agreed .with our Cotimonwealth-partners.
We on our side
are not prepared to render nugsltory the very significant
agreement reached at Nassau barely a month ago. It is a
great pity .that our efforts to achieve unanimity have been
frustrated and that comfort ‘has thereby been afforded to
the .party which least deserves it: South Africa.

57. Mr. OKUN (United States of America): Permit me at
the outset, Sir, on behalf of the entire American delegation, to welcome your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We feel confident that our vessel will be well
ste&d ,under such a distinguished helmsman, distinguished alike .for his wisdom, energy and tact.

51. Nevertheless, my Government remains determined to
work for the independence of Namibia without delay.

58. Permit me also to express the deep regret of my
Government at the news of Jhe recent natural calamity in
Colombia. In expressing sympathy with our sister Republic to the south, we do so in the knowledge that the brave
$eople of Colombia ~$1 surmount this, tragedy, as they
.have other difficult times in the past.

52. Mr. de KfiMOULARIA
(France) (inferprerution
from French): Sir, it is with pleasure that I follo\?l the tradition of hai!ing your accession to the presidency pf the
Council and express wishes for success during your term as
President. Each of my predecessors has spoken of and
referred to their couxitries’ relations with Australia. As y&
know, it is a country I know well, and so I am the best
person to testify to the excellent relations between Australia and France. I cannot myself tafk about cricket, as some
of my colleagues have done, but I could mention rugby,
since we have ,often met on the rugby field, the field of
friendship.

59. At this critical juncture in the ,history of southern
Africa, a debate such as the one’ under way here in the
Council holds.particular relevance. We have come a long
way since the Councjl adopted resolution 435 (1978) seven
years ago. One hurdle after another has been overcome,
and we find ourselves today-I should like to hope-near
the end qf an arduous journey. An act qr two more of
goodwill, gestures of true statesmanship by the involved
parties, and the region will have taken a major step
towards a peaceful solution of the problems and strife that
now beset it.

53. On behalf of my delegation, I should like to ask’the
representative of the United States, Mr. Okun, to accept
our thanks for the good humour, competence and authority demonstrated by the presidency of our friend Mr.
Walters.
5

60. My Government welcomes the announcement by the
South African authorities that proportional representation
has been selected as a framework for elections in Namibia.
The United States expects that South Africa will strictly
adhere to the election modalities as outlined in the settlement plan and endorsed by the Council in resolution 435
(1978). I quote the following from that plan. Section I
states that:

In favour. Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining: France.

“the Secretary-General [will] appoint a United Nations
special representative whose central task will be to make
sure that conditions are established which will allow
free and fair elections and an impartial electoral process. The Special Representative will be assisted by a
United Nations. transition assistance group.” [See
S/12636, para. 2.1
Section II states that::

’

i%e result of the vote was 12 in favour, 2 against and I
abstention. The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative votes being those ?f permanent members of the Councif.
65. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements
following the voting.

j

66. Mr. ALZAMORA
(Peru) (interpretation from Span,ish): In my capacity as coordinator of the non-aligned
States members of the Council, I should like to make some
comments on the draft on which we have just voted.

“The elections-will be under the supervision and control
, of the United Nations*’ [ibid., para. 5J.
I recaii also that the plan has been adopted and accepted
by the South African Government.

67. As the members of the Council are aware, the Political Declaration of the Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Luanda from 4 to 7 September last [S/l7610 and Corr. 1, annex I’J, urged the Security Council to meet once again to consider the question of
Namibia and to renew the appeal for the imposition of
comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

61. As my British colleague did yesterday [2626th meeting], I too must refer to the request addressed to you, Mr.
President, by six Namibian political parties to participate
in this debate. The United States believes it most important that all relevant parties with information to impart to
the Council be permitted to speak under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure. Such a stance is .consistent
with the universality of the United Nations. Furthermore,
all parties should be accorded equal treatment under the
terms of the settlement plan. Hence, it is our view that a
request from one or another member of a Namibian political party to address the Council should be accorded sympathetic consideration.

68. In furtherance of that mandate received from the
non-aligned countries, the delegation of India, in its capacity as Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, requested this series of meetings of the Council,
which over the past three days has been dealing with the
question of. the decolonization of Namibia.
69. As the result of that debate, the non-aligned countries jointly submitted the draft resolution which was just
voted on and which reflects their true feeling as to the
strategy to be followed in the case of Namibia. Since its
presentation within the due time-limit, the sponsors maintained constant contacts with delegations, seeking to bring
their positions closer to our own. In some cases we
achieved that completely, as is reflected in the draft resolution and the result of the vote. There were substantive
considerations which we were unable to reconcile as the
inevitable result of different approaches to the problem,
and as is only normal those differences were also reflected
in the vote.

62. That said, it is the long-standing view of my Govemment, as well as other members of the Council, that persons acting as representatives of the so-called transitional
government, the creation of which was declared null and
void by the Council, should not be given the right to speak
here.
63. As regards the draft resolution before us, it is with
regret that we shall vote against it. My delegation will do
so because it would impose mandatory sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. My
Government’s position on this matter is well known. I
would add in this case that, actively engaged as the United
States is in seeking a negotiated solution of the problem of
Namibia, we would utterly negate our good offices by
supporting mandatory sanctions. We sincerely regret that
this draft resolution persisted in that short-sighted course
of action.

70. To negotiate is to seek convergence and consensus
when that is possible. However, that is often not possible
in the United Nations and elsewhere in spite of the efforts
made and the goodwill shown, as has occurred here. But to
negotiate is not to falter or to submit, although those
efforts proved insufficient in the face of circumstances
which ruled out consensus.

64. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put the draft resolution in document S/17633 to the vote.

71. In connection with progress made in other organizations and associations-which
we duly appreciate-we

k vote was taken by show of hands.
6

must recall that we are acting here within the Security
Council and, accordingly, consistent with its own precedents, aims and policies which are autonomous, reflecting
a universal process and the composition of the General
Assembly and thus the reality of the world around us.

meeting at Nassau, as set out in the Commonwealth
Accord on Southern Africa.’

72. We non-aligned countries trust that the growing
awareness of all the peoples of the world of the undeniable
justice of Namibia’s case and the inexorable force of history will allow us soon to overcome those disagreements
and together bring about the end of the illegal occupation
of the Territory of Namibia and ensure the final achievement of its freedom and independence.

75. Just as the Commonwealth Accord was adopted by
consensus, so we would have wished the Council to proceed today on the basis of consensus or- unanimity, which
would have sent a clear and unambiguous signal to South
Africa. The Australian delegation worked actively, with
others, to achieve a resolution which would have met that
objective. We regret that it was not possible to achieve it
on this occasion and hope that the Council will be able to
attain a unanimous position when it next meets to consider
the situation in Namibia.‘.

73. The PRESIDENT:
I wish now to speak briefly in my
capacity as representative of Australia.

76. I now resume my function
Council.
..

74. Australia voted for the draft resolution. We did so to
express our strong support for the cause of Namibian independence and our attachment to the United Nations plan
under resolution 435 (1978). As I said in my statement
yesterday [262&h meettig], Australia supports the imposition of mandatory economic sanctions in order to bring
South Africa to accept its international obligations .and
bring Namibia to early independence. Austratia is also
fully committed to the approach adopted by the heads of
Governments of Commonwealth States at their -recent

77. The Council has concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

as President of the

NOTES
’ See XXVI:
227.
2 See A/40/817.

.\
_I

t

.

r’

.
.

._

7

.,

:

I.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies’sont en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaims
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des.ventes, New York ou Get&e.
ICAIC I-IoJIYvwrb
tI3lWiliX0~WISf3ilIUH
EliSCliTCTB&XBOBCCXp&iOHilX
Mara3riHe xmi nsimi~e
~OAruKeH3AlUid.

ci3~I-IIaI
oPrAHH3Ak@iki
OEbEWHEHHbIx
HAL&In
06IdZiIieKHb~x HamtRt.rO~~o KYH%iTbBKHUXCHbIXM~a3HHaX
MHpa.&?BOmTeCnpaBKH
06 H3AKWUIXBBWIIeMKHSiXCHOM
no anpecy: GprarinXtuttr G6z+eAtinetttibtx Hat@, Cexmir no
HbO-tiOpK%lJISi

)&ZlIeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librcrfas y cams distribuidoras en
todas pattes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61439-March

1995-1,925
