S/2021/1110

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 December 2021
Original: English

United Nations operation in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 19 June to 15 December 2021. It brings up to
date the record of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2587 (2021), since the issuance of my reports dated 9 July 2021 on UNFICYP
(S/2021/635) and on my mission of good offices in Cyprus (S/2021/634).
2.
As at 15 December 2021, the strength of the military component stood at 797
(722 men and 75 women, or 7.7 per cent women for all ranks, compared with the
global peace operations target of 7.5 per cent women), while that of the police
component stood at 62 (39 men and 23 women, or 37 per cent women compared with
the overall global target of 23 per cent women) (see annex).

II. Significant developments
3.
Following the informal five-plus-one meeting 1 held in Geneva from 27 to
29 April 2021, consultations with the parties continued over the reporting period,
exploring whether common ground could be found to lay a path towards formal
negotiations. I invited the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders to an informal
lunch that was held on 27 September in New York. While confirming during the lunch
that their positions remained far apart, the two leaders also indicated their interest in
continued engagement.
4.
The two sides’ respective coronavirus disease (COVID-19) measures at the
crossing points had been harmonized during the previous reporting period and
continued to be fine-tuned by health experts within the Technical Committee on
Health. Based on the epidemiological data shared within the Committee on a biweekly
basis, the epidemiological level was consequently adjusted during the reporting
period. The pandemic also continued to have a substantial negative socioeconomic
impact across the island, albeit to different degrees on each side, with recovery
challenges island-wide, including with respect to the tourism and education sectors.
__________________
1

21-19598 (E)

An informal meeting of the Greek Cypriot leader, the Turkish Cypriot leader, the guarantor
powers and the United Nations.

070122

*2119598*

S/2021/1110

5.
The Special Representative/Deputy Special Adviser continued the regular
trilateral meetings with the representatives of both leaders to discuss the technical
committees and confidence-building measures, and to address a range of issues
causing tension in and adjacent to the buffer zone.
6.
Public confidence in the possibility of securing a settlement continued to fall
and debate was focused on the divergent positions of the sides overall, along with the
possible appointment of an envoy on Cyprus. An unsettled internal political landscape
created additional challenges, with Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots seeming
increasingly sceptical as to the prospects of common ground being found and of a
future resumption of peace talks occurring. Furthermore, certain steps taken, in
particular with respect to the fenced-off part of Varosha and the buffer zone,
contributed to further deepening mistrust, both between the sides and among the two
communities.

III. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
7.
With the backdrop of a continued lack of progress toward the resumption of
formal negotiations between the sides, cooperation on the island remained limited,
notwithstanding the sustained dialogue between the leaders’ offices through the
United Nations in Cyprus. Political tensions and distrust continu ed to impede the
implementation of significant confidence-building measures, and changes on the
ground, unauthorized by UNFICYP, remained a key challenge for the mission.
8.
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to affect Cyprus, with a significantly higher
socioeconomic cost in the north. The status of the crossing points, however, which
had been a core issue during the previous reporting period, was progressively
normalized and helped facilitate the implementation of the mission’s essen tial tasks.
The activities of UNFICYP remained centred around monitoring, reporting, liaison
and engagement through a perspective of conflict prevention and trust -building.
9.
Despite the existence of robust internal measures with respect to quarantine,
testing requirements and guidelines limiting physical interaction, UNFICYP
continued to record COVID-19 cases among its personnel, with 69 cases (60 military
and 9 civilian personnel) identified and managed during the reporting period.
International, Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot civilian personnel also received
vaccines from local authorities.

A.

Prevention of tensions in and around the buffer zone
10. The weekly meetings of the Special Representative/Deputy Special Adviser
with the Greek Cypriot negotiator and the Turkish Cypriot special representative
continued to bear fruit. The agreement reached between the sides with the active
support of the United Nations at the end of the previous reporting period to harmonize
procedures at the crossing points had a significant positive impact towards a return to
the status quo ante the pandemic. In addition, it was agreed that the no -testing
requirement would come into effect on 27 September for people who were fully
vaccinated. The mission monitored the implementation of these decisions, which
overall was well executed, notwithstanding some claims by Turkish Cypriots of being
ill-treated at several specific crossing points, notably Deryneia/Derinya.
11. Encroachment into the buffer zone in the form of unauthorized construction,
while specifically proscribed by the Security Council in its resolution 2587 (2021),
became a primary source of tension between the sides. Both individual and
authorities-led constructions – including military – triggered reciprocal reactions with

2/15

21-19598

S/2021/1110

frequent repercussions at the political level. These actions had an impact on the
integrity of the buffer zone and contributed to a deterioration in respect for the
mandated authority of UNFICYP. The mission’s calls for a return to the status quo
ante remained unanswered regarding the 12 km concertina wire fence deployed during
the previous reporting period in parallel to the southern ceasefire line and located for
the most part (85 per cent) inside the buffer zone. The fence continued to block the
mission’s patrol track in 11 areas.
12. In Varosha, no steps were taken to reverse the actions implemented since the
announcement of the partial reopening of the fenced -off town in October 2020,
despite the Security Council’s call in resolution 2587 (2021). Based on the mission’s
observations, the declaration of July 2021 on the lifting of the military status of
3.5 per cent of Varosha did not translate into significant changes on the ground in this
area during the reporting period, beyond the clearing of vegetation. The parts of the
town that were being made accessible to the public continued to attract many visitors,
both Cypriots and others. This influx of civilians resulted in several instances of
trespassing at the observation posts of UNFICYP. As a result, the mission deployed
fences around its two manned positions, which led to a standoff with the Turkish
Cypriot security forces for several weeks, during which the mission’s access to
Varosha was further hindered. Nonetheless, focused engagement at several levels
contributed to an easing of tensions and to progressively improved access. In the areas
of Varosha observable by UNFICYP, activities and changes continued, consisting
mostly of vegetation clearing, small-scale infrastructure development (e.g. electrical
work, road paving and installation of closed-circuit television cameras and
streetlights) and aerial commercial drone overflights, linked most likely to the
monitoring of civilian visits. In relation to the status of Varosha, UNFICYP continues
to be guided by relevant Security Council resolutions. Accordingly, the mission and
the Secretariat repeatedly expressed concern over the developments in the fenced-off
part of the town. The United Nations continues to hold the Government of Turkey
responsible for the situation in Varosha.
13. Political tensions regarding developments on the Pyla plateau remained
unresolved during the reporting period. The mission continued to engage with both
sides to address the issue of water access for the Turkish Cypriots living on the
plateau, in consultation with the adjacent British Sovereign Base Area.
14. Despite the buffer zone being a no-fly zone for non-United Nations assets,
airspace violations, notably by aerial commercial off-the-shelf drones, continued to
increase during the reporting period.

B.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and maintenance of the
military status quo
15. Military tensions between the opposing forces remained low, despite a backdrop
of further militarization of the island on both sides. The tendency that started during
the previous reporting period, namely of fewer military violations being registered
but more significant ones occurring, continued during the reporting period. The
hardening of the ceasefire lines, described in my previous report, continued through
the deployment of additional surveillance equipment on both sides, various upgrades
of observation posts (including 6 additional prefabricated concrete firing positions
along the southern ceasefire line, bringing the total to 239) and training manoeuvres
conducted close to the buffer zone. On both sides, the disti nction between military
and civilian construction was sometimes unclear.
16. The growing issue of undetected crossings through the buffer zone by asylum
seekers and irregular migrants was often referred to as the reason for the enhancement

21-19598

3/15

S/2021/1110

of surveillance capacity along the ceasefire lines (see sect. III.F). The policy of the
mission in that regard has constantly been that the installation of surveillance
technology at observation posts would be tolerated, if it were followed by an
unmanning of the observation posts in the same area.
17. The reporting period saw renewed engagement between the military leadership
of the mission and its counterparts on both sides, including through the resumption
of in-person meetings. However, these interactions did not result in any progress
towards new military confidence-building measures.
18. Both sides continued to challenge the mission’s delineation of the buffer zone
in several areas, for example, by moves forward and unauthorized construction.
19. There was no improvement with regard to the restrictions imposed on the
mission’s freedom of movement in Varosha and Strovilia. In Strovilia, the Turkish
Cypriot security forces position remained overmanned.
20. The establishment of a direct military contact mechanism continued to face
fundamental obstacles from both sides. As in the previous reporting period, positions
on the composition of the mechanism remained far apart and hardly bridgeable. In the
south, the position remains that such interaction should involve the Tur kish army
alone, while, in the north, the response remains that only Turkish Cypriot security
forces should be present from their side. In 2020, UNFICYP had put forward the
proposal that the commanders of those opposing forces that maintain military
positions along the ceasefire lines should enter into dialogue, with the facilitation of
the mission’s Force Commander.
21. Despite the call by the Security Council in its resolution 2587 (2021) for the
sides to agree on “a plan of work to achieve a mine-free Cyprus”, no progress was
made during the reporting period regarding the clearing of the 29 remaining suspected
hazardous areas on the island, including the three active National Guard minefields
in the south and the Turkish Forces’ legacy minefield in the east. While the Turkish
Cypriot security forces expressed potential interest in the discussion, if it were to
involve reciprocity from the other side, the National Guard did not wish to discuss
the matter. The Mine Action Service continued to research options for the next phase
of clearance activities to be presented to the two sides, with a special focus on the
buffer zone.

C.

Management of civilian activity and maintenance of law and order
22. While both sides tacitly acknowledged the mission’s aide-memoire governing
conduct in and around the buffer zone and the mission’s mandated authority, there
were frequent instances where this authority was disputed. Various decisions were
taken in complete disregard for the mission’s position on the issues at hand. In
addition to creating facts on the ground, i.e. by jeopardizing the integrity of the buffer
zone and special status areas, these actions often raised political tensions and fostered
cycles of reciprocal actions. In that regard, as mentioned above, unauthorized
construction remained a chief concern of UNFICYP, due to the permanent nature of
the violations and the perception by the other side of encroachment.
23. Generally, the reporting period saw a potential reduction in the number of
civilian incidents in the buffer zone (343) compared with the same period during the
previous year (989). However, the mission recently underwent a fundamental review
of its Situational Awareness Geospatial Enterprise (SAGE) reporting system in order
to make the system more integrated across its components, which may partly explain
the large discrepancy between the two periods.

4/15

21-19598

S/2021/1110

24. Cooperation with police services in managing demonstrations close to the buffer
zone remained satisfactory (18 demonstrations). The Joint Contact Room, a vehicle
for information exchange on law and order linked to the Technical Committee on
Crime and Criminal Matters and facilitated by UNFICYP, continued to operate and
exchange data on crimes with implications on both sides of the buffer zone.
25. The number of incidents of illegal dumping inside the buffer zone was three
times higher than in 2019, which created a growing environmental problem. The
mission reached out to farmers and others to raise awareness, while at the same time
liaising with the relevant police services and municipalities. This issue was at times
linked to the numerous wildfires that occurred in the buffer zone during the summer,
against which UNFICYP had developed an effective cooperation mechanism with the
authorities.
26. From the end of October, illegal hunting in the buffer zone, mostly coming from
the south, became a concerning issue, despite the mission’s enhanced communication
efforts to deter such activity. The risks of miscalculation posed by individuals wearing
military fatigues and holding rifles in a zone surrounded by thousands of soldiers are
deemed by the mission to be significant.
27. In Pyla, the past six months saw an increase in the number of illegal ga mbling
establishments, with the opening of a casino and no progress towards removing the
existing ones. The continued growth in illicit activity in this unique mixed village in
the buffer zone has been acknowledged as a concern by both sides, and discussio ns
are under way, with United Nations facilitation, to devise a potential response to the
situation.
28. The level of engagement between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots in Pyla
remained limited, mainly due to the lack of institutional structures suppo rting their
interaction in a sustainable way. While the COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative
impact on in-person activities, a focus on interaction through educational institutions
in the village demonstrated a promising way forward for intercommunal initi atives.
Meanwhile, the university in Pyla continued to operate without authorization from
UNFICYP, and no progress was registered in resolving the matter of the large
unauthorized construction project associated with the university, despite the
continued engagement efforts of the mission.

D.

Intercommunal relations, cooperation and trust-building
29. Despite the reopened crossing points and harmonized crossing procedures, and
while measures restricting domestic movement were progressively lifted, the
sustained presence of COVID-19 continued nonetheless to significantly hinder
contacts and interaction from across the divide, including by putting limitations on
public events. Furthermore, the absence of peace talks and negative messaging
between the political leaders on both sides during the reporting period generated an
atmosphere that was not conducive to reconciliation efforts.
30. In spite of the challenging environment, UNFICYP maintained its support for
intercommunal engagement and various trust-building activities, including through
the organization of in-person gatherings when possible and appropriate. The United
Nations Youth Champions for Environment and Peace, led by UNFICYP with the
support of my mission of good offices, received increased attention on the island in
the context of the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held from 31 October to
13 November 2021, which resulted in enhanced engagement between the Youth
Champions and the international community. The participants benefited from 32
sessions and activities with 43 experts from Cyprus and abroad, including from the

21-19598

5/15

S/2021/1110

United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Also, UNFICYP facilitated
several popular workshops on social innovation and entrepreneurship , gathering an
audience (both in person and virtually) of thousands of people from both
communities. At the municipal level, the traditional bodies for coopera tion between
the two Nicosia municipalities (the Nicosia Coordination Group and the Nicosia
Master Plan group) remained mostly dormant during the reporting period. However,
during a meeting on 11 November between the then Special Representative/Deputy
Special Adviser and both mayors, the latter expressed their commitment to
reinvigorating those bodies and discussed concrete plans for the betterment of
Nicosia, which the United Nations stands ready to facilitate, as appropriate.
31. While all technical committees met at least once during the reporting period,
overall progress was slow. The regular trilateral meetings between the Special
Representative/Deputy Special Adviser and the leaders’ representatives assisted with
the efforts to revitalize their work, although various activities and projects in the
committees remained stalled. However, several important achievements were
recorded: the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage received the prestigious
Grand Prix of the 2021 European Heritage Awards/Europa Nostra Awards; the leaders
confirmed an agreement on 19 November that will make way for the introduction of
5G across the island as a result of the extensive work carried out by the Technical
Committee on Broadcasting and Telecommunication over the past t wo years; and the
Association for Historical Dialogue and Research, under the auspices of the Technical
Committee on Education, launched the “Imagine” peace education pro ject on
8 November for the 2021/22 school year. More information on the technical
committees and their activities is provided in the report on my mission of good offices
in Cyprus (S/2021/1109).
32. Education is key to sustainable peace on the island. Despite the request by the
Security Council in its resolution 2587 (2021) for the two leaders to “address
impediments to peace by conducting a joint review of school materials, including
textbooks”, no steps were taken in this direction by either side.
33. Representatives of Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political parties
maintained their regular monthly meetings under the auspices of the Embassy of
Slovakia. Due to the improved epidemiological situation on the island in the fall of
2021, they were able to partially return to the usual format of in -person discussions.
This step was welcomed by the representatives, who had repeatedly stressed the
importance of personal contacts to bolster cooperation. They were also able to return
to the subcommittee format, enabling more detailed discussions on potential joint
confidence-building activities of the political parties.
34. The religious leaders of Cyprus sustained their commitment to peacebuilding
and reconciliation within the framework of the Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace
Process, under the auspices of the Embassy of Sweden. They continued to meet and
work together to advance, inter alia, the right of each faith community to administer
and pray at its respective places of worship and have free access to care for them.

E.

Facilitation of access and humanitarian functions
35. The mission’s humanitarian functions, and its operations overall, were
facilitated by the reopening of the crossing points. In parallel, with crossing being
made available once more for Cypriots and others, the number of COVID -19-related
humanitarian requests to UNFICYP drastically decreased.

6/15

21-19598

S/2021/1110

36. The mission continued to engage with the Greek Cypriot and Maronite
communities living in the north, and with Turkish Cypriots living in the south.
UNFICYP facilitated the handover of COVID-19 vaccines to Greek Cypriots and
Maronites living in the north in July and November. With the easing of pandemic related movement restrictions on both sides, requests for access to religious services
resumed slowly, but remained below half of pre-COVID-19 rates. In three instances,
UNFICYP facilitated the post-mortem transfer of recently deceased Cypriots, both
from the north and from the south.
37. In addition to its regular humanitarian deliveries to 292 Greek Cypriots and 48
Maronites, UNFICYP also provided support to the Greek Cypriot schools on the
Karpas Peninsula. The appointment of four out of six teachers was approved by the
Turkish Cypriot authorities, and UNFICYP continued to engage regarding the
remaining two positions. Most of the schoolbooks used in the north by the Greek
Cypriot communities were accepted by the Turkish Cypriot authorities, with the
exception of a few deemed to contain inappropriate references.
38. On 8 August, UNFICYP facilitated the crossing of more than 500 Turkish
Cypriots between the Limnitis/Yesilırmak crossing point and the Kokkina pocket for
an annual commemoration event.
39. On 2 June, the European Commission adopted its seventeenth report on the
implementation of European Council regulation (EC) No. 866/2004 of 29 April 2004
and the situation resulting from its application covering the period from 1 January to
31 December 2020. The report registered a large decrease in the number of crossings
by Cypriots, from 3,694,958 in 2019 to 780,087 in 2020, with most crossings having
occurred before the pandemic hit the island in early March. The number of European
Union citizens other than Cypriots and third-country nationals crossing the line also
decreased, from 1,515,717 to 106,624. Trade in goods across the Green Line was also
affected by the situation at the crossing points in 2020, which was somewhat
mitigated by a system of contactless trade created by businesses on both sides,
whereby the seller left the goods in the buffer zone between two crossing points,
which were then collected by the buyer and subsequently submitted to the customs
authorities. The total official value of goods traded across the Green Line in 2020 was
assessed at €4,693,898, compared with €5,464,237 the year before.

F.

Refugees and asylum seekers
40. Compared with 2020, the number of asylum applications in the Republic of
Cyprus increased significantly from January onwards, although the figures remained
lower than in 2019, reaching a total of 10,508 persons by the end of October. According
to information provided by the Republic of Cyprus, the overwhelming majority of
asylum seekers arrived through the buffer zone, reportedly accounting for 80 per cent
of the total number of asylum applicants. The first reception centre, used for the
registration of irregularly arriving asylum seekers, was operating at 200 per cent of its
capacity at the end of October. According to UNHCR, pushbacks at sea and at the
official crossing points by the Republic of Cyprus were likely to have contributed to
the increase in the irregular crossings through the buffer zone, putting asylum seekers
at risk of exploitation and making them vulnerable to security incidents.
41. Pushbacks at sea increased during the reporting period, resulting in eight
confirmed cases of collective refoulement and one person missing at sea. Three
asylum seekers from Cameroon who had been unable to leave the buffer zone since
24 May 2021, including a vulnerable woman, were refused access to asylum
procedures during repeated attempts to present themselves to the police at the Ledra
Palace checkpoint. While one of them managed to cross to the south, two remained

21-19598

7/15

S/2021/1110

stranded in the buffer zone without access to proper reception conditions, including
shelter, food, clothing and hygiene facilities. Given the situation, UNFICYP and
UNHCR, among others, assisted them with access to food and ablution facilities.
Despite emergency admission to the hospital of the Cameroonian female asylum
seeker on 9 October 2021, access to asylum procedures was again denied and th e
individual was pushed back to the buffer zone upon being discharged from the
hospital facilities. However, on 3 December, in the context of the Pope’s visit to
Cyprus, the mission was informed that the two Cameroonians, along with 48 other
asylum seekers, would be granted asylum by the Holy See.
42. The issue of irregular migration and, in particular, the irregular crossings of
asylum seekers from north to south, continued to be a source of tension between the
sides during the reporting period. Several discussions on irregular migration took
place between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot experts during this period, with
United Nations facilitation. While it was agreed that efforts need to be made to sustain
such a dialogue with a view to tackling this serious issue more effectively, decisions
on a proper vehicle for ongoing discussion remain pending.

G.

Gender, and women and peace and security
43. UNFICYP continued its outreach to women’s groups island-wide, as well as to
young men and women on shared issues of concern pertaining to gender equality.
UNFICYP supported a platform that linked young men and women with the Cypriot
antennae of the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network, facilitating dialogue on
practical aspects of gender and youth inclusion in the Cyprus peace process and
providing an opportunity for young people to directly express their needs and
concerns. The mission also held a workshop on 31 August with the United Nations
Youth Champions for Environment and Peace that addressed the inter face between
gender and climate change, highlighting the differential impact that climate change
and environmental issues are having on women, girls, men and boys. UNFICYP also
marked the International Day of Peace with a podcast interview with Special
Representative Spehar, who highlighted the mission’s engagement with youth and
women on both sides of the island. In order to mark United Nations Day, UNFICYP
supported an event that highlighted the ongoing gaps and opportunities related to the
full and effective participation of women in the peace process.
44. With the support of UNFICYP, the Ambassadors to Cyprus of Ireland, the
Netherlands and Sweden and the High Commissioner to Cyprus of Australia released
a statement on 29 June 2021 as a group of friends of women, peace and security, in
which they stressed the importance of the full and meaningful involvement of women
in the Cyprus peace process. The group pledged to work both with the United Nations
and other stakeholders to strengthen this commitment on the island. Furthermore,
together with my mission of good offices, UNFICYP continued to facilitate the work
of the Technical Committee on Gender Equality. This included supporting its work
related to the call by the Security Council in its resolution 2587 (2021) on the leaders
of both sides to submit to me by 15 December 2021 an action plan, in coordination
with the Committee, to increase the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in peace talks and to provide direct support and encouragement to civil society
organizations to enhance intercommunal contact and trust-building. While the
Committee reached a convergence on a set of draft recommendations, which were
welcomed by the two leaders in their essence, agreement on a joint action plan in line
with the request of the Council was regrettably not reached, with both sides
submitting their own versions of the plan on 15 December.
45. In line with its objectives to advance gender parity and support gender
mainstreaming across the mission, UNFICYP continued to focus on greater gender

8/15

21-19598

S/2021/1110

inclusion throughout its operations and on supporting an environment that is also
responsive to the particular needs of female peacekeepers. Dialogue sessions on
gender identity, sexism, diversity and inclusion, and accountability were facilitated
among uniformed personnel, in addition to capacity-building and awareness training
on the women and peace and security agenda. Special Representative Spehar also
participated in an event co-hosted by the Governments of Canada and Uruguay on
operationalizing opportunities for women in peacekeeping, at which mission best
practices on advancing gender parity were shared.

IV. Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus
46. Since its establishment, the bicommunal teams of scientists of the Committee
on Missing Persons in Cyprus, supported by the United Nations and mandated to
recover, identify and return the remains of persons who went missing during the
events of 1963/64 and 1974, has exhumed or received the remains of 1,179 persons
on both sides of the island thanks to funding from donors, in particular the European
Union. Ten persons were exhumed during the reporting period with seven teams of
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot scientists carrying out excavations across the
island. The overall exhumation figure may include persons who are not on the official
list of missing persons and is finalized only after the completion of anthropological
analysis and DNA identification, a process commonly completed within one to two
years. When the identified remains are not related to the mandate of the Committee,
they are then subtracted from the official exhumation figures. Operations of the
Committee have fully resumed.
47. In 2021, the Committee conducted excavations in 3 of the 30 military areas in
the northern part of Cyprus to which access had been granted in June 2019, with no
recoveries made during the reporting period. To date, of 2,002 missing persons, 1,022
have been formally identified and their remains returned to their families for dignified
burials, including 16 during the reporting period.
48. In an effort to obtain additional information on the location of the burial sites of
missing persons, the Committee continued its efforts to gain access to the archives of
countries and organizations that had maintained a military, police or humanitarian
presence in Cyprus in 1963/64 and 1974. During the reporting period, access to
archives of the National Guard of Cyprus was given to the Co mmittee. The issue of
archives was also discussed with the Permanent Representatives of Turkey and of
Greece to the United Nations. After four years of continuous work, the Committee
completed its extensive research in the archives of the United Nations in Nicosia and
New York. Several hundred documents containing information on missing persons
and potential burial sites have now been centralized and shared between the offices
of the three Committee members.

V. Conduct and discipline and sexual exploitation and abuse
49. During the reporting period, UNFICYP pursued its efforts to encourage strict
adherence to the United Nations policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse. In coordination with the Regional Conduct and Discipline Section ba sed at the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the mission implemented activities related
to prevention, enforcement and remedial action regarding misconduct, including
sexual exploitation and abuse, fraud and prohibited conduct in the workplace.
50. Given the COVID-19 context, all conduct- and discipline-related training for all
categories of personnel in the mission, including on the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse, fraud and corruption, was delivered online.
21-19598

9/15

S/2021/1110

51. During the reporting period, UNFICYP did not receive any allegations of sexual
exploitation and/or abuse.

VI. Financial and administrative aspects
52. The General Assembly, by its resolution 75/299 of 30 June 2021, appropriated the
amount of $53.8 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July
2021 to 30 June 2022, inclusive of the voluntary contribution of approximately one third
of the net cost of the Force, equivalent to $18.2 million, from the Government of Cyprus
and the voluntary contribution of $6.5 million from the Government of Greece.
53. As at 30 November 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNFICYP amounted to $11.9 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $1,473.8 million.
54. Reimbursement of troop costs and contingent-owned equipment have been
made for the period up to 30 June 2021 in accordance with the quarterly pa yment
schedule.

VII. Observations
55. The absence of progress towards the resumption of formal negotiations
continued to create space for new facts on the ground and spawned unilateral actions
deemed provocative by the other side. In this context, UNFICYP faced significant
violations or attempts to contravene the mission’s aide-memoire during the period
under review. I note with concern that this trend may result in systematic brinkmanship
that could contribute to the already difficult climate between the parties.
56. Encroachment by both sides into the buffer zone, mostly in the form of
unauthorized construction, has continued to increase tensions. In addition to creating
operational challenges for UNFICYP, these actions generate tensions on the ground
and between the sides, can carry security risks and do not contribute to a positive
climate. Unauthorized construction for private and commercial use in the buffer zone,
in contravention of established procedures for the management of civilian activity,
displays a disregard for the United Nations delineation of the buffer zone and for the
mandated authority of UNFICYP. It could further compromise the mission’s ability
to fulfil its mandated objective of maintaining calm and creating conditions conducive
for a settlement. I urge both sides, once again, to respect and abide by the United
Nations delineation of the buffer zone and established mechanisms for managing
civilian activity therein. I recall the Security Council’s request that all unauthorized
constructions inside the buffer zone be removed and that both sides prevent
unauthorized military and civilian activities within and along the ceasefire lines.
57. Another example of the contravention of the aide-memoire was the recent
enhancement of surveillance technology on both sides of the buffer zone, which was
done without consultation with UNFICYP. I would encourage a dialogue between the
parties and my Special Representative to explore the idea of unmanning the ceasefire
lines, in return for the potential validation by the United Nations of surveillance
technology that is neither deployed inside the buffer zone nor able to see beyond it. I
believe that such a measure could significantly contribute to building confidence and
holds the potential to deescalate tensions in the buffer zone.
58. I reiterate the call of the Security Council to the sides to abide by the 2018 aide memoire that underpins the supervision by UNFICYP of the ceasefire and supports
its efforts to contribute to the maintenance of law and order, and a return to normal
conditions.
10/15

21-19598

S/2021/1110

59. UNFICYP records all observed violations and engages with the two sides to
resolve issues that arise in and around the buffer zone, with a view to maintaining
calm and preventing escalation. However, some incidents are used politically and
amplified through the media, further increasing tensions and mistrust. I deplore any
attempts to instrumentalize the situation in the buffer zone and call upon the two sides
to work constructively with UNFICYP to address violations and incidents and to
refrain from increasing tensions further.
60. Beyond the buffer zone itself, I have repeatedly stressed the importance of the
parties refraining from taking unilateral actions that could raise tensions and
compromise a return to talks, while also calling upon all parties to engage in dialogue
in order to resolve their differences. In that respect, I reiterate my concern over
developments in the fenced-off area of Varosha, as well as the lack of response to the
Security Council’s latest resolution, 2587 (2021), in which the Council called for a
reversal of the actions taken since the announcement of the partial reopening of the
fenced-off town in October 2020. I further recall the Council’s decisions related to
Varosha, notably resolutions 550 (1984) and 789 (1992), and the importance of
adhering fully to those resolutions, underscoring that the position of the United
Nations on this matter remains unchanged. I also deplore the restrictions on the
freedom of movement of UNFICYP imposed in the area and elsewhere, as in Strovilia,
and request that the ability of the mission to patrol and implement its mandated
activities be restored in full. I recall that the mandate provided by the Council to
UNFICYP is not limited to the buffer zone but extends to the entire island.
61. During the reporting period, the island continued to be considerably affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic. While both communities suffered from the socioeconomic
impact of COVID-19, the Turkish Cypriot community, with an economy already in
distress before the pandemic, saw a further significant deterioration of so cioeconomic
trends this year. I am concerned that, as a result, the economic gap between the two
sides will continue to widen, a situation that is likely to bolster illegal trafficking
through the buffer zone in both directions and, ultimately, add an addi tional
impediment to the peace process.
62. I am also concerned that the progressive lifting of restrictions both domestically
and at the crossing points did not translate into a significant increase in meaningful
interaction between the two communities, which remained largely estranged from
each other and focused almost solely on the internal issues of their respective sides.
With the passage of time and the risk that the communities drift ever further apart,
supporting people-to-people trust-building and fostering cooperation more broadly on
issues that affect the daily life of Cypriots are fundamental. I urge the leaders to
encourage more direct contact and cooperation between the two communities and to
provide concrete support to people-to-people initiatives, as called for by the Security
Council and as evidence of their genuine commitment to a solution.
63. The Security Council has also repeatedly called upon the leaders to refrain from
using rhetoric that might deepen the mistrust between the communitie s, insisting on
the importance of improving the public atmosphere and preparing the communities
for a settlement, while also highlighting the importance of peace education. Most of
those pillars of reconciliation, unfortunately, remain to be built.
64. Given the complex regional environment and its impact on Cyprus, I call upon
relevant actors in the region to exercise restraint and take constructive approaches to
resolving their disputes. It is important that all parties demonstrate their goodwill and
make greater efforts to create conditions conducive to a political settlement.
65. Despite the current challenges, I encourage the leaders and their representatives
to maintain dialogue and to engage with each other, including through the
continuation of the weekly trilateral discussions with my Special Representative/
21-19598

11/15

S/2021/1110

Deputy Special Adviser, as one of the platforms for achieving progress on confidence building measures and resolving outstanding problems on the ground that tend to raise
tensions. It is also critical that the leaders and their representatives provide the
technical committees with the political support that they require to sustain a
constructive dialogue and deliver tangible results. While more cooperation could and
should be pursued, I take note with satisfaction of the achievements during the current
reporting period, including with regard to 5G and on the continuous harmonization of
the conditions required to cross from one side to the other.
66. Notwithstanding repeated calls on my part and on the part of the Security
Council, efforts in Cyprus to achieve greater economic and social parity between the
two sides and to broaden and deepen economic, cultural and other forms of
cooperation remain limited. The full implementation of European Counc il regulation
(EC) No. 866/2004 would significantly help to increase the volume of trade and
should be pursued with renewed vigour. Increased cross-island trade, together with
deeper economic, social, cultural, sporting and other ties and contacts, would p romote
trust between the communities and help to address the concerns of the Turkish
Cypriots regarding isolation.
67. In their efforts to promote closer cooperation between the communities, local
and international actors continue to be confronted with challenges and obstacles
linked to the status of the north and concerns relating to “recognition”. While the
United Nations policy on Cyprus is maintained and decisions of the Security Council
on the matter are upheld, concerns about recognition should not in themselves
constitute an obstacle to increased cooperation.
68. I recognize and support the role of civil society, especially women and youth,
as an international best practice in the contexts of peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and view the inclusion and active participation of civil society actors in the broader
Cyprus peace process to be key to a lasting settlement and peace. I therefore wish to
highlight the important facilitation role of the two United Nations missions on the
ground in that regard and commit both missions to further pursuing such assistance
and engagement.
69. With regard to the request of the Security Council to see the establishment of a
mechanism for direct military contacts, I regret that no agreement has yet been
reached despite the submission by former Special Representative Spehar of a proposal
on 1 May 2020 and recurrent engagement on the matter. I remain convinced that such
a mechanism would allow the parties to effectively alleviate day -to-day tensions in
and around the buffer zone and appeal to them to continue to explore this proposal
with the Special Representative, in addition to other potentially significant military
confidence-building measures. Similarly, given the continuous deterioration of the
law and order situation in Pyla, I would encourage the parties to conclude their efforts
to find an effective means of addressing the matter at the earliest opportunity.
70. UNFICYP will continue to play its part in leading by example on gender parity
in peacekeeping and will maintain its efforts to support gender and peace activists to
take their rightful place in the peace initiative on the island. In that respect, I urge the
leaders to fully support the work of the Technical Committee on Gender Equality and
the critical role of civil society and to ensure a linkage between the two, in order to
pursue a sustainable and equitable solution to the Cyprus issue for all.
71. The situation of asylum seekers and refugees across the island, as well as the
issue of access to asylum procedures in accordance with international law, continued
to be a challenge during the reporting period and is of serious concern to the United
Nations. While appreciating the challenging regional context, as well as the high
volume of arrivals in Cyprus in relation to the size of the population, I must recall the
critical importance of full adherence to international legal norms in the handling of
12/15

21-19598

S/2021/1110

asylum seekers and refugees, wherever they may be found. I would also encourage
the continuation of regular interaction between experts on both sides to discuss the
issue of irregular migration in meetings facilitated by my mission of good offices and
attended by the UNHCR representative on the island, as initiated in May.
72. In the light of the continued contribution of UNFICYP to peace and stability
and to the creation of conditions conducive to a political settlement, I recommend that
the Security Council extend the mandate of the mission for six months, until 31 July
2022.
73. I would like to thank the partners, in particular the European Commission, that
have continued to provide support for the work of both United Nations missions in
Cyprus, the United Nations Development Programme and the Committee on Missing
Persons in Cyprus, and that have contributed to the imp lementation of various
confidence-building measures. I also thank the 36 countries that have contributed
troops, police or both to UNFICYP since 1964 and pay tribute to the 186 peacekeepers
who have lost their lives in the service of peace in Cyprus.
74. I would like to express my gratitude to Ms. Spehar for her leadership and
commitment to discharging the responsibilities entrusted to her as my Special
Representative in Cyprus, Head of UNFICYP and Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus
over the past five years and welcome the arrival in Cyprus of Colin Stewart, who took
up those duties on 6 December 2021. I also express my appreciation to all the women
and men serving in UNFICYP for their steadfast commitment to the implementation
of the mandate of the mission and the cause of peace on the island.

21-19598

13/15

S/2021/1110

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to the
United Nations operation in Cyprus (as at 15 December 2021)
Country

Number of military personnel

Argentina

249

Austria

3

Brazil

2

Canada

1

Chile

6

Ghana

1

Hungary

11

India

1

Norway

2

Pakistan

3

Paraguay

12

Russian Federation

4

Serbia

8

Slovakia

241

Ukraine

1

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

252

Total a

Country

797

Number of police personnel

Bosnia and Herzegovina

6

Bulgaria

2

China

4

Finland

5

Ireland

12

Italy

2

Jordan

4

Montenegro

1

Pakistan

1

Romania

4

Russian Federation

6

Serbia

2

Slovakia

7

Sweden

2

Ukraine

4

Total a
a

14/15

62

Of the military personnel, 722 are men and 75 are women. Of the police personnel, 39 are
men and 23 are women.

21-19598

S/2021/1110

21-19598

15/15
