S/PV.7031

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7031st meeting

Monday, 16 September 2013, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2013/516)

13-47482 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1347482*

S/PV.7031

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.

General National Congress decided separately to
suspend their participation as organized political
parties in the work of national political institutions.
Although partially reversed, those decisions were in
large part a reaction to widespread popular discontent
with political parties and, at the same, reflected an
accentuated polarization of public life.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2013/516)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tarek Mitri,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/516, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings by
Mr. Tarek Mitri and His Excellency Mr. Eugène-Richard
Gasana, Permanent Representative of Rwanda, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Mitri.
Mr. Mitri: The Security Council has received the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/516), which
provides information on the work of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) over the past six
months and offers a sober reading of the political and
security developments in Libya during that period. A
combination of internal and regional dynamics continues
to place a huge strain on the political processes taking
place in the country, which compounds further the
difficult tasks facing the Libyan authorities — both the
Government and the General National Congress — as
they strive to ensure that the country’s transition moves
peacefully forward.
During the past three months, we have seen more
pronounced political disagreements among the various
political forces. The main political blocs within the

2/6

16/09/2013

There is also a regional dimension to the significant
political changes in Libya. Recent developments,
particularly in Egypt and Tunisia, have had a palpable
effect on the political scene and greatly influenced the
behaviour of some political forces. Those events have
injected a sense of unease into the political system, as
different political actors reassessed their positions both
with regard to the major problems confronting Libya
and the region more generally.
The recent and severe disruption in the country’s
oil exports, following protests at a number of
terminals, mostly in the east, has grave consequences
for Libya’s economic stability. The disruption has
compelled Libya’s National Oil Company to take the
unprecedented measure of declaring a force majeure,
indicating its inability to meet contractual export
obligations. Conflicts related to oil terminal protection
and federalist demands in eastern Libya are at the core
of the protests.
In a country where oil revenues account for
approximately 80 per cent of Libya’s gross national
product and 97 per cent of exports, the Libyan
Government faces the dangerous prospect of not being
able to meet its financial obligations unless a resolution
to the crisis is reached immediately. We believe that the
resolution of that crisis, as well as of the many others
confronting Libya, through peaceful means is vital to
the country’s national interests and its ability to make
meaningful progress in its transition. In that context,
we also urge all parties to desist from the manipulation
of Libya’s resources for political ends.
With regard to the development of new legislation,
the adoption of a law on transitional justice remains
pending before the plenary of the General National
Congress. UNSMIL believes that the passage of such a
law is vital to helping Libya deal with many of its past
tragedies and crimes. It is equally essential in facilitating
the difficult process of national reconciliation.
The situation of many of the estimated 8,000
conflict-related detainees remains problematic. While
the Ministry of Justice has reported a reduction in

13-47482

16/09/2013

The situation in Libya

complaints, reports of deaths in custody, torture and
other forms of ill-treatment continue to be a source of
concern. However, UNSMIL has observed a marked
improvement in conditions and treatment of detainees
in centres that are effectively under the authority of the
Ministry of Justice and where there are experienced
and trained judicial police officers.
There have been new developments regarding the
trials of senior members of the Al-Qadhafi regime.
Further to the conviction and sentencing to death on
31 July of Ahmad Ibrahim Al-Qadhafi, former Minister
of Education and Information, the trials of some 250
defendants, including Saif al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, are
expected to commence soon.
In that regard, UNSMIL continues to underline
the need for a coherent approach to secure acceptable
standards in the prosecution of former regime officials
so as to avoid random charges and contribute to
establishing a historical record of the crimes committed
under the former regime. Ensuring fair trails for former
regime officials will test the Libyan judicial institutions
in the coming months. The prevailing security
situation in the country and the continuing attacks on
judges, lawyers and courthouses continue to present a
formidable challenge to the authorities.
In spite of the numerous difficulties and
uncertainties, I am pleased to report that the Libyan
constitution-making process has made some progress,
with the adoption by the General National Congress
of a law for the election of the Constitution Drafting
Assembly. UNSMIL had advocated for special measures
for better representation of women in the Constitution
Drafting Assembly. However, the adopted electoral law
provides for limited representation for women, granting
them six reserved seats in the 60-member Assembly,
which is lower than the 16 per cent allotted to them
in the July 2012 elections to the General National
Congress.
For their part, cultural and ethnic minorities were
granted six reserved seats. Some of their influential
organizations and personalities are quite assertive
in demanding that constitutional issues pertaining to
their cultural and linguistic rights be decided upon
by consensus rather than by a two-thirds majority
of the 60-member Assembly, as stipulated in the
Constitutional Declaration. The constitution-drafting
process presents an opportunity for the Libyan people
to forge a new social contract that will govern the

S/PV.7031

new Libya, therefore making it imperative that it be
transparent, consultative and inclusive.
The new Board of Commisionsers for the
permanent High National Election Commission was
recently selected. With the full support of the United
Nations electoral team in the various areas of its work,
the Commission is actively engaged in planning and
preparing the elections to the Constitution Drafting
Assembly.
The security problems in Libya are still, arguably,
the predominant concern for the Libyan people. Since
my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6981), there
have been armed clashes in Tripoli between rival
revolutionary brigades. Due to the limited State capacity
to secure the capital, the newly elected President of the
General National Congress, Mr. Nouri Abu-Sahmain,
assigned the task of protecting the city to the Libyan
Revolutionaries Operations Room, a coalition of
revolutionary brigades.
Tensions among various political, tribal and armed
groups have also escalated into confrontations in
various parts of the country, resulting in several deaths.
Assassinations of security figures, mostly in the east,
and more recently of political activists and journalists,
improvised explosive devices, attacks against members
of the diplomatic community, threats against the United
Nations and general criminality continue in the face
of weak State security institutions. Border security is
increasingly a critical issue that the authorities have yet
to address effectively.
Progress in integrating revolutionary fighters into
the police and the Libyan army remains very limited,
as is their reintegration into civilian life. In an attempt
to encourage revolutionaries to enlist in the army and
to improve the salary scale for current uniformed
personnel, the Government recently announced an
increase in salaries for the military, effective from
January 2014. The Government has also announced that
it is moving forward with the training of between 12,000
and 15,000 soldiers outside of Libya. Restructuring the
army and addressing the inflated ranks of the officer
corps are urgent priorities. The Libyan police continue
to integrate individuals from the armed brigades. Some
are already enlisted and many more are in the vetting
and enrolment process.
The Government’s preoccupation with the
deteriorating security situation and the increasing
divisions among political groups and revolutionary

13-474823/6

S/PV.7031

The situation in Libya

brigades have all inhibited the development of a solid,
coordinated and effective national security system.
When I last briefed the Council in June, I alluded to
the enormous difficulties confronted in the aftermath
of four decades of despotic rule. Next month marks the
two-year anniversary since the fall of the authoritarian
Al-Qadhafi regime. It is more evident today that
preconceived ideas about political transition are likely
to be a recipe for disappointment, if not failure. Free and
fair elections may have augured a democratic process,
but they raised greater expectations than the political
institutions and forces have been capable of meeting.
Today, there is a sense of scepticism, and perhaps
of rejection, with which the Libyan people view the
political process. But this should not be mistaken for
a loss of faith in national unity, democracy and the
rule of law. Their commitment to the principles for
which they fought their revolution remains deep. The
Libyan experience has demonstrated the urgent need
for an inclusive dialogue and consensus-building on
national priorities during the transition period, as well
as regarding guiding principles, norms of governance
and basic rules of political action.
In response to the increasing demand across the
political spectrum for a national dialogue that can
address the country’s faltering transition, the Libyan
authorities agreed on preparing and convening this
dialogue. A national dialogue would provide a platform
for engaging political, revolutionary, traditional and
other actors in discussing urgent national issues
and seeking consensus on strategies, as well as
basic principles, that ought to govern political life
in the transitional period until the adoption of a new
constitution and the holding of new elections.
In my meetings with the leadership of the General
National Congress and the Government, I noted a shared
belief that a national dialogue process would allow for
the Libyan national interest to prevail over factional,
regional and short-term interests. In the light of the
growing disillusionment with the political process,
such a dialogue would give voice to many Libyans and
open a space that does not exclude any of those who
may have contributions to make to public life and who
are otherwise isolated, separated or entrenched in their
partisan attitudes. It would also promote a national
capacity to address urgent priorities and ensure public
support for State-building efforts, particularly in the
security and justice sectors.

4/6

16/09/2013

There has been an increasing number of calls for
the United Nations to play an active role in initiating
and facilitating national dialogue. We will not shy away
from shouldering our responsibility but will continue
to insist that the process should be Libyan-convened
and Libyan-led. I have assured the Libyan authorities
time and again, as well as many political leaders and
opinion-makers, of our readiness and commitment
to giving advice and technical support to dialogue
endeavours, whatever form they may take. It is our
hope that those efforts will come to fruition in the near
future.
The President: I thank Mr. Mitri for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Gasana.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established pursuant
to the same resolution. The report covers the period
from 19 June to 16 September 2013, during which time
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations.
On 2 July, the Committee received the interim
report of the Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution
2095 (2013). I will briefly recapitulate parts of the
executive summary of that document.
Concerning the arms embargo, the Panel concluded
that the Libyan authorities had taken concrete steps in
the security assistance area to implement resolution
2095 (2013), such as the establishment of a focal point
structure for security assistance, which had already
produced the first few end-user certificates. Despite
those efforts, the Panel cautioned that more still needed
to be done in that regard.
The Panel expressed its concern about the
proliferation of arms and ammunition across all of
Libya’s borders and noted an increasing number of
reported cases of trafficking of arms and ammunition
from Libya to the Syrian Arab Republic by sea and
air. Concerning arms proliferation within Libya, the
Panel reported that the increasing demand for personal
and small arms had boosted imports of materiel into
the civilian black market in Libya. In that context, the
Panel reported on several seizures that were made by
third countries.
Concerning the travel ban, the Panel stated that of
the 20 individuals originally falling under the travel

13-47482

16/09/2013

The situation in Libya

ban, five were deceased, four were currently being
detained in Libya, four were living in other countries
and the whereabouts of seven individuals remained
unknown. The Panel further reported that both the
Sultanate of Oman and the Government of Algeria
had indicated that Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mohammed
Al-Qadhafi had left Algeria and were present in Oman.
With regard to the assets freeze, the Panel reported
that it had obtained access in part to further revealing
details of the efforts made by Saadi Al-Qadhafi and his
associates to hide, move and use assets that should have
been frozen, and that it was investigating reports of very
large quantities of assets believed to belong to listed
entities and/or individuals. The Panel underscored the
inadequacies of some Member States in their legislative
capacity to properly and effectively implement the
assets freeze measure, which at least in one instance
had resulted in the dissipation of almost $2 million in
funds that should have been frozen.
The Committee discussed the report and
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in informal
consultations on 10 July. The report was generally
well received, and the main points that emerged in
the discussion were the following: concern with the
reported violations and with the destabilizing effect of
arms proliferation outside of Libya, in particular to the
Syrian Arab Republic; welcoming the establishment
by the Libyan authorities of certain procedures aimed
at improving the situation, while acknowledging that
more needed to be done; acknowledgement of the
movement of two listed individuals from Algeria to the
Sultanate of Oman; challenges faced by Member States
regarding the implementation of the assets freeze and
the possibility of repatriating frozen funds; welcoming
the good relationship between the Panel and the Libyan
Government; ways in which the Panel could be assisted
with its requests for visits and for information; and how
to carry forward the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts.
Of the eight recommendations, the Committee
agreed to take follow-up action on four. One
recommendation required no action and the Committee
simply took note of it, while the three remaining
recommendations were addressed to the Security
Council. As a follow-up to the meeting, the Panel
was requested to thoroughly investigate information
provided by media reports on several large shipments
of arms from Libya that took place this year.

S/PV.7031

The agreed action on the four recommendations
of the Panel consisted of the following. After having
received on 18 July further information from the
Permanent Mission of Libya on the focal point structure
for security assistance, on 7 August the Committee
wrote a letter to the Permanent Representative of
Libya requesting further clarification and followup of outstanding issues, which was responded to on
4 September by the Permanent Mission of Libya. On
29 July and 4 September, the Committee updated the
entries concerning Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mohammed
Al-Qadhafi in its list of individuals and entities subject
to the travel ban and/or assets freeze. On 13 September,
the Committee dispatched follow-up letters to six
Member States concerning outstanding requests for
visits by the Panel.
On 24 July, the Committee shared with the Libyan
Government an unofficial and informal table that
summarized the exemption requests and notifications
relating to the arms embargo measures that were
imposed by resolution 1970 (2011) and modified by
resolutions 2009 (2011) and 2095 (2013) and processed
through the Committee, from its inception until 10 July
2013.
On 27 August, the Committee updated its second
implementation assistance notice on the arms embargo,
reflecting modifications introduced by resolution 2095
(2013).
Also during the reporting period, the Committee
concluded its agreement with INTERPOL on
INTERPOL-Security Council special notices and
reviewed a request for delisting from the travel ban by
Aisha Al-Qadhafi.
Lastly, I would like to mention some updated
statistics on issues that the Committee has dealt with
since the last periodic report to the Council. In relation
to the arms embargo, the Committee approved two
exemption requests and received five notifications, on
which no negative decision was taken. The Committee
also responded to three requests for guidance from
Member States.
The President: I thank Ambassador Gasana for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to address
the Security Council. Allow me first to congratulate

13-474825/6

S/PV.7031

The situation in Libya

you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. I am confident that you will
lead its deliberations to a successful conclusion.
Before addressing the substance of the issue under
consideration, I would like to draw the attention of the
Council to the need for procedures in the Secretariat
that enable representatives of Member States under
discussion in the Security Council to participate more
easily in its deliberations. We know that in some cases,
for one reason or another, a request for participation
may reach the President of the Security Council or the
Secretariat late, because of a shortcoming in one area
or another. However, we have always had a structure in
the Secretariat that allows for an immediate invitation
to participate. Regrettably, this morning, that only
happened long after the meeting had begun.
I would like to thank Mr. Tarek Mitri for his
important and accurate briefing and for all the
information he has provided on the situation in Libya.
I should like to thank my dear friend and colleague
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), for his briefing on the
implementation of sanctions against Libya.
As the Council knows, Libya is in a period of
transition. This is a complicated and sensitive time,
in particular given a bloody conflict that lasted many
months and ended in the fall of a dictatorship. The
country was left with no institutions to speak of.
What is at issue now is the creation of a new authority,
new institutions and, indeed, new leadership for the

6/6

16/09/2013

country. The Government and the General National
Congress are facing difficulties in this thorny period,
where many different elements are converging. On
the one hand, there is delight at the overthrow of the
dictatorship and the re-establishment of democracy,
with high expectations from the populace. On the other
hand, there is the Government’s limited ability to rule,
a lack of institutions and an absence of deterrent force
for the Government to be able to extend its control over
the entire territory.
The Libyan authorities need the support of the
Council. We need the support of every single State
Member of the United Nations at this point. Libya is
moving towards building effective, capable institutions
that will rebuild the State, begin to revitalize the
economy, reintegrate former combatants, ensure respect
for the rule of law and achieve national reconciliation.
There are many objectives to achieved, and they require
strong leadership, strong institutions and a robust
capacity for deterrent force. Of course, the Government
has begun to set up the national army. The Government
is seeking to reform, re-establish and re-arm the police
force. That requires that the Security Council provide
all possible assistance. The Council stood shoulder to
shoulder with the Libyan people during its revolution
and in recent times, and I am sure that it will continue
to stand by us now.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.

13-47482
