S/PV.8566

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8566th meeting

Thursday, 27 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Moriko
Ms. Batista Díaz
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Special report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on the strategic assessment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2019/445)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-19598 (E)
*1919598*

S/PV.8566

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Special report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
on the strategic assessment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2019/445)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/525, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/445, which contains the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on
the strategic assessment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

27/06/2019

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all Council colleagues for their engagement on
resolution 2479 (2019) and for coming together in this
constructive way, and I am very pleased today to see
the resolution adopted unanimously. I particularly want
to thank our good friends from Germany, with whom
we have worked so closely on this resolution as our
co-penholders.
With the adoption of this resolution, the Security
Council has made the responsible decision to pause the
withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). This was the right
decision and aligned with the decision of the African
Union Peace and Security Council on UNAMID.
Moreover, it recognizes that Darfur is affected by wider
instability in the Sudan and that there is a need for the
continued protection of civilians in Darfur.
In requesting options for a follow-on mechanism
to UNAMID, we have demonstrated to the people of
Darfur that we will remain committed to supporting
efforts to achieve the sustainable peace and stability
they rightly deserve, even after UNAMID’s eventual
departure, and that should include tackling the root
causes of the conflict.
The current situation in Darfur and, indeed, across
the Sudan is deeply concerning, as are the recent
attacks on United Nations property and assets. We call
for an immediate end to all violence, and we urge the
Sudanese authorities to fulfil their obligation to protect
United Nations and other international staff operating
within the Sudan.
In order to resume the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding, we must see progress, and in
particular the Rapid Support Forces must withdraw
from all former UNAMID team sites so that they can be
used for civilian purposes, as the Transitional Military
Council has committed to.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft resolution
received 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has
been adopted unanimously as resolution 2479 (2019).

All of this should take place alongside a transition
to a legitimate civilian-led Government, a Government
that is accepted by the people of the Sudan and therefore
the wider international community. The African Union
and the United Nations need a legitimate partner with
which they can engage on the modalities of UNAMID’s
withdrawal and the broader transition to peacebuilding
in Darfur.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

If these conditions are not met, and if there is no
improvement in the situation in Darfur, we will find

2/8

19-19598

27/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

ourselves in the same predicament at the end of October
as we are now, unable to continue with a responsible
and sustainable transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur.
The United Kingdom, along with a number of other
countries, would have liked a longer extension at this
point to provide greater space for the talks going on in
Khartoum and to align ourselves more clearly with the
position of the African Union. I would just signal at
this point that if we find ourselves here again in four
months’ time with the same sorts of conditions, then we
may well need a further extension.
Let me conclude by echoing a call I have made
on previous occasions, and that is to talk about the
choice that I believe faces the Sudan. That is a choice
around ending all violence, a choice around a transfer
to a civilian-led authority, a choice that enables the
international community to come in and really support
the Sudan as it deals with a legacy of economic
mismanagement over several decades and provide some
of the economic and long-term support required for the
Sudan to be able to retake its place in the community
of nations, as it truly deserves. The opposite choice,
I fear, will lead to greater division, greater instability
and greater problems for the Council.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to start by
returning the expression of gratitude to the United
Kingdom in agreeing to co-penholdership on this
and to work together on resolution 2479 (2019), and I
would like to thank all delegations for their cooperation
during the negotiations and for their support for the
resolution submitted today. The fact that we adopted
this resolution on the peacekeeping operation in Darfur
unanimously demonstrates that the Council is living
up to its responsibility. We have to use the following
image: we have turned off our autopilot and are not
sleepwalking into a drawdown and eventual exit from
peacekeeping, oblivious to the changing situation in
Khartoum; instead, we have pressed “pause”.
With this approach, the Council is taking into
consideration the recent developments in the Sudan,
in Khartoum, which, of course, have repercussions
on Darfur. The pause in the drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) that was decided today allows time for
the Sudanese actors to come together to agree on a
transition that has been and is demanded by the people

S/PV. 8566

of the Sudan, the African Union (AU) and many
international actors, including Germany.
A civilian-led transitional Government is of
paramount importance to peace and stability in the
Sudan, the sooner the better. A civilian-led Government
will be needed, from our perspective also, to normalize
relations with the African Union. Again, that is very
relevant to UNAMID, which, as members know, is
the only, and a very successful, joint peacekeeping
operation of the United Nations and the African Union.
Germany is committed to that partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union and the
close cooperation with our African partners here in
the Council.
The pause in the drawdown of UNAMID does not
imply that there should also be a pause in the mission
fulfilling its mandate. On the contrary, the mission
is mandated to continue its operations, including
with regard to protecting civilians in Darfur. We also
expect concrete actions by the Sudanese authorities,
as the cooperation of the host Government is key in
any peacekeeping setting, in particular with a view
to a potential exit. Rescinding decree 102, which
stipulated the handover of UNAMID team sites to the
Rapid Support Forces, is a necessary step. It is really
important that there now be concrete changes on the
ground that allow the Darfuri people to have trust in
their authorities and to enjoy security, protection and
the rule of law.
The United Nations camps that have been handed
over to the Sudanese authorities and are currently
occupied by the Rapid Support Forces must be placed
under civilian control in a responsible manner. That
is consistent with the relevant agreements. To be very
clear, for Germany, it would be inconceivable that the
forces that triggered the international peacekeeping
efforts in the first place should benefit from AU and
United Nations assets once the mission leaves because
we all know that the Rapid Support Forces is a followup operation of the infamous Janjaweed.
Looking ahead, we need a reliable and realistic
road map that ensures that all UNAMID camps will
be handed over to civilian users permanently and that
civilians are protected once UNAMID leaves. That is
a responsibility of the Sudanese Government. Today
the Security Council paused the drawdown but we
also sent a clear signal that we are looking beyond the
lifespan of UNAMID. By requesting the development

19-195983/8

S/PV.8566

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of a political strategy for engagement in Darfur and
options for a follow-on mechanism once UNAMID
leaves, we recognize that sustainable peace in Darfur
requires continued international engagement and
support — support for mediation, for capacity-building
in the areas of the rule of law and human rights, for
finding durable solutions for the internally displaced
people and for creating socioeconomic development
perspectives. Therefore, once the situation on the
ground allows for that, the focus should shift from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Germany remains committed to accompanying
UNAMID in the current phase, including through
individual police officers and staff officers. We
remain committed to supporting a peace process with
the Darfuri rebel groups, as well as peacebuilding in
Darfur. We look forward to continuing to work with
all members of the Security Council to ensure that we
contribute to peace and security in the Sudan through a
responsible approach with regard to UNAMID.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2479
(2019), which provides for the technical renewal of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for four months. I
would like to warmly thank the United Kingdom and
Germany for having put forward the resolution.
France has always supported a responsible and
prudent withdrawal of UNAMID, depending on the
situation on the ground. To decide on the closure of
the mission, we need a legitimate Government that is
fully recognized by the international community. The
current political uncertainty in the Sudan fully justifies
the temporary suspension of the mission’s withdrawal.
I would like to recall that we strongly condemn
the violence that has occurred in Khartoum and other
cities in recent weeks and call for the perpetrators to be
brought to justice. We call on all stakeholders to exercise
restraint. The challenge today is to resume political
dialogue in order to achieve a negotiated and agreed
transition, spearheaded by a civilian-led Government.

27/06/2019

the international community to do its utmost to prevent
the region, which remains very fragile, from flaring up
again. UNAMID therefore retains an important role.
It is essential that the mission’s assets be temporarily
maintained in order to ensure the protection of civilians
and the reporting of human rights violations and to
facilitate the settlement of intercommunal conflicts, as
well as to provide humanitarian access and allow for
the protection of humanitarian personnel.
Ms. Batista Díaz (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): The Dominican Republic voted in favour
of resolution 2479 (2019) in the understanding that,
in fulfilling its mandate, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
the responsibility to protect the civilian population
because, despite the moderate impact of the events in
Khartoum, in Darfur there continue to be reports of
human rights violations, mainly against children and
women, unresolved intercommunal conflicts, internal
displacements and restrictions on humanitarian access.
Given that situation, the renewal of the mandate until
October makes it possible for UNAMID to continue
fulfilling its responsibility.
The Sudan is in the midst of a political crisis. We
must act with caution and prepare for the possibility of
increased violence. One example is the promulgation
of decree 102, which orders the handover of team sites
to the Rapid Support Forces and the looting of the El
Geneina facilities. Those facilities should be handed
over to civilians. In that regard, we welcome the decision
by the United Nations to suspend the transfer of the
facilities and to pause the reconfiguration process.
Twelve years after the deployment of UNAMID,
we cannot allow the mission to fail. It is crucial for
UNAMID to have a mandate commensurate with the
situation that can be adapted to potential changes. The
time frame allows us, albeit minimally, to rethink the
exit strategy and focus on maintaining the mission’s
capacities to protect civilians and monitor human
rights abuses.

In that regard, France welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the African Union, supported in
particular by the Ethiopian mediation, and calls on the
United Nations to fully support those initiatives.

The recent events in Khartoum open up a series
of opportunities for an open, civilian-led political
negotiation that is inclusive of women and young
people, facilitates, above all, an accountability process,
brings to justice those responsible for acts of violence
and enables an independent investigation.

Finally, we are very concerned about the increase
in tensions and acts of violence in Darfur, and call on

My delegation would like to reiterate that the
challenges facing the Sudan must be resolved through

4/8

19-19598

27/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

open dialogue in the interests of the well-being of the
Sudanese people.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States thanks Council members for their endeavours to
ensure that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is well positioned
to continue its mission to protect civilians, support
humanitarian aid to 1.2 million internally displaced
persons and assist in the creation of an inclusive
political process in Darfur.
Ongoing armed clashes in the Jebel Marra region
between the Sudan Liberation Movement/Abdul Wahid
al-Nur rebel group and the Sudanese Armed Forces,
intercommunal violence in other parts of Darfur and the
recent attack on civilians in Deleij on 9 June serve as
reminders of the ongoing security challenges that plague
the region. For that reason, we believe that UNAMID
should continue to implement its full mandate.
As security in Khartoum is intrinsically tied to
security in Darfur, the four-month technical rollover
will allow more time for the Rapid Support Forces (RSF)
to remove themselves from team sites, to ensure that
the transfer of future UNAMID headquarters and team
sites are for community use and to remain responsive to
events on the ground. For now, we support the United
Nations decision not to handover facilities or sites to
the RSF and to safeguard the sites for civilian purposes.
The next four months should provide further
clarity on the national political situation. We expect
the Transitional Military Council to transition to a
civilian-led Government that is able to make progress
towards creating the conditions for UNAMID’s
planned exit. However, if negotiations stall or security
conditions continue to deteriorate, we will look more
closely at the planned UNAMID drawdown. We urge
all stakeholders to make significant progress on putting
in place a civilian-led transitional Government in the
coming months.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes
the adoption today of resolution 2479 (2019), which
provides the basis for a technical rollover of the mandate
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) for another four months. We
thank the co-penholders, the United Kingdom and
Germany, as well as other delegations, for their active
contributions and flexibility, which enabled the Council
to reach a consensus and once again prove its unity.

S/PV. 8566

Indonesia has consistently advocated for a
responsible and carefully calculated drawdown and
exit for UNAMID. The incident in El Geneina when
the UNAMID site was looted should not happen again.
The drawdown must be conducted in a way that does
not create a security vacuum, with full regard for the
humanitarian impact and the safety of the civilian
population. The mission must be guided by a careful
and honest assessment of the situation on the ground.
Positive trends must be duly recognized and challenges
addressed. We trust that the upcoming special report
of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission will serve its purpose of
providing recommendations on appropriate courses of
action regarding the drawdown of UNAMID. Indonesia
also welcomes the affirmation of the Council’s strong
commitment to the sovereignty of the Sudan in
the resolution.
Indonesia has been at the forefront of support
for the promotion of peace and stability in Darfur.
My delegation was a member of the Council when it
authorized UNAMID’s establishment in 2007. We have
been a proud contributor of peacekeepers to UNAMID,
both military and police, since 2008. Indeed, at one
point Indonesia was one of its largest contributors.
There is no doubt that much has been achieved through
the work of UNAMID in Darfur, including an improved
security situation. Indonesia certainly does not want to
see Darfur to slide back into conflict, and we hope that
our Blue Helmets will not have to return there. We hope
that the resolution we have just adopted will contribute
to the promotion of lasting peace and stability in Darfur.
In closing, we would once again like to pay
tribute to the Blue Helmets who have put their lives in
harm’s way in theatres of conflict all over the world,
including Darfur.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and
my own country, South Africa.
We would like to thank Council members for
agreeing that now is not the time to continue the
drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The Council’s unity
in taking this decision sends a message about the
importance of recognizing the current uncertainty
prevailing on the political and security fronts. Though
the African members of the Council would have

19-195985/8

S/PV.8566

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

preferred a six-month technical rollover to ensure
adequate time to comprehensively evaluate the situation
in Darfur, we nonetheless agree with the four-month
period provided for in resolution 2479 (2019). That will
enable both the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations to make a thorough joint assessment and,
hopefully, the mediation initiative to consolidate that
process in the Sudan. The technical rollover supports
and complements the decision of the African Union
to postpone the drawdown. The decision taken today
is an example of the important cooperation between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council in dealing with matters of peace and security
on our continent.
We trust that the leadership in the Sudan will
effectively utilize the time that has been provided
to address the political impasse, usher in stability
and fulfil the aspirations of the Sudanese people.
Moreover, the time allowed should ensure that all
UNAMID team sites are cleared for civilian purposes,
as originally intended.
Peace and stability in the Sudan are critical for the
region and for the continent as a whole, particularly
with regard to fulfilling the aspirations of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063 and silencing the guns by 2020.
The Sudan has played an important role in finding peace
and security in Africa in the past and it should play that
role again. The African members of the Council hope that
the planned joint visit to Khartoum by Prime Minister
Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chair of the AU Commission, and Mr. Smaїl Chergui,
the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security, will soon
assist the Sudanese stakeholders in finding harmony on
a common transitional arrangement. We also hope that
they can agree on a local road map for peace in order to
give certainty and assurance to all the Sudanese people,
including in Darfur, so that their motherland will soon
enjoy peace, stability and prosperity.
Lastly, we thank the United Kingdom and Germany,
the co-penholders, for their leadership and transparency
during the negotiations.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Poland welcomes the
Council’s adoption today of resolution 2479 (2019),
extending the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
until October. We would like to thank the United
Kingdom and Germany for their efficient conduct of
the negotiations on the document.
6/8

27/06/2019

Poland supported the resolution because we believe
that given the current situation in the Sudan, we need
a pause in the process of the Mission’s drawdown. We
remain supportive of the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding in Darfur. Unfortunately, today
the Council is not in a position to make any longterm decisions. We need more time to make sure that
our action will not have a negative impact on the
mission’s efforts and gains made so far in Darfur. On
top of that, the African Union has urged us to halt the
reconfiguration process until after the joint strategic
assessment. Poland strongly supports the role of
Africa’s regional and subregional bodies in resolving
disputes and conflict on the continent, and we therefore
took due account of the African Union’s position during
the negotiations.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supported the
adoption today of resolution 2479 (2019), extending
the mandate of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for four
months. We understand the position of the African
Union, which expressed the importance of conducting
a comprehensive analysis of the emerging situation and
developing the most appropriate concept for UNAMID’s
responsible withdrawal. We also noted the Secretariat’s
assurances that the June 2020 deadline for the mission’s
drawdown agreed on by the Security Council would be
fully respected.
We once again call for refraining from insistent
attempts to link the state of affairs in Darfur to the
situation evolving in the greater Sudan. We cannot help
thinking that if the work with the unreconciled Sudanese
opposition had been done with the same fervour — and
we all know perfectly well where those people prefer to
live — peace would have come to Darfur much sooner.
However, even now the situation emerging in this region
of the Sudan shows that it is essential to reconfigure
the peacekeeping support into peacebuilding support,
for which all the necessary conditions are already in
place. The representatives of the United Nations and
the African Union reached the same conclusion in their
latest strategic assessment (S/2019/445).
We welcome the decision of the Transitional
Military Council to annul decree 102, which some of
our colleagues and the leadership of the Secretariat
termed one of the main obstacles on the path to handing
over the peacekeeping sites to the Sudanese. As we see
19-19598

27/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

it, the Sudanese authorities are keeping their promise
and are interested in mutually respectful cooperation.
To sum up, we expect to see specific proposals for
implementing the Security Council’s decision to draw
down UNAMID in September’s joint special report. We
want to emphasize that we are opposed to attempts of
any kind to change the plan for the Mission’s drawdown.
The time has come to focus on recovery and economic
development in Darfur. That should now be the priority
of the international community.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Security Council has just unanimously adopted
resolution 2479 (2019), granting a four-month technical
rollover of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
providing for an assessment of the situation in Darfur.
We welcome the resolution.
In recent years, the situation in Darfur has remained
stable, thanks to UNAMID’s active and effective
mandate implementation and the good offices of the
African Union and other regional organizations. The
Government of the Sudan has made active efforts to
maintain peace and stability in Darfur and has played
a vital role. It is our belief that the Security Council
and the international community should continue to
fully respect the Government’s leadership in the Darfur
issue, strengthen communication and coordination
with the Sudanese Government and listen attentively
to its views and suggestions so as to ensure the steady
implementation of UNAMID’s transition plan and
the gradual transfer of security responsibilities to
Government security forces.
China has been a consistent supporter of the
peace process in Darfur. It is one of the major troopcontributing countries to UNAMID. Over the years,
China has made robust efforts to keep Darfur peaceful
and stable and build UNAMID. Together with the rest
of the international community, China stands ready
to continue to play a constructive role in achieving
sustained peace, stability and development in Darfur.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.
At the outset, we thank the penholders, Germany
and the United Kingdom, for preparing the resolution
2479 (2019), which the Council has just adopted. For its
part, Kuwait voted in favour of the resolution, granting

S/PV. 8566

a four-month extension of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), because we believe that the mission has an
important role to play.
We supported the technical extension for a number
of reasons. Kuwait supports UNAMID’s exit strategy,
which will continue based on the technical extension
contained in today’s resolution, in particular its
paragraph 2. We have been committed to the decisions
of the consecutive Summits of the League of Arab
States since 2016, seeking to promote the Sudan’s
vision for UNAMID’s exit strategy. In addition, Kuwait
believes that the Sudan, a brotherly Arab State, is
capable of shouldering its primary responsibility to
protect its citizens.
We are eager to discuss several issues over the
next four months, including the identification of
choices pertaining to the Mission’s exit strategy and
the adaptation of its mandate to ensure a smooth and
gradual withdrawal in support of the efforts made
by the United Nations country team in the Sudan.
Furthermore, the period given by the extension to
assess the situation in Darfur will enable us to make
ensure continued improvements there, as we have seen
this year and in previous years, and as confirmed by
the reports of the Secretary-General and the periodic
reports issued by the Secretariat.
We support the Sudan and its partners, both inside
and outside the Council, in their efforts to build lasting
peace in Darfur, create the conditions necessary for the
safe, dignified and voluntary return and stability of the
displaced, and strengthen the capacity of the Sudan to
assume its primary responsibility to protect its citizens.
We reaffirm the primacy of a political solution and
we look forward to the concerted efforts of all partners
to reach that goal, based on Council resolutions and
in cooperation with organizations seeking to achieve
security and development in Darfur and of which the
Sudan is a member, such as the United Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States. That
should be attained within the framework of respect for
the sovereignty of the Sudan and non-interference in its
domestic affairs.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.

19-195987/8

S/PV.8566

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

27/06/2019

Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As this is
the first time I am addressing the Council, I would
like to assure members of our willingness to seriously
and fully cooperate and coordinate with the Security
Council with regard to issues related to the situation in
the Sudan that are under consideration by the Council.
I would also like to thank all States that supported the
position of the Sudan during the negotiations that led
to the adoption of resolution 2479 (2019) earlier today.

effects of the conflict. We therefore see no justifiable
reason for maintaining peacekeeping forces in Darfur.
In fact, their presence would impede and delay the
transition. We hope that the Council will take that into
consideration when renewing the mission’s mandate
in October. It is important that the Council change
the way it deals with the situation in Darfur because
peacekeeping is no longer useful now that the armed
conflict has ended.

In the past, we have assured the Council that the
situation in Darfur was constantly improving, as
confirmed by all the reports submitted to the Council
during the past period. We had hoped that the two
penholders would have taken those reports into account
in the resolution, in particular the report on the strategic
review of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2019/445), which
includes recommendations for a gradual withdrawal of
the mission from Darfur, based on the options available.
However, the penholders had a different opinion on
the issue.

The hybrid mission, which depends on peacekeepers
from African States, shows that the African continent
is capable of successfully addressing its own issues.
UNAMID has contributed considerably during the last
period to achieving peace and maintaining security
throughout Darfur. The Sudanese people are very
grateful for and appreciative of the sacrifices and efforts
made by peacekeepers. Furthermore, I would like to
assure the Council, and in particular my three brothers
the representatives of the African States members of
the Council, of the determination of the Government
of the Sudan to make UNAMID’s mandate and goals a
success. That would ensure that the mission, which was
deployed 13 years ago, is the first successful model of
African solutions for African problems.

Let me assure the Council that the Sudan is
determined to restore normal life in Darfur, begin
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and achieve the development necessary to address the

8/8

The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

19-19598
