‘I i: ‘.J

rd
MEETING:

NEW

/ ;,
:

,,/
_: .:

;

I’
’

’ /

I i

% i

. . ‘.~i%,

30 DECEMBER 197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1623) . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
<a) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/10396);
(b) Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/ 10229 and Add. 1 and 2);
(c)
Interim report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/10408) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

slpV.1623

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-THIRD

Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr. 1. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

30 December

(Sierra Leone),

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1623)

Adoption

2.

Question
concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10396);
Fourth report of the Committee established in
pursuance
of Security Council
resolution
253 (1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2);
lnterim
report of the Committee established in
pursuance
of Security Council
resolution
253

1971, at 3.00 p.m.

2. I have received letters from the representatives of
Uganda [S/l 04781, Nigeria f S/l 04821, Algeria [S/l 04831
and India [S/10484] requesting that they also be invited to
participate in the current discussion on the question before
the Council. In accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure, and with the consent of the Council, I propose
to invite the representatives of Uganda, Nigeria, Algeria and
India to participate in the discussion of this item without
the right to vote.

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua,
Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

1.

MEETING

3. In accordance with the usual practice of the Council,
and in view of the limited number of seats available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Saudi Arabia,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya, Zambia, Ghana,
Uganda, Nigeria, Algeria and India to take the places
reserved for them in the Council chamber, it being
understood that they will be invited to sit at the Council
table when it is their turn to address the Council,

of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. M. Baroody
[Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. A. Salim (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. K. S. 3. Nyirenda (Zambia), Mr. G. S,
Ibingira (Uganda), Mr. E. 0. Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. A. Ruhal
(Algeria) and Mr. S. Sen (India) took the placesreservedfor
them in the Council chamber.

(1968) (S/10408).

4. Mr. KU$AGA (Poland): Almost two years ago when
my delegation took its seat in this Council, the first item it
had to deal with was the question of Namibia. Today, as
our term comes to a close, the Council is deliberating on
2%e agenda wasadopted,
the question of Rhodesia. Nothing could point up more
vividly how deeply the problems of decolonization in
Question concerning the situation in Socthern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Africa and of ensuring African rights to liberty in equality,
dignity and justice, have permeated our debates and our
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
accomplishments. It
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed resolutions, if not-unfortunately-our
to the President of the Security Council (S/10396);
has become equally clear to my delegation in this span of
Fourth report of the Committee establishedin purtime how imperialism and colonialism have passed from a
suance of Security Council resolution 2.53(1968)
position of passive resistance towards the norms, the
(S/10229 and Add.1 and 2);”
principles and the resolutions of the United Nations,
Int&im
report of the Committee establishedin purthrough sabotage of their content, and into an open
suance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
reneging of all those norms, principles and resolutions. In
(S/10408)
practical terms, it amounts to strengthening colonialism in
some parts of Africa, to attempts at colonial reconquest in
The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
other parts of Africa; and I base this conclusion on direct
taken
previously by the Council (1602nd, 1603rd and
experience from my participation in two Special Missions
1604th
meetings], I invite the representatives of Saudi
of the Security Council.
Arabia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Kenya, Zambia
and Ghana to participate in the discussion of this item
5. If ever a case could prove the point I have made it is
without
the right to vote.
that of Southern Rhodesia. This case is perhaps a unique
one in the field of decolonization inasmuch as not only has
* Subsequently
issued ZISOfficial Records of the Security Council,
the right of the people of Zimbabwe to self-determination
Twenty-sixth
Year, Special Supplement No. 2 and Corrigendum and
and independence in accordance with resolution 15 14 (XV)
Special Supplement No. 2A.
Adoption of the agenda

1

been unequivocally affirmed by the United Nations and the
Security Council, but also decisions of a coercive character,
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
have been taken in order to bring about the overthrow of a
racist rdgime that has been defying the fulfilment of this
inalienable right. We have only to compare United Nations
principles, decisions and courses of action with the position
of the United Kingdom to see that what we have been
facing since the so-called uniIateraI declaration of independence, and before, and what we are facing now, is a
consistent and purposeful policy of the administering
Power, contrary to the demands of the United Nations and
contrary to the interests and aspirations of the Zimbabwe
people.

locuteurs valables.A confirmation of that position can be

seen in the reply of the United Kingdom Government to
the decision of the Security Council [1604th meetingj to
invite Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole, two representative leaders of their people, to appear before the Security Council,
For the British Government, the condemned rebel regime
not only has been an interlocuteur valable-whether on
board H.M.S. Tiger or H.M.S. Fearlessor in Salisbury-but
has been the only interlocuteur valable.The abyss between
such an attitude and that of the United Nations could not
be deeper, and the so-called test of acceptability proposed
by the United Kingdom has already been put to the test by
the United Nations and has been found unacceptabld.
10. It has always been the United Nations policy that the
independence of Rhodesia could be based only on the
principles of majority rule and one man, one vote. To these
principles we have a reply which consists of acrobatic
electoral arithmetic. This point has been sufficiently explained by representatives around this table, including
Ambassador Farah in his statement yesterday, and I need
not return to it.

6. Let us first take the right to self-determination and to
independence of the Zimbabwe people. It is contained in
the Charter of the United Nations; it has been developed in
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples; it has been reaffirmed by
the Security Council in its resolutions, including the latest
one on the subject, resolution 288 (1970) of November
1970. The approach of the administering Power-which, as
was pointed out again yesterday [I622&
meeting/, itself
voted for the above-mentioned Security Council resolution-to the implementation of that right finds its culmination in the “proposals for a settlement” [S/20405] 1
elaborated jointly by the British Government and the Smith
regime and presented to us by the representative of the
United Kingdom on 2.5 November 1971 [.Z602nd meeting].
The time that has since passed is more than sufficient for
grasping both the real objectives and the wider significance
of those proposals. It has also made it possible for us to
learn about reactions to them in Zimbabwe, in Africa and
in the world. Indeed, in this very building the General
Assembly, then in session, did not take long to react by, in
its resolution 2877 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971, rejecting
the proposals as a violation of the Zimbabwe people’s right
to self-determination and independence.

11. Thirdly, the United Nations has been and stands
committed to the abolition of the rule of the white
minority in Southern Rhodesia as the only way to enable
the people of Zimbabwe to achieve their freedom and
independence. The United Kingdom has, it is clear, never
really pursued this goal. What it now openly aims at is the
recognition of the independent status of the racist regime
-a goal contrary to that of the United Nations, which has
been and remains, independence for the Zimbabwe people.
12. Fourthly, the story of the economic sanctions against
the Smith regime is a very instructive one indeed. At first,
there was a gradual imposition of sanctions which enabled
the Smith regime to prepare itself to evade them. Selective
at first, the sanctions were later enlarged under the pressure
of the majority of United Nations membership and with the
evident reluctance of the minority. They have never
become really comprehensive and effective, because from
the very beginning there have been large-scale and wilful
violations-the violators being protected in the Security
Council by some of its permanent members. The erosion of
sanctions which has followed is now being adduced as a
justification for the possible lifting of those sanctions. But
that course is in clear contradiction with the United
Nations policy in respect of Southern Rhodesia, that is, the
maintenance of the boycott and the isolation of the white
minority rigime as long as it does not give way to majority
rule.

7. In the debate in this Council, representatives of African
States characterized the agreement as a “betrayal of the
Zimbabwe people”, as a “sell-out”, as a capitulation of the
British Government before the racist minority rkgime, and
as a flagrant violation of the Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions as well as of the principles and
obligations embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.
The representative of Zambia, Ambassador Mwaanga, has
told this Council [1605th meeting] that his delegation had
been requested by the leaders of the Zimbabwe people,
Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole, to inform the Council of their
total rejection of the Anglo-Rhodesian agreement.
8. The picture is therefore clear, and this outright rejection, this indignation and protest, in which my delegation
fully shares, come to us as no surprise.

13. Fifthly, there has been and there still is an obviously
fundamental contradiction between the United Kingdom
and the United Nations in the understanding of the United
Kingdom responsibility in Southern Rhodesia. Indeed, we
were surprised to hear Sir Colin Crowe quote the words of
Sir Alec Douglas-Home to the effect that

9. A second principle is that of the free exercise of the
right to self-determination
of colonial peoples, Here,
according to the United Kingdom position, it is not the
representatives of 5 million people who are the inter-

“ I . . the only reason we are in this business at all is that
we want to help the Africans towards a better future than
they are otherwise likely to have.” [I602nd meeting,

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year,Supplement
for October, November and December 1971.

para. 52.1

2

14. We have always thought that, as affirmed and reaffirmed in Security Council resolutions, it is the primary
responsibility of the United Kingdom to enable the people
of Southern Rhodesia to achieve self-determination and
independence. In our opinion, the United Nations should
and will hold the United Kingdom responsible as long as
this
goal
is not achieved, and the “proposals for a
settlement” certainly do not provide for that,
15.

The analysis of particular elements of the present
of the United Kingdom Government on the
question of Southern Rhodesia, as reflected in the “proposals
for a settlement”, certainly shows that it is in
contradiction
with the established positions of the United
Nations as expressed in, among others, the resolutions of
this
Council. Certainly, the United Nations and the Security
Council cannot become a party to an act of colonial and
racist entrenchment, to a deal that is dooming an African
people-the
people of Zimbabwe-to many years of colonial
and racist enslavement. Certainly the Council, facing a new
and dangerous development in a situation which it has itself
found serious enough to require that it invoke and apply
Chapter VII of the Charter, is bound to pronounce itself
against this, just as the General Assembly has done in no
uncertain terms,
attitude

16.

In view of those considerations and motivated by our

consistent
policy concerning decolonization, and in accordance with our support for all United Nations actions against
the illegal white minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, we

are prepared to support the draft resoluZion contained in
the working paper presented by the representative of
Somalia, Ambassador Farah [see I622nd meeting, para. 81.
17.

This being in all probability our last intervention in
the Council during our present term of office, I should like
to say that in the Security Council, as in all other bodies of
the United Nations, we have tried our best to contribute to
the solution of the important problems with which we have
been faced. Valuing highly our membership in this Council,
we have tried to contribute to the consolidation of its
position
and authority. We greatly value and shall continue
to value the friendship and co-operation that you, Mr. President, and other members of the Council have extended to
US in the course of our stay here. We wish to thank you for
that.

18.

Mr, VINCI

accept the denial to millions of Africans of the most
fundamental political rights, We fully realize that this
situation may have upsetting effects on neighbouring
countries; it will surely engender a difficult future for
Rhodesia itself,
20. How, in fact, can a small group of settlers maintain its
domination over a country whose vast African population is
growing at the rate of 3 per cent a year, and bring it into
the modem world without the full social, economic and
political participation of the great majority of its people?
21. It is for those reasons that Italy has given its
unconditional,
whole-hearted support to the measures
adopted by the Security Council to bring the Salisbury
regime to an end. The Italian Government has severed all
relations with Rhodesia and has adopted special legislation
to enforce the sanctions imposed on that r6gime.
22. The economic sanctions were devised by this Council
upon the request of the United Kingdom in order to
help-as is clearly stated in Security Council resolution
253 (1968)-&e British Government “to bring to an end
the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia”. The sanctions which
have been adopted have not yet enabled us to attain that
objective. They have weakened the Rhodesian economy,
they have paralysed certain sectors and increased the
difficulties of the Rhodesian foreign exchange; they have
not, unfortunately, brought the regime to its knees. I will
not dwell on the reasons for the somewhat insufficient
effect of the sanctions, because those reasons are known to
all of us.
23. Bent on attaining this objective, namely, the economic
downfall of the Salisbury regime, we have neglected our
main goal which is closely connected with the complex
process of self-determination. We have neglected it to the
point of forgetting that the sanctions may even slow down
the progress towards nationhood and the development of
the aspirations to self-determination when they cut off-as
indeed they did-the people mainly concerned from all
contacts with the outside world, a fact which goes against
the whole experience through which the peoples of Europe
and other continents passed on their march towards
independence. History shows that the more open were the
contacts with the outside world, the quicker was the
exercise of self-determination.

(Italy): In the emergence of independent

Africa,
Southern Rhodesia represents one of the anomalies
surviving
in that continent, The process of decolonization

halted
white

at the borders of that Territory where a handful of
settlers, defying the metropolitan Power, have estabfished their domination over millions of Africans. The white
minority,
trying to set back the clock of history, has up to
now
denied to the African majority any participation in the
Government
of the country and, in order to consolidate its
power,
has not refrained from turning to the hideous
practice
of racial discrimination. This abnormal situation
has caused serious concern to the Italian Government.
19. Indeed, morally and historically speaking, there could
not be a more disturbing factor hampering the political
development
of the peoples of southern Africa. We fully
understand
that the independent African countries cannot

24. It is in the light of those considerations that we
should, in otir view, evaluate the recent developments that
have led to the proposals for a settlement. The representative of the United Kingdom reminded this Council, convened at his request, that if the sanctions hurt the
Rhodesian economy and therefore induced the Salisbury
re’gime to try the path of negotiations, they did not bring
that regime to the extremity of having to accept anything
London might propose.
25. On the other hand, the British Government decided to
pursue the negotiations because it was convinced that the
situation was deadlocked and might even become more
detrimental to the interest of the African population,
following the further development of legislation and the
further practice of racial discrimination.

26. Those, then, are the conditions under which the
proposals were negotiated: on the one hand, a white illegal
regime not on the verge of capitulation; on the other hand,
no better alternative than negotiations, limited in scope
-namely, to prevent deterioration of the situation. Those
are the facts as we see them-unpleasant,
but inescapable.
27. Now I shall turn very briefly, and in very general
terms, to the proposals. I do not need, in fact, to take them
one by one, since they have been submitted to very close
and accurate scrutiny by several members of the Council.
And, as a matter of fact, we can hardly object to what has
been said, or fail to sympathize with some of the
views-and especially feelings-expressed,
But quid age&i?
As has been rightly remarked during our debate, no
practical idea has been offered in the place of the British
proposals. As far as we are concerned, having for some
years lost all contact with the Territory, we do not have
up-to-date information which might perhaps give us a clew
to find our way, like Theseus, through the labyrinth of
these proposals. Certainly, if we consider them in the light
of principles or in the face of our ultimate objectives, they
fall very short of our ideas and our hopes. As often happens
in matters of compromise, a shadow looms over the real
result whose achievement they might make possible.

31. In conclusion, my delegation feels that at this stage
the Council should, in spite of the reservations raised bY fhe
proposals in question, confine itself to the reaffirmation
-which is essential-of certain principles shared bY all of US,
as well as of the ultimate goals of this Organization
for
Rhodesia: namely, independence based on majority
rule.
And once we have been assured that the administering
Power will do its best in order to carry out the test of
acceptability in the most objective way, we should postpone any further decision until the results of that test
become known and have been carefully studied.
32. It is on the basis of the foregoing considerations
that
my delegationwill take its position in the voting on any
draft resolutionintroduced before the Council, whatever its
possiblemerits and particular positions of principle which
might be similar to our own.
33. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) [interpretcztiotl fiorrr
French): At this stage, the French delegation has no
intention of giving its evaluation of the draft settlement WC
are discussinghere. In today’s circumstances,the important
thing in our view, is that the British Government is thus
reaffirming its own responsibility asadministering Power to
lead Rhodesia towards self-determination in accordance
with the freely expressedwishesof the people.

28. Whatever shortcomings and misgivings these proposals
produce, they have been practically submitted as an
attempt by the administering Power, in fulfilment of its
responsibility, to overcome the present deadlock and to
create conditions that might help improve the situation of
the Africans and lead them towards self-determination. As
to how successful this attempt might be and how long this
process might take, much has been said, and my delegation
will not try to make its own guess. What time has in store is
always difficult to predict, since conditions change-and
very rapidly in our times-and what has been planned in
certain circumstances is subject to radical revision, adjusted
to new, unforeseen developments.

34. The British Government proposes,in the initial stage,
to conduct a comprehensivesurvey to determine whether
the settlement-with which we are familiar-is acceptable to
the people. That is what is known as the test of
acceptability. The French delegation feels that we should
not prejudgethe results of this test of acceptability. In our
view, we should leave it up to the Commission established
for that purpose to undertake all the necessary investigations which it has been called upon to conduct, and await
the resultsof that first operation. That doesnot mean that
a number of the criticisms uttered around this table are not
echoedby us. We note that the processcontemplated is, in
many respects,far different from what was done in other
parts of Africa by the United Kingdom itself and by
France, and we are not seekingto conceal our perplexity
over certain’aspectsof the systemdescribedto us. The r-i&t
of suffrageis not recognized in it asbeing universal, and Ihe
emancipationenshrined in the application of the majofity
principle occurs only after the completion of a series of
stages.However, the draft we are discussingdoes frave the
merit of putting an end to the status quo, of introducing
movement into a stagnant situation; and when that momentum hasthe support of the will of a people, it can no
longer be halted or braked, becauseit will be for the people
of Rhodesiato take the final decision,

29. Since I am speaking of future tests, let me refer to the
test of acceptability. The test is not, of course, the exercise
of self-determination. Nobody has assumed that it would
constitute that exercise. But self-determination may well be
preceded by one or more tests that may prepare for it. I
have already mentioned that the main problem in this
respect is to make a majority of the people aware of their
fundamental rights; it is to awaken in their hearts the
aspiration to be a nation-in other words, to have them
strive for self-determination.
30. Now, the test of acceptability provides really the first
opportunity to reach individuals and groups of people in
each corner of the Territory and to begin doing what has
been badly needed for a very long time: namely, to make
the adult African population of Rhodesia think about its
future and its fundamental rights. However unsatisfactory
and incomplete this process may seem, especially to the
theorists of the principle of seIf-determination, it is the first
concrete approach to the real problems with which we are
confronted. Our main concern in this respect is to have a
test performed in fair and democratic conditions. Furthermore, we think the administering Power would be well
advised to try to associate the United Nations more closely
with the conduct of the test.

35. An opportunity is being offered, perhaps, to set in
motion the machinery which can and must transform
institutions. Wedo not want to condemn it a p&ri, or to
questionthe intentions of thosewilling to try it, It is in this
spirit that the French delegation will cast its vote on the
draft resolution to be submitted to US.
36. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Somalia,who wishesto speakon a point of order.
37. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I feel it is necessary for me ta
intervene at this stage because there seems to be some
4

misunderstanding
about what this proposed test of acceptability will lead to.

45. I see no better course than to comment on these
proposals before the Council, paragraph by paragraph, and
as briefly as I possibly can. I will commence by reading
from the proposals for a settlement published as Command
Paper No. 4835 by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office in
London [see S/l 04051.

38. Some members believe that it is the beginning of a
process. My deIegation maintains that it is going to be the
beginning and end of a process. In a statement made in
Salisbury, in the Rhodesian House of Assembly, on 25
November,
Mr. Smith had this to say on the proposals
agreed to between himself and Lord Home:

46. The first proposal for a settlement is the so-called test
of acceptability, which the Ambassador of Somalia so ably
clarified just before I started to speak. It is our view that
the only test of acceptability in the colonial history of the
people of the United Kingdom, who have brought to
independence hundreds of millions of persons in all the
continents of the world, has been by universal franchise,
through an electoral process that has been tested for a
period of almost 350 years and found to be the most
satisfactory method. We have all gone through it-in Asia,
in North America, in Africa. The question is: Why are we
now being requested to exempt Southern Rhodesia and to
let Southern Rhodesia hold not a referendum, a plebiscite
or a general election on a universal and adult franchise, but
a consultation intended to seek the opinion of “the people
of Rhodesia as a whole”?

“Paragraph
8 deals with the implementation of the
Agreement.
If the British Government signifies that it is
satisfied that the proposals are acceptable to the people
of Rhodesia as a whole, the Rhodesian Government will
introduce the necessary legislation to amend the Constitution and the Electoral Act. The British Government will,
in turn, introduce legislation to confer independence on
Rhodesia as a Republic and they will terminate sanctions
when this legislation takes effect. Rhodesian legislation
will
take effect on the same day as the British legislation.”
39. It grieves me to hear the statements made by the
representatives
of Italy and France as they relate to the
political destiny of 5 million Africans in Southern Rhodesia, particularly
in view of those representatives’ own
experience of the African continent.

47. What does the expression “as a whole” mean? Who is
going to determine what constitutes “as a whole”? It is
supposed to be a Commission. But that Commission will 80
there, unsupervised by the independent eye of the members
of this Council, unsupervised by any exterior force. It is to
operate through the apparatus of Mr. Ian Smith. I would be
most surprised if that Commission did not come out and
say: “We have tested the opinion of the people of Rhodesia
as a whole and have conclusively found that the people of
Rhodesia as a whole want these proposals to be implemented.” That is what is going to happen because it is what
Ian Smith wants and because the Africans are not going to
be fully consulted as they were in all the other Territories
which the British in their wisdom and experience have led
to independence.

40. Yesterday
I said: How can we here deny to others,
whether in principle or in form, what we hold so sacred for
ourselves,
that is, the right of self-determination, the right
of universal
adult suffrage, the right of one man, one vote,
regardless of colour or creed? How can we in this Council
give international
sanction to an exercise which denies the
implementation
of those principles, no matter what the
so-called realities are? What are realities without morality?
Surely we must lift ourselves above the animal.
41. I felt it necessary to make those remarks in the hope
that we can steer our debate on a right and proper course.

48. We do not voice this concern simply because we come
from States in Africa. We are perfectly aware that within
the policy-making institution of the British House of
Commons and the House of Lords there is a substantial
number of morally minded distinguished people who share
our concern. I should like to quote the expressions of
concern by some of these people, I have before me a House
of Commons official report of the Parliamentary debate
which took place on Thursday, 25 November, when these
proposals were put forward to the House of Commons by
Sir Alec Douglas-Home, We find that a distinguished member of the Shadow Cabinet, Mr. Healey, said:

42. The PRESIDENT:
The next name inscribed on the list
of speakers
is that of the representative of Uganda. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
43. Mr. IBINGIRA
(Uganda): I express the gratitude of
my delegation
at being allowed to speak before you on this
matter of critical importance, although I may not have the
right to vote.

“In his statement”-that
is, the Minister’s statement
- “he said that normal political activity would be permitted, and I asked him whether that meant that the
apparatus of the police state would be removed. . . . May
I tell him frankly that no one on this side of the House
will treat the test of acceptability as in any sense serious
or committing unless there is freedom of African political
activity for all those other than those interned on
criminal charges.“2

44, Most of us seated around this table have at one time or
another
in the history of our nations been through some
sort of subjection
on the part of some other, exterior
Power.
Our people, in the course of history, have known
what it is to be free and what it is to be unfree and subject
to another
Power. All that my delegation asks is that before
&is
Council
takes a final decision on the proposals
submitted
to it, constituting the settlement between the
United
Kingdom
Government and Ian Smith, it should
bow
fully and exactly what those proposars are, what it is
being
asked to endorse and what it is being asked to
legitimize.

2 See Parliamentary Debates (Hansard), House of Commons,
Official Report,
Fifth Series, vol. 826 (London, Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office), COI.1551.

5

,

emergency has been reduced from 12 to 9 months, it is an
improvement. It hardly is.

49. It is well known that the African leaders who are
interned in Southern Rhodesia, specifically Mr. Nkomo and
the Reverend Sithole, are not interned on criminal charges;
they are interned on political grounds. It is also well known
that the question was not properly answered by Sir Alec
Douglas-Home. The record is full of interjections and
uproars in the House of Commons because of the dissatisfaction of Members who, unfortunately, were outvoted
because of an automatic majority in the House.

53. Another point is the amendment of the Constitution.
In our view, this is a very critical point. We know that the
amendment of the Constitution-other
than amendment by
armed force, which is an abrogation of the Constitution-la
of cardinal importance, because it is upon it that the rights
of people are entrenched and safeguarded. If it is abused,
there are no such things as rights, whether it be a treaty or
an agreement of any kind or a constitutional instrument
such as we are considering now. It is stated here in
subparagraph 5 (a):

50. But we feel that without fully consulting the leaders
of the African masses and of the political parties which are
now banned in Southern Rhodesia, there cannot be a just
test of the acceptability of these proposals in Southern
Rhodesia. Therefore, we cannot be induced to agree that
that test is going to be any good. For, in any case, if I were
a Rhodesian and were asked to judge the proposals which I
was expected to accept, I should want to examine them
myself to see if I found them acceptable. We cannot
honestly say, as people who have been through a colonial
tutelage, that the proposals contained here are acceptable
to a people seeking independence. Obviously they are not.

“The Rhodesian Government have given an assurance to
the British Government that they will not introduce or
support in the Rhodesian Parliament any amendment of
the specially entrenched provisions of the Constitution
relating to the composition of the House of Assembly or
of the specially entrenched provisions of the Electoral
Act until the first two African higher roll seats have been
created and filled or until three years have elapsed since
the Constitutional changes provided for by these proposals have come into force, whichever is the sooner,”

51. I will now turn to the Constitution-paragraph
II in
the proposals for a settlement. Much has been said
concerning the House of Assembly and the electoral rolls. It
is very perplexing to us because, in spite of wide experience, in spite of what we all know about the evolution of
the electoral process in British dependencies, through which
many of us have gone, this is a completely strange and
novel adventure in the British constitutional theory of
colonial administration. We know that these proposals for
qualitative franchise, for people having to be qualified
because of ownership of property or education or something of that kind, comprise a process that has been gone
through long before the actual time of independence,
because no Territory-apart
from the minority-dominated
Territories which are in a minority in any case in British
colonial history-has
gone to independence on the basis of
the proposak put before us. We have all gone to independence on the principle of universal adult franchise, and we
do not see any reason why our brothers in Southern
Rhodesia should be placed at a disadvantage through an
electoral process which would be manipulated by an
executive over which they would have no control. We know
that those proposals cannot be acceptable to them, just as
they are not acceptable to us.

54. We are being requested to accept an intention and an
assurance on the part of the Southern Rhodesian Government. The question that is so basic to all this discussion is:
are we in a position to trust that Government? Are we in a
position to accept the credibility of the Ian Smith
Government in Southern Rhodesia? What evidence is
before this Council to persuade us to accept that all these
beautiful phrases will be honoured, since they depend
purely on expressed intention and an expressed commitment by that Government? On the contrary, the
evidence before this Council is that they will be dishonoured, because we have a Government in power which
has already been guilty of breaking a constitution. They
had a constitution which they received from the United
Kingdom. They revoked that constitution and were prepared to fight by force of arms to assert their independence
unlawfully. They are the very same people we are being
requested to trust to fulfil these obligations. I ask the
Council in its wisdom to consider whether actually it is
realistic or proper for us to accept these provisions because
that Government in Salisbury is sufficiently honest to be
bound by the commitments it makes on paper. We have
seen a similar case in the history of our continent-in South
Africa, to be specific-where
the United Kingdom gave
independence to a minority Government; there were in the
Constitution of that State, in the South African Independence Act, provisions of entrenchment more or less similar
to these here, which stated in effect that certain rights were
reserved to the Coloured population and to the African
population and that those rights could not be abrogated or
taken away except through a complicated system of voting
in two Houses, requiring two thirds voting simultaneously
and things like that. We know that actually that never
worked. We have a precedent to indicate that entrenchment
of the kind we are being persuaded to accept cannot work,
because it has failed in a country that is so close to
Southern Rhodesia and has such influence over it. How
then can we accept or hope that it will work in Southern
Rhodesia? This question was indeed raised in the House of

52. I should like to comment on subparagraph 4 of that
paragraph, concerning the renewal of declarations of
emergency. It states:
,
“Section 61 of the Constitution will be amended so as
to reduce the period within which a Declaration of
Emergency requires renewal by resolution of the House
of Assembly from 12 months to 9 months.”
That is meaningless. Even if a declaration of emergency
were to be renewable every two months, it can extend for a
period in perpetuity. We have seen it happen in other
nations on that continent, where states of emergency have
been prolonged for a period of six or seven years, having to
be renewed every three, four or five months. Therefore we
cannot say that because the period for extension of
6

Commons by an honourable member, Mr. James Johnson,
and I read from the Hansard from which I have already
quoted:
“In view of the black history of South Africa and all
other similar communities in Africa, does the Foreign
Secretary really expect white oligarchies to hand over
power to the African masses? It has happened nowhere
else. None of us who has been to Africa expects this to
happen unless it is a genuine Christian community, which
is not so. Why does he not demand external safeguards
for the future of these black African masses? "3
That is the question, Can we reasonably expect that a
resolution
passed by this Council to the effect that we
support these proposals will be of value, knowing very well
that the oligarchy is there and the gentleman to whom I
referred has said: “We will not honour the majority rule
principle”?
55. We feel that there must be some kind of external
guarantee if these proposals are going to be put into
operation-which
we would regret very much. But if they
are to be put into operation, the United Kingdom must
have the right, and indeed the obligation, to intervene and
enforce the rights of these people. The ultimate obligation
is not going to be with Smith; the ultimate obligation must
remain vested in the United Kingdom. British constitutional
law
is quite clear. It is not in dispute that the United
Kingdom
is legally the Iawful authority over Rhodesia,
within
the British municipal law, and that it can and does
have the right in Parliament to pass any legislation for
Smith and his Government to follow. That is what all of us
have gone through, either by an order in council or by a
statute
of Parliament.
56. I shall now turn to paragraph 111,which concerns the
review of existing legislation. The paragraph states, in part:
“The Rhodesian Government have intimated to the
British
Government their firm intention, within the spirit
of these proposals, to make progress towards ending racial
discrimination.”
It is a long paragraph, and I shall not read it all. Here again
it is a question of “firm intention, within the spirit of these
proposals”.
Can this august Council accept the genuineness
of this kind of “firm intention”, considering the antecedents
of the Government with which the Council is
dealirlg in Salisbury? It is our submission humbly to put to
the Council that it is not possible because of the glaring fact
of rebellion
that has emanated from that Government.
Therefore,
there can be no review of existing legislation on
the part of the Smith government, which itself has enacted
that legislation
to entrench its minority interests. If it were
really
to review this legislation and end it, the question
must
be asked: Why in the first place was it necessary to
pass it? It was necessary to pass it because they wanted to
hang on to power at all costs. If they wanted to hang on to
power
at all costs, surely they are going to continue to do
so and they are not going to be deterred by any nice
phrases enshrined in this report.
3 Ibid.,

col.

1549.

57. I shall now turn to paragraph IV, which concerns the
review of cases of detainees and rest&tees. The world is
full of detention and detention is not peculiar to racist
white regimes. It is a phenomenon that reflects the sad
aspects of human nature all over the globe, It happens
everywhere. But that is no excuse for Smith. Smith is
detaining people because he is afraid of them, and not
because they have committed crimes. If they had committed crimes, they would have been tried in a court of law
and convicted by the criminal law of that land. They have
been detained not because of any criminal offence, but
because of their political support for the majority of the
people in Southern Rhodesia. And we are being here
requested to believe that if we accept these proposals, then
Sithole and Nkomo and others might be released. That
surely is too much of a price to pay. Whether those people
are detained or not, the fact remains that the principle is
wrong. It is wrong that the political opponents of that
Government should be detained for no crime other than
demanding their inalienable rights to which they were born
as human beings.
58. I shall now turn to paragraph V, which concerns land.
Land is a very critical factor in African history. We are an
agrarian people. We live on the land and are rather a rural
people. We live on the land and we till the land. We are not
city dwellers. And there is no shame in this. In Southern
Rhodesia millions of acres of land have been taken away
from the Africans and designated as being special for white
occupation or settlement. Paragraph V states:
“The Rhodesian Government have given an assurance
that they will not take steps to evict African tenants or
other occupants from these two areas”-those
are the
areas from which Africans are awaiting eviction-“or
from
other areas in which they are living until such time as the
Commission referred to in paragraph III above has
reported and its recommendations have been fully considered.”
That is absolutely meaningless. It is a procedural clause. Let
us suppose that the Commission makes an inquiry and finds
that the Africans must not move from their land. Smith is
still perfectly entitled legally to say, “Oh, yes; we have
considered your report but we are not bound by it, We feel
that they must still move and they are going to move under
the law of Southern Rhodesia, and even under the law
enshrined in these proposals.”
59. We cannot, therefore, be persuaded to accept that the
proposals concerning land are humane or reasonable. They
must be rejected, I cannot possibly foresee the possibility
that Africans wil1 accept the so-called test of acceptability,
that they will accept these proposals when they are going to
be evicted from the land of their ancestors. It does not
make sense.
60. I shall now turn to paragraph VI, which concerns the
development programme under which the United Kingdom,
in its magnanimity, would give up to $5 million per year for
10 years to improve the condition of Africans in Southern
Rhodesia, If that were to be done when Southern Rhodesia
was being governed by the majority, it would be an
excellent proposition. We all have had programmes of

I

-

development like this one, where the United Kingdom has
graciously given some aid to its former colonies. That has
been a very worth-while experience, because the aid was
exchanged among equals. But this is a different proposition.
This is a proposition where the majority of Africans are not
going to have a say in how that money is to be administered
on their behalf and in their interests. Who determines what
is right for the Africans? Why should somebody else
determine how that money should be utilized on behalf of
the Africans?
61, I shall now turn to the final part, which is the so-called
“Declaration of Rights” [ibid., appendix II.]. This is very
fundamental, and we have heard it enshrined in many
constitutions of those of us who have been through British
colonial tutelage. We have heard that Declaration in the
Malaysian Constitution, the Nigerian Constitution, the
Uganda Constitution and so on. It contains excellent
propositions because they spell out the fundamental human
rights to which every citizen in society must be entitled.
But these proposals are rendered completely meaningless by
the exceptions that are attached to each of them, considering the fact that it will be the executive branch of the
Smith government that will be determining those exceptions-to what extent they can be stretched, to whom they
can apply and where. The Declaration speaks of protection
of the right to life. That is an excellent thing. It states: “No
person shall be deprived of his life intentionally, save in
execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal
offence of which he has been convicted .”

the Executive, in detaining political
justification.

detainees without

65, We therefore feel that it is these exceptions, more than
the rights themselves, that are going to matter, because the
rights are going to be rendered completely meaningless
when the authorities hide in the exceptions-and they are
the people who interpret the rules.
66. It has been the usual practice that there is an ultimate
right of appeal to the Privy Council from a colony when it
is getting independence, on the assumption that the Privy
Council, being so detached in London from the local
situation, may be in a position to assess a situation
independently. Now, why is that right not here? Why is the
ultimate course of appeal remaining in Rhodesia? It is
because they are afraid that at some stage the courts are
going to take rulings in support of the Executive, which
would be looked at with disfavour by courts in London, by
the Privy Council, by the House of Lords. And it is for that
reason that this thing is being shielded to take place only
within the confines of Southern Rhodesia.
67. The idea expressed in paragraph 2, subparagraph 7, of
establishing a tribunal for the purpose of reviewing casesof
detainees, is quite meaningless because they can review
your case for years and you will never get out. Their
decisions are not binding. These provisions are standard
provisions. We have seen them in constitutions of former
British dependencies and we know how they have been
carried out in practice-without just theorizing about it. We
know that they can be abused by an Executive which is
prepared to disregard them, with impunity.

62. Granted. But then we are told that “a person shall not
be regarded as having been deprived of his life in contravention of this paragraph if he dies as the result of the use of
force to such extent as is reasonably justifiable in the
circumstances of the case”, and about five cases are
enumerated,

68. Then we come to paragraph 5, under “Protection”
-here are the fundamental rights-“from deprivation of
property”, which says:
“(1) No property of any description shall be compulsorily taken possession of, and no interest in or right over
property of any description shall be compulsorily acquired, except by or under the authority of a written law
and where provisions applying to that acquisition or
taking of possession is made by a written law-”

63. Now, what is “reasonably justifiable in the circumstances”? Who is going to decide? Supposing there was a
mass n&y by an African nationalist, and ordinary peasants
were flocking to hear some complaints lodged against
oppressive legislation. And supposing the police urged these
people to disperse, and the people were hesitant and angry
at the denial of their right of association and freedom of
expression, and some of them were shot in the scuffles, and
so on. Those people, I can assure the Council, would have
lost their lives perfectly lawfully and there would be no
case whatsoever for taking the authorities to task for it.

And the exceptions then start:
“(3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in
contravention of this paragraph to the extent that the law
in question makes provision for the taking of possessionor
the acquisition of any interest in or right over property-”

64. Next we have ‘Protection
of right to personal
liberty”. That is a right to which we all aspire. But it also
has exceptions, because it can be taken away for purposes
of public safety or public order, or in the interests of
defence. Again, who determines these exceptions? Who
determines what constitutes public order? What is public
order? And would it not be perfectly proper, as he seesit,
for Smith to say that it is against public order to hold a
rally of 50,000 people-when he himself cannot hold a rally
of lO,OOO-because they are going to shout slogans in
support of detained politicians? He is going to say that it is
contrary to public order. And the courts, which are paid by
him and which have already upheld the revocation of a
proper constitution, are going to uphold his act, the act of

I will just quote one example with regard to land, which
appears in subparagraph (3) (q):
“(q) in the case of land, for so long only as may be
necessaryfor the purpose of the carrying out thereon-

“ ..
“(ii) of agricultural development or improvement
which the owner or occupier of the land has been
required, and has without reasonable or lawful excuse
refused or failed, to carry out”.
8

69. Having given the African the right to own his
property-let us take land, which is so basic to him-that
right is then taken away. Because if the Executive should
say, “You have not complied with certain requirements
under certain laws for directing farming, laws on how to
develop the land, it is going to be taken away from you”, I
think that would put the vast majority of the Africans in
that country to tremendous hardship, because they would
not be in a position to comply with the developments that
are envisaged by the minority regime, since they have
neither the capital nor as yet, most of them, the skill to
do so.

go so far as to say, even of creed. Creed may be a method
of accessto God. But if we are to have a government that
says that because of his colour Mr. X. cannot go to church
in a certain parish because that parish belongs to another
colour, I think we are discrediting the religions to which we
often pay lip service.
75. The protection of freedom of expression mentioned in
paragraph 9 is what we all exercise here. We may annoy our
friends and colleagues, but they accept that because it is
part and parcel of our rights; we are expressing our own
views. But if we approve this document we shall be
sanctioning the denial of that very right to our friends in
Southern Rhodesia, because it says “freedom to hold
opinions and to receive and impart ideas and information
without interference, and freedom from interference
with . , . correspondence” can be taken away if it is
“reasonably justifiable in a democratic society . , , in the
interests of defence, public safety, public order, the
economic interests of the State, public morality or public
health”. Again we must ask who determines what is in the
interests of public order or public safety. You see,it is the
same Government. And how can that Government actually
impIement this clause? It will only hide behind these
exceptions and render the clause completely inoperative,
and it will still be within the confines of the law, as it is
proposed in this settlement,

70. Then there is “Protection from arbitrary search or
entry”, in paragraph 6, which says:
“(1) Except with his own consent or by way of
parental discipline, no person shall be subjected to the
search of his person or to entry into or the search of his
dwelling-house.”
71. People in every country read about secret police
bursting in, in the middle of the night, to disturb the
privacy of a home. We know very well that none of us
would like such an experience in his own home. But here
we have exceptions which actually take away that right of
protection from arbitrary search or entry, becauseit recurs
again and again all the time-if it is for the sake of public
order, if it is for public safety, or for public morality. The
ultimate question that we must come to again is: who
determines these things? Who determines whether a police
officer is going to search Nkomo’s house? It is Ian Smith
who has put him in jail. It is Ian Smith who has banned his
party, who has stifled all the other freedoms. Now why
should he not actually, under these exceptions of public
order, public safety, public morality, take advantage and go
further to probe into the affairs of everybody without what
we may term acceptable standards of reasonable justification? We therefore find that even that paragraph is no
protection; it is no guarantee of any human right whatsoever.

76. We feel we are living in a world of too many relative
standards. When we talk of what is “reasonably justifiable”,
what do we mean? What may be reasonably justifiable in
my State may not be in Mr. X’s State. Ian Smith is going to
say, “Well, what is reasonably justifiable in Salisbury is not
reasonably justifiable in London; therefore, as far as I am
concerned, in Salisbury it is reasonably justifiable and
proper.” And he will be entitled to say that in the context
of these proposals.
77. And what is a democratic society? We ask this
question again. We all aspire to democracy, but we all have
different interpretations of democracy. The cardinal point
we must determine is whether we accept that the Smith
regime heads a democratic society by any standard that we
use here.

72. Then, of course, there is the proverbial “Protection of
freedom of conscience”, permitting individuals to worship
where they want, to express their beliefs, to associate, and
so on. But within that very same paragraph, there is a
provision which gives the Government the right to stop you
from associating to worship together, if it “is reasonably
justifiable
in a democratic society . . . in the interests of
defence, public safety, public order, public morality or
public health”. And we go back. Who is there to determine
where I should go to church, where I should not go to
church, with whom I should go to church?

78. Does any honourable member of the Security Council
subscribe to the view that despite our divergent opinions on
what constitutes a democratic society the Smith regime is
in fact a democratic society? I doubt it. I am sure we all
agree that it is not a democratic society. There must be an
element of consent predominant in our definition of a
democratic society-the will of the people to be governed
by that government.
79. We have seen-many times with appreciation-what
the United Kingdom Government has done and has tried to
do to bring Territories to independence. That is a fact of
history, and there is no point in denying it. But it is most
extraordinary that at this time, when the United Kingdom
is winding up its empire on the African continent, it should
actually perpetuate a most disagreeable and most objectionable racial-minority Government, when it knows very well
that this is contrary to everything we have all accepted in
history and in the current situation of the world.

73. It is the very same regime which has violated the
Constitution,
which has passed discriminatory laws, and
which is going to sit in the judgement chair and say “We
determine”-and
no court of law can question that because
it would be perfectly legitimate.
74. I do not believe we have separate Gods-a God for the
white, a God for the black. a God for the yellow, and so on.
We have one supreme being, those of us who believe in
God, and he is God of all, irrespective of race and, I would
9

legislation is saved-and we are told that Southern Rhodesia
has no apartheid. Unless apartheid is becoming another of
those elastic, meaningless words, in my submission it does
apply to Southern Rhodesia.

80. We believe that if it really was true that Smith was
convinced that the United Kingdom meant business when it
said, “DO not secede or we shall take tough measures
against you”, Smith would have capitulated a Iong time
ago. It was the idea, not publicly expressed but nevertheless
real and strong, that, after all, in. the final analysis, the
United Kingdom would never move to force the Southern
Rhodesian minority regime to capitulate that actually gave
them strength to continue with their rebellion.

85. We do hope that this august Council, despite its many
problems, will come to grips with this problem. We are
living day by day in a world of interdependence which is,
because of technological advances and other important
factors, becoming closer and closer together. ideas travel
fast in communications of all sorts, and it is most
regrettable that we are having a situation created in
Southern Rhodesia with the masses of the people being
deprived, as they will be, of their most basic, elementary
rights-not the right to live in mansions, not the right to
drive Cadillacs, but the right to the basic elements of living
as human beings with self-respect. When those people are
deprived of their rights they are going to seek help, and
there are going to be States which, either out of selfish
interest or out of humanitarian motives, are going to come
to the rescue of those people in ah sorts of ways, A
situation is going to be created of a magnitude difficult to
foresee in certain details, but certainly, in principle, very
real and present, and it is going to be most regrettable.
Because when a people is by law subjugated and deprived of
its rights in the name of civilization, in the name of
Christian doctrine, in the name of all that all of us have
held dear, all these things lose meaning in the eyes of the
subjected people, and we are laying, in fact, the foundations for a situation of chaos, a situation that none of us,
certainly not the United Kingdom, would like to see come
into being. I do hope that the United Kingdom Government
will listen first to views within its own house-the House of
Commons, the House of Lords, public opinion in the
United Kingdom which is seeking to reshape and modify
these proposals-and then also to you, and accept modificstions that will not allow a legitimization of a rebellion.

81. We know that with the exception of the loss of the
American colonies in 1776 the United Kingdom has in its
colonial experience never accepted rebellion on the part of
any colony in Asia, North America or Africa. And wars
have been fought to subject princely States which asserted
independence from British authority. They were fought by
Clive and Warren Hastings in India; they were fought on the
African continent to suppress the Mau-Mau; they have been
fought in all sorts of places.
82. Now, why is it that, after almost 350 years, for the
first time our friends in the United Kingdom are saying,
“Oh no; in the case of Southern Bhodesia we are not going
to fight.” Why? We know of the Boer Wars, which were
fought in the 1880s and 1890s in South Africa when the
Boers wanted independence in the Transvaal and Orange
Free State. They had to fight pitched battles with the
British army. They were conquered and subjected to British
rule.
83. We cannot understand why Southern Rhodesia should
be an exception to that trend of history. If there were
cogent humanitarian reasons for such an exception to be
made-after all, it is said that exceptions prove the rule-we
might consider them. But there are no cogent reasons. This
is simply a request to endorse and legitimize a racial regime.
We would prefer that that Government remain with the
stigma of a rebellious Government in the world community
of nations rather than give it the stamp of acceptability of
no less authorities than the Security Council and the
General Assembly and have no less an authority than the
community of world nations accept it in its councils as a
properly established State and ,Government. That would
negate any pressures that may come from Member States of
this Organization in trying to bring the situation to a more
rational end.

86. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Nigeria. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
87. Mr. OGBU (Nigeria): Mr. President, I am grateful to
you for allowing me to participate in your debate on this
item, which is of the utmost importance to my country.
88. The urge to speak on this item immediately after the
representative of the United Kingdom formally brought to
the attention of the Security Council the so-called agreement between the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec
Douglas-Home and the rebel leader, Ian Smith, was irresb
tible. A cursory look at the agreement would have
convinced anyone that it did not remotely seek to take
account of the interest of the 5 million African Rhodesians,
and that it was arrived at mainly with a view to satisfying
the quarter-million white Rhodesians. What is more, one
had the feeling, even on glancing at the agreement for the
first time, that the British Government, in its desperation to
get the Rhodesian problem off its hands, had arranged a
document with Ian Smith, behind the backs of the
recognized leaders of the Africans in Rhodesia. If I resisted
the urge to speak at that point, shortly after His Excellency
Sir Colin Crowe introduced the so-called agreement to the
Security Council, it was to avoid the accusation which has

84. We read in paragraph 11 of protection from discrimination. We are told that people shall be protected from
discrimination.
But at the same time, and it is extraordinary, there is a certain clause saying that all the
discriminatory laws passed in Rhodesia up to the time of
the implementation
of the Declaration shall be enforced.
The legislation on land apportionment; the legislation on
the police State, detrimental to Africans; the legislation on
all aspects of life in Southern Rhodesia-all will continue in
operation, it is said here, and we are told it is a provision
for safeguarding against discrimination. That is absolutely
meaningless. What does Smith ‘need? He already has it. If
he wants to move Africans from place A to place B,
according to all tenets of common sense he will do so with
the legislation already on the Southern Rhodesian statute
book. He does not need to enact any other law. And that
law is saved in these proposals. That discriminatory
10

been voiced all too often, both in the Security Council and
in the General Assembly, that African delegations are apt to
dismiss any effort by the British Government at settling the
Rhodesian problem even before they have permitted
themselves enough time to study the result of such efforts.
89. It is now over a month since the agreement was made
public. My Government has studied and restudied the
document in the hope that it might find in it whatever it
was that convinced the British Government that it was an
agreement in the best interest of all Rhodesians. I regret to
say that the more the document was studied by my
Government, the more it was found that our very first
reaction to it was-and still is-quite justified. The so-called
agreement has absolutely nothing to commend it to anyone
who is desirous of settling the Rhodesian problem in the
interest of all Rhodesians. Of course, it has a lot to
commend it to those whose preoccupation is to give
satisfaction to the white minority element so as to lend
respectability to their rebellion. The agreement in all its
aspects is tantamount to a British Government endorsement
of the perpetual subjugation of the black people of
Southern Rhodesia by the white minority.
90. On 23 December 1971, my Foreign Minister, His
Excellency Dr. Okoi Arikpo, held a press conference in
Lagos on the Anglo-Rhodesian agreement, in which he
issued the following statement, and with your permission I
shall quote it:
“After
the most careful examination, the Federal
Military Government has concluded that the new British
proposals for a settlement of the Rhodesian problem are
completely unacceptable to Nigeria and cannot be recommended for acceptance by the African population of
Zimbabwe as they are designed neither to prevent the
perpetuation of white minority rule nor to guarantee
progress to majority rule in Rhodesia.
“The proposals do not even satisfy the so-called five
principles promised by the British Government as a basis
for the settlement of the Rhodesian problem. Indeed, one
of the five principles-progress
towards ending racial
discrimination-implicit
in the 19Gl Constitution has
been abandoned. All that remains of it is Mr. Smith’s
reported promise to make progress towards ending racial
discrimination.
“The new proposal will not eliminate racialism and
inequality in Zimbabwe. The two main racial groups will
operate parallel and separate elec)i-e.71rolls; and even after
parity has been achieved, there wili be no legal guarantee
to secure a unified multiracial electorate.
“On a more basic level, the proposals violate United
Natil;ns resolution 1.514 (XV), of 14 December 1960, on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples, which principally declares, in paragraph 1, that
‘The subjection of peoples to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation constitutes a denial of
fundamental human rights, is contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations and is an impediment to the
promotion of world peace and co-operation.’

“All the disguises of the proposed electoral reforms do
not conceal the most important truth about the new
arrangements which will enable Mr. Smith to frustrate
and prevent African advancement: They leave him with
the control of the economy and the schools and the
power to regulate the number of Africans to be admitted
to the electoral register.
“The Federal Government recalls that the then British
Government under Lord Balfour similarly abandoned the
African and Coloured population in 1909-1910 by
agreeing to constitutional guarantees undertaken by the
South African Government to respect African interests
and promote African advancement. After independence,
the South African Government fundamentally changed
the 1909 Constitution. The result today is total apartheid
and the enslavement of Africans+
“In the circumstances, the Nigerian Government reaffirms its stand with regard to the principle of no
independence before majority rule in Zimbabwe. It will
not support the admission of an independent Zimbabwe
under a minority regime into the United Nations, the
Commonwealth or any other international organization
of sovereign States. Nor will it agree to the lifting of
United Nations sanctions against the minority r6gime in
Zimbabwe.
“The Federal Government, therefore, urges:
“First,
effective
Zimbabwe;

United

Nations

intervention

in

“Second, the immediate introduction of a constitution
in Zimbabwe which will provide for majority rule under
the supervision of a United Nations commission;
“Third, arrangement for massive international aid for
economic reconstruction and educational development of
the African population in Zimbabwe; and
“Fourth, the Y,tivision of a United Nations guarantee of
the territorigl integrity of the new independent Zimbabwe.
<’ .L Britain rejects these just demands and persists in
opposing African aspirations in collusion with racialist
rdgimes and in threatening thereby the security of Nigeria
and other African countries, the Federal Government will
be constrained to re-examine its obligations asla member
of the Commonwealth and will take other appropriate
measures to safeguard Nigerian and African interests and
security.”
91. The United Nations cannot and must not be an
accomplice to the British attempt at abandoning the people
of Zimbabwe to perpetual bondage. If the British Government finds that as administering Power it cannot discharge
its responsibility to all the people of Zimbabwe it should
say so in clear terms and enable the United Nations to take
direct responsibility for the Territory+ The indecent haste
with which the British Government plans to grant independence to Zimbabwe under the rebel minority rCgime
constitutes a great indictment of the British sense of justice

4
and fair play and if’this plan is carried out it will be an
indelible blot on the British record of decolonization.
92. Thank God there are many people even in Britain
itself who recognize the irreparable damage which this
so-called agreement is likely to do to the British image, not
only in Africa but throughout the world. One such
distinguished Briton recently-during
the debate on Rho
desia on 2 December this year in the House of Lords-called
the Rhodesian settlement proposals a fraud. He continued:
“it is a cunning fraud and there is nothing in this for the
people of Rhodesia. The Smith regime has been able to
win its maximum advantage with a minimum of expenditure . . . and now we have therefore come to a situation
where we have betrayed the Africans, we have flouted the
Commonwealth
and we have undermined the United
Nations.”
In the same statement that noble Lord warned the British
Government of the consequences of persisting in this course
of action in Southern Rhodesia. He said:

96. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, I am grateful to you
and the Council for allowing me to speak on the important
problem of Zimbabwe. India has constantly and consistently taken great interest in the struggle for independence
of all colonial Territories. Quite naturally, our first concern
was with the countries of Asia, where most of the
Territories are now independent. Unfortunately, in Africa a
large number of Territories have still to achieve their goal of
independence.
97. On the specific question of Zimbabwe, we cannot help
feeling that the discussion in the Council over so many
years has had an air of fiction, and yet of finality,
98. We cannot ignore the fact that the Council is a
political body, and not a forum for deciding legal issues, for
which we have a separate, expensive and generally underemployed organ. However, as is inevitable, legal issues are
brought up to support different political views.
99. The first fiction is that the United Kingdom has
claimed, and we have accepted, that it is responsible for the
administration and defence and external relations of
Southern Rhodesia. The United Kingdom delegation has
admitted more than once that it has neither the administrative machinery nor the power to enforce any decision on
Southern Rhodesia or on its rebel regime. Responsibility
without power is the first fictitious responsibility the
Council is faced with.

“I am sorry to say that what is going to be done now
does not avoid bloodshed. It may postpone it, perhaps.
Certainly what is going to be done will cause great misery
in the hearts of many miIlions of Africans and Asians
throughout the world. It is a setback, yes, for all of them.
It is going to cause great joy in Pretoria, Salisbury and
Lisbon, but the bloodshed will not be averted . . . we have
put off the evil end but when it comes the end will be far
more evil. This is an insurance that in southern Africa
bloodshed will take place, and the responsibility will lie
on those who today are saying that they have taken this
action in the interest of the Africans. That sort of cant is,
I think, the most terrible thing to listen to-to say they
do it for the Africans.”

100. The second fiction is that no British Government can
be expected to use force against its kith and kin. We
consider, from such knowledge of history as we have, that
there is not a single instance where white people have used
force against other white people for the simple benefit of
the blacks. If this is accepted, the question is not one of
using force against kit11 and kin-the example of Northern
Ireland cannot be overlooked-but one of historical conflict
of the races. We wish it were not so and, in any event, we
have to take note of the British declaration that they
cannot and will not use force to solve this problem,

93. I agree with the views expressed yesterday in this
Council by the Ambassador of Syria to the effect that
resolutions will not liberate Zimbabwe, or any other
dependent Territories in southern Africa for that matter.
The people of the Territory themselves will have to take
their destinies firmly in their own hands and to meet
tyranny with force. Nevertheless, the United Nations-and
in particular the Security Council-cannot
stand idly by
while provisions of the Charter are being trampled underfoot with the aid and assistance of influential Members of
the Organization.

101. The third element-another fiction-is that sanctions
as such could bring down the Ian Smith regime in Southern
Rhodesia. I shall not delve here into the details of the
evolution of the sanctions in the Council, but it has been
well established that the sanctions have not been effective
and that they cannot be effective unless they are extended
to South Africa, South West Africa, and the Portuguese
colonies in Africa. Such an approach too has been rejected,

94. If Britain will not use force to meet a situation which
has clearly got out of hand, at least it should not put
obstacles in the way of the people of Zimbabwe by aiding
and abetting the illegal regime of Ian Smith. My delegation
cannot subscribe to the double standard underlying the
whole negotiation and agreement between the British
Government and Ian Smith. We will not be party to the
attempt by the British Government to convert Ian Smith’s
uniIatera1 declaration of independence into a Home-Ian
Smith bilateral declaration of independence,

102. Given those important considerations, the question is
why we are discussing Rhodesia, and what we hope to
achieve through this discussion. It is also pertinent to ask
why the United Kingdom Government has brought this
question before the Council, not only when the sanctions
were to be imposed, but on many other occasions. A
careful study of the documents makes it clear that the
United Kingdom’s decision to have this subject thoroughly
debated in the United Nations is closely connected with the
requirements of its domestic politics. At various stages, if
the United Nations could or would underwrite the decisions
of the British Government of the day, it would, of course,
be of great advantage; but so far as the decisions themselves

95. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of India
to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
12

1
j’
!
:

---are concerned,
it seems to us that they are taken in London
without
any inhibition about what the Security Council
and the United Nations may or may not have recommended
Or decided.
103.
The finality I have referred to is to be seen in the
Present
propodS
for a settlement. It is quite clear to us
that,
irrespective
of what the Council may decide, the
British
Government has charted a course of action which it
is determined
to follow. Many other speakers have already
referred
to the various ways in which the present proposals
conflict
with the attitude, decisions, and recommendations
of the United Nations, and it is not necessary for me to
elaborate
on them.
104.
The representative
of the United Kingdom has
Pointed
out that, in the absence of the kind of settlement
that has now been worked out, the system of apartheid
would
have been extended in all its evil aspects to Southern
Rhodesia,
that Zimbabwe would have formed some kind of
hegemony
with South Africa and the Portuguese colonies,
and thus
would have further impaired the welfare, if not
tile progress,
of the black people in Zimbabwe.
105.
On the other hand, it is evident not only that
apartheid
is rampant in Rhodesia, but that in the present
proposal
every word breathes the doctrine of racial discrimination.
Its basic assumption is that the blacks are backward
and irresponsible
and have to be ruled by the whites for
many,
many long years to come.
106.
We do not see any significant difference between the
policy
of apartheid as practised in South Africa and the
system
prevailing or proposed in Zimbabwe. Secondly,
Southern
Rhodesia is already closely allied to South Africa
and the Portuguese colonies. We do not see that the present
proposals
would in any way weaken Southern Rhodesia’s
links
with
those neighbouring colonial Territories or the
racist
Government
of South Africa, which also illegally
controls
South West Africa, or Namibia. The danger that if
some
such settlement as has been proposed by the United
Kingdom
Government were not put into effect South
African
hegemony would be consolidated in those parts of
Africa
is therefore not established.
Even bn the assumption that such hegemony will
107.
take
place, what greater harm could come to the black
population
than what it is already suffering and is expected
to suffer
for an indeterminate period of time? We would
rather
put up with these dangers and difficulties and hope
that
black
nationalism will assert itself, with such help as it
can obtain
from outside, than give ::!I? impression that some
visible
progress is being m:lcle by perpetuating white
domination
over millions of black Africans.
It
108.
principles
s/10405]
respected.
paramount
pend
on
to them.
109.
would

is in this context that we find that none of the five
which British Command Paper No. 4835 Isez
mentions in its opening paragraph has been
I shall examine the fifth principle first, as it is of
importance, for the other four principles deit, whatever detailed interpretations one may give

The fifth principle states that the British Government
need to be satisfied that any basis proposed for

independence was “acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as
a whole”. A commission, under Lord Pearce-whose ability,
integrity and capacity to understand the black people of
Southern Rhodesia need not be questioned-will explain
the Proposals, which are complicated enough, and obtain
African reaction.
110. We should not at this stage anticipate what the result
of his consultation will be; but, clearly, the explanation
will be limited to only the present proposals, without any
alternative, and there will also be no public criticisms or
discussions of these proposals by the political parties and
leaders, many of whom are in gaol and are not likely to be
released for this purpose. Certainly, they will not be
allowed the normal political work which a matter of this
importance would require.
111. It is of utmost importance that the people as a whole
be informed by supporters and critics of the settlement of
its substance and significance. This right has been denied to
the people. The Emergency Powers Act and Regulations,
the African Affairs (Maintenance) Act, the Unlawful
Organization Act, among many others, will continue to
operate. These measures give extraordinary executive and
police control over the movement of persons, the holding
of public meetings, the publication of newspapers, and all
other devices for any democratic discussion. Anyone
expressing an opinion-or even not expressing any opinion
at all-is subject to possible detention at the discretion of
the authorities.
112. The Commission under Lord Pearce will, therefore,
have an impossible task in ascertaining the genuine wishes
of the people of Southern Rhodesia under a state of
emergency with the police State intact, recognized political
leaders detained, the major political parties banned, and all
channels of communication-radio
and television included-available only to the parties in Parliament. Some
delegations have suggested that the association of the
United Nations with the task which Lord Peace will
undertake, as also with various other stages of the settlement, would be napimprovement. We do not share that
view, for the conditions in Southern Rhodesia are such that
nothing which is not to the liking of the white illegal and
racist r&gime of Ian Smith can be expressed-far less
approved. It is for that reason that the representatives of
the Zimbabwe people cannot appear before the Council,
and the opinions collected by the British Foreign Secretary
cannot be made available.
113, In those circumstances, the association of the United
Nations would simply give respectability to the suppression
and oppression of the black people in Southern Rhodesia,
and we hope tllat the United Nations will not be an
instrument for such a folly.
114. I shall now turn to the first principle, of “unimpeded
progress to majority rule”. Every ingenious method of
impeding .progress has been employed: the impediment of
time, the hpedhuent of immigration, and, finally, the
Commission will be impeded from looking over the whole
question again. The basis of voting is money and education.
1 won&r ~KIW many people, even in the United Kingdom,
would be qualified to vote if those criteria were applied. In

worked out. We think that these sanctions should be
strengthened, universally and compulsorily applied, and all
escapes prevented to the best of the ability of the United
Nations and the other Governments. This will neither bring
down the regime of Ian Smith nor introduce majority rule
in Southern Rhodesia. It will, however, prove that international opinion is anxious to put up as many obstacles as
possible for Mr. Ian Smith, and will in no way be a party to
giving respectability or recognition to his rdgime. Meallwhile, one would hope that nationalism of the Africans,
particularly of the black people of Zimbabwe, would be
strengthened to a point where the white racists of that area,
as also of South Africa and the Portuguese colonies in
Africa, will have no alternative but to deal with the blacks
as men and women of equal worth, and of equal merit and
equal dignity. We would rather wait than compromise with
human lives and human values. No self-respecting Asian or
African can take any other view.

my own country we have given the voting right to all
people, men and-women, at the age of 18. We do not regret
it-in fact, we are proud of it-and our experiment has
shown that people do not need money or four years of
secondary education to exercise their franchise in a
responsible manner. There are many independent African
countries where these criteria do not apply, and it cannot
be seriously argued that the blacks in Southern Rhodesia
are less responsible than any other group of people
anywhere in the world. The whole basis of voting there is
built on apartheid and a determined attempt to continue
the white rule. Even if everything goes well-which is more
than doubtful, as has been explained by various speakers
before me-the total number of African seats in the House
of Assembly will be only 10 more than the number of
white seats, and this too will be achieved some time in the
future-perhaps
50 years hence-and will depend, to a great
extent, on the good faith of the white minority. This is
indeed very far from majority rule based on the principle of
universal adult franchise.

120. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi): During previous meetings,
the delegation of Burundi dealt with the substance of the
permanent crisis in Rhodesia. This perpetuated state of
affairs can only be cured by the unconditional granting of
independence to the Zimbabwe people. Far from being
tantamount to unwarranted sufferings or sacrifices imposed
upon the white settlers, independence will signal the dawn
of national happiness shared by a multiracial society in
Southern Rhodesia. The fruit of the political and full
independence, the harvest of the economic resources will be
beneficial and profitable to both the black majority and the
white community.

115. The second principle speaks of guarantees to be given
by a Government which has not shrunk from rebellion and
by a Prime Minister who has not hesitated to break his oath
to his own Sovereign. Is he or his successor likely to be
deterred from breaking or circumventing the entrenched
guarantees if he finds them inconvenient at any time?
116. The third principle, about the improvement of the
political status of the African population, does not even
come up to the standards of the 1961 Constitution-and
they are deplorable enough.

121. As to the agreement reached between London and
Salisbury last month (see S/IO405/, it represents an
obvious political imbroglio, whose tenns can scarcely be
digested even by the most erudite scholars. The phases
established by this intricate system are totally unnecessary
and as such shun the real issue, which is independence
according to the normal democratic process.

117. The fourth principle, on progress towards ending
racial discrimination, is to be applied in such a manner as to
bring about some slight improvement in some distant
future. The progress foreseen is so marginal that it hardly
merits any real recognition.
118. I could take up any and every detail of the
complicated proposals and demonstrate, as indeed has been
done by many others, that in its’entirety it simply means
the maintenance of the status quo with some promises and
faint hopes, here and there, and leaving the entire future of
this
country to the white racist minority rkgime. It has
further been proposed that once these proposals have been
given effect to, the sanctions should be withdrawn, and the
independence of Southern Rhodesia recognized. In due
course, I suppose, we shall be witnessing diplomatic
relations with that country, and perhaps we shall even face
an application for its membership in the United Nations.
We have indeed moved a long way from the days when the
British Government declared that it would use every
practicable means available to it to bring down the regime
of Ian Smith.

122. The decision of the Security Council on 2 December

(1604th meeting] to invite Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole to
address this body had made it unnecessary for my
delegation to intervene in this matter. Nevertheless, in view
of the reply by the British Government to the Council’s
decision in this respect, my delegation is compelled to state
that this is the first acid test of Great Britain’s ability to
implement the so-called agreement.
123. My delegation therefore has serious doubts about the
success of the administering Power in attaining the ultimate
goal, namely, independence, if the United Kingdom fails to
produce the legitimate representatives of the Zimbabwe
people before the Council. In other words, to disclaim the
ability to bring Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole to New York
before this highest organ is tantamount to disclaiming the
ability to implement the agreement.

119. In these circumstances, the United Nations can
certainly adopt resolutions rejecting the British proposals,
but in our view, since the decision of the British Government has been approved by the British Parliament, that
Government is not likely to be deflected by whate,ver
resolution the Council may adopt. On the other hand, the
British Government has indicated that it is prepared to
maintain sanctions until the present proposals have been

124. On behalf of my delegation, I am pleased to express
sincerely a deserved gratitude to Ambassador Yakov
Aleksandrovich Mnlik of the LJniim of Soviet Socialist
Republics, for his resolute plea /l&22& meetirzg] for a
hearing of the true representatives of Zimbabwe before this
supreme organ.
14

I

125. In departing

from the Council my delegation is

bound to take note of the universally expresseddisappoint-

ment in the inability of the Council to function in
accordance with general hopes and expectations. There was
a wave of criticism when the Council failed to act promptly
in the Indo-Pakistan crisis, primarily because of the divided
views of the permanent members. There is criticism that
when the Council attained unanimity on the Middle East
resolution it fell short of fruitful implementation of that
resblution.
126. AS Burundi leaves the Council to other capable
hands, we see 1972 as a year in which this criticism-valid
as we all must agree it is-can be in some measure appeased.
With the happy arrival of the People’s Republic of China,
1972 will be the first full year in which it will function with
the full complement of the five permanent members. This
new voice in the person of Ambassador Huang Hua should
add greatly to its authority.
127.

The authority

of the Council in the Middle East has

also been augmented. Whatever hesitation prevailed on the

question of the interpretation of resolution 242 (1967)
should now be dispelled by the guidelines laid down by the
General Assembly sessionwhich closed a few days ago.
128. In the India-Pakistan subcontinent the unhappy
beginning fortunately ended in the constructive resolution
of 21 December [resolution 307 (1971/j, and the developments that followed appear to be a good augury for that
resolution. However, that resolution deals mainly with the
bilateral aspect of the problem, and this, it appears to my
Government,
is not enough. All the events preceding the
resolution, here and in the region, show that the tragedy of
the subcontinent ‘is only a reflection of a great-Power
struggle that is engulfing the whole of Asia. This is all too
clear and tleeds no enlargement. It seems to my delegation
that the Council may take an initiative to try to stem this
fatalistic drift without reopening the Indo-Pakistan case as
such and without tampering with the resolution of
21 December.
129. I refer, of course, to the consensus of the Council in
June 1970 [15#4th meeting], providing for periodic
high-Ievel
meetings of the Council in an endeavour to
anticipate and to give thought to those incipient threats to
international
peace and security which might be dealt with
informally
in a spirit of prevention before they develop into
stubborn and intractable symptoms. Without going further,
I will merely respectfully suggest that, especially with
China-the real China-here, such a high-level session might
be devoted to the item of “an Asian peace”, because Asia is
the most troubIed continent.
130. In conclusion, the delegation of Burundi departs with
the prayerful hope that the Council will deal constructively
with the African items on its agenda and with a sensitive
response to the hopes and expectations of the suffering
peoples of Africa.
13 1. My delegation wishes to express its profound satisfaction at having been able to co-operate with all members
of the Council during our tenure and especially to pay
tribute
to our President, Mr. Taylor-Kamara of Sierra

Leone, under whose presidency, conducted with great skill,
business-like efficiency and exemplary patience, the Council was seized of the difficult and vexing issues of the
subcontinent and Rhodesia. We extend to him and all our
colleagues our best wishes for the New Year and many
years ahead.
132. This Organization and mankind as a whole owe a
great debt of gratitude to our retiring Secretary-General,
U Than& who has held his office for the unprecedented
time of 10 years-10 long and historic years which
witnessed great changes and an important transition, He
dedicated himself to the United Nations during the first
years of the first decade of economic development, He
navigated between the eras of d&ente and violence, which
do not make a statesman’s leadership an easy task. The
world presents a rather simple problem when there is a
sharp confrontation between good and evil; but it is
complicated when evil and good are developing side by side.
My delegation believes that U Thant succeeded in dealing
with this complicated world when it was suspended
between hope and fear. One of his greatest contributions
was his refusal to conceal fear and his determination to
hold up high the torch of hope. This he wasable to do by a
unique contribution of his own. It is often debated whether
the office of Secretary-General should be political or
administrative. U Thant added a third alternative, spiritual
leadership, which is a great legacy in a world that is shaken
by a moral erosion The Burundese delegation holds that a
book can be written on his many other virtues; but my
delegation is content to settle for that one single contribution to the international community. We extend to him
our sincere wish for a happy New Year and a long life of
service and dedication, which we are confident he will
continue to render.
133. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Algeria to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
134. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, permit me first to extend to you my thanks,
and I should like to thank the members of the Council also,
for permitting me to take the floor in this debate on
Southern Rhodesia.
135. Before going into the subject itself, I must say that
my statement must be understood to lie within the
framework of the mandate entrusted by the Organization
of African Unity to three African countries, Algeria,
Senegal and Zambia, to follow the debates on Rhodesia in
the Security Council. It is under this mandate that we
addressed the Council at previous meetings to reaffirm the
great interest of the Organization of African Unity in the
situation in Rhodesia and to request that all possible
measures be taken to put an end to the illegal situation
created by the unilateral declaration of independence by
the racist minority of Salisbury and to permit the African
majority to exercise its rights to self-determination and
independence.
136, We do not think that it is indispensable to go once
again into the details of the problem. They are very well
known to the Council, which for many years now has had

t

the question of Rhodesia before it. Many resolutions have
already been adopted, both by the Council itself and by the
Assembly. These have reaffirmed the right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination; they have requested the
administering Power to take the necessary measures to put
an end to the systetn of racial discrimiriation and to permit
the African majority to exercise its responsibilities in the
government of the country.
137. In the light of the failure of the administering Power
to discharge its obligations, if necessary by making use of
armed force, the Council took economic sanctions against
the Salisbury regime which were meant to be binding.
138. However, the British Government began negotiations
with Smith and, after the talks had been broken off several
times, now announces that it has reached an agreement [see
$/IO405/ which may bring about a solution to the problem
of Rhodesia.
139. It was at the request of the United Kingdom that the
Security Council began its debate on Rhodesia devoted to
the examination of this agreement. I do not know whether
the British delegation had in mind simply to provide
information to the Council in order to keep it abreast of
the way in which the administering Power intended to
discharge its responsibilities,
or whether it wanted to
submit those proposals to this august body in order to
ensure that they received its approval.

British Government, as of ensuring that it respects the
principles adopted and often reaffirmed by the Security
Council and by the General Assembly.
143. I do not want to strain the patience of members of
the Council by entering into a critical analysis of the
Anglo-Rhodesian agreement. Such an analysis has already
been made, and very well made, by previous speakers, and I
have nothing to add to what they have said on this subject,
144. The extreme complexity of the measures contemplated would be enough in any case to condemn them, and
the same can be said for the gaps which were so subtly
introduced into the text and which leave the way open to
all kinds of departures from the application of those
principles. And what are we to think of the fact that it is
the minority, the very minority in Salisbury, which has
been entrusted with the task, once the independence of
Rhodesia has been accepted and legalized, of implementing
the measures which theoretically are supposed to bring the
African majority to the government of the country?
145. But I shall not dwell on those provisions, which are
certainly the result of a praiseworthy effort of intellectual
acrobatics. Their ineffectiveness has already been amply
demonstrated. For us the only fundamental element of the
problem is and remains the future of the people of
Zimbabwe. It is to the people of Zimbabwe that justice is
owed first and foremost, and it is for that people to decide
on its own future in complete freedom and independence.

140. In dealing with the problem of Rhodesia and
discussing it regularly since 1965, the Security Council has
recognized its own responsibility in this matter, and the
British delegation, in associating itself with the decisions
taken by the Council, sometimes on its own initiative, has
confirmed that responsibility. Of course, Great Britain has
always been considered the administering Power, and it is as
such that the Council requested it to ensure the application
of the measures which it advocated. While the Council has
always given a great deal of liberty and room for manoeuvre
to the administering Power in the search for ways and
means to be used, none the less it specified the inviolable
principles which should provide the basis for any acceptable
solution. The Council is therefore obliged to say today
whether the solution proposed by Great Britain is in
keeping with the decisions it has already taken and the rules
it has already laid down. It cannot, under any circumstances, merely take note of the British communication
and, on the basis of more or less vague assurances,
relinquish its own responsibility in favour of the British
Government.

146. The agreement submitted to the Council was between the British Government and the racist and rebel
regime of Ian Smith. The representative of the United
Kingdom did state [1605th meeting/ that Lord Home was
able to make contact with 97 representatives of the African
majority. But the provisions of the agreement were nego.tiated solely with the representatives of the minority in
power. It is difficult to know to what extent account was
taken of the views expressed by the Africans. There can be
no doubt that it would be very important for the Council
to have some knowledge at least of the memoranda
presented by the leaders of the two African parties in
Rhodesia, ZAPU and ZANU. The reluctance of Great
Britain to publish these documents is difficult to endorse. It
is particularly regrettable because that action deprives the
Council of information which would be of the utmost
importance in its deliberation.
147. But, we are told, the agreement will come into effect
only when it receives the approval of the Rhodesian people
as a whole. That is the famous acceptability clause, which
was particularly stressed by the representative of the United
Kingdom, and quite rightly so. I say quite rightly because
that clause should make it possible to destroy one of the
principal objections to the agreement, namely, the nonparticipation of Africans. To this end, a commission made
up of British representatives will be entrusted with the task
of going around the country, explaining the provisions of
the agreement and obtaining the views of the people. It is
on the basis of that information that it will be decided
whether the Rhodesian people as a whole do or do not
approve the text submitted to them.

141. We should like to reaffirm here most categorically
and firmly that whatever the importance of the obligations
which we recognize as belonging to the administering
Power, the primary and ultimate responsibility for the
solution of the problem of Rhodesia rests with the Security
Council.
142. The British proposal must therefore be considered in
the light of previous recommendations of the Council. It is
not so much a matter of considering whether the process
contained in the Anglo-Rhodesian agreement is in keeping
with the six or five principles unilaterally laid down by the

16

148. It is far from our intention to question the honesty
of the members of the commission, but is this not rather a
strange
way of consulting a population of more than
5 million people ? While the future of a whole people is at
stake are we going to content ourselveswith thisprocedure
which is so difficult to put into effect and inevitably
imperfect?
And what choice will be offered to those who
are going to be consulted, apart from that of simply
accepting or refusing a set of measureswhich wereworked
out without their participation? If the British Government
really wants to ascertain the views of the people on the
agreement it negotiated with Smith, there is only one way
of doing it. One way only which will yield a clear and
unequivocal reply, and that is a referenduminvolving the
Whole population of Rhodesia, on the basisof one man,
one votg. There is no other honest way of finding out the
views of the Rhodesian people about theseproposals,We
will deny in advance any validity to a decisiontaken by the
British Government on the basisof the opinionsgathered
by the commission to which it wants to give the task of
applying what it calls the test of acceptability.
149. In fact, the political leadersof the African peopleof
Rhodesia have already made known their oppositionto the
Home-Smith
agreement. The Organization of African
Unity, for its part, has rejected the whole Anglo-Rhode&m
pIan as a plan that will lead to the final alienationof the
Zimbabwe
people doomed indefinitely, and in a manner
legalized by the British Government, to endurethe oppression
of a racist minority which has never concealedits
intention
and its will to perpetuate its dominationand to
maintain a regime of racial segregation.
150. The Council can find out the views of the African
people of Rhodesia. This people has qualified representatives to express its wishesand make known its aspirations,
TIzese representatives, who for many yearsnow have been
rotting
in Ian Smith’s prisons, are entitled to speak on
behalf of their people. Let them come here and speakto
this Council and set forth their views and objectives
directly.
They can say what they think of the plan
presented by the British Government. For us, there could
be no better test of acceptability of this plan.
f 5 I, I shall confine my statement to thesefew thoughts,
wltich
of course do nol: exhaust the question, but do lay
stress on the fact that the British proposalscan make no
claim
whatsoever to complying with the principles laid
down
by the Security Council. In following the British
Government
in its intentions, we would end up by
legdizing
a rebellion which the Council has always condemned.
We would be consolidating the power of a
ntinority
r6gime which the Council has alreadyattempted
to
overthrow
by economic sanctions, and we would
elIcourage the establishment and strengtheningof a system
of
racial segregation which arousesthe indignation of
international
opinion.

it must help it to defend itself because,in effect, a people
must wrest its own freedom for itself andrecover its dignity
by its own sacrifices.
153. Under the mandate entrusted to Algeria by the
Organization of African Unity, I therefore askthe Council
to reject the Anglo-Rhodesianagreementasnot complying
with the principles it has laid down for a solution of the
Rhodesianproblem.
154. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium)(interpretation from
French): My delegationhasfollowed with greatinterest the
debate which the Security Council has devoted to the
question of Southern Nlodesia. Although the debate was
interrupted by the urgent considerationof the grave events
which occurred in the Indian subcontinent, it is neverthelesstrue that my Government hasremainedattentive to
the new prospectswhich are openingup in connexion with
the revolution of the political situation in Rhodesia,
following the proposals for a settlement agreed to in
Salisbury.
155. On several occasionsthe Belgian Government has
cIearly stated that it doesnot recognizeany legalexistence
of the Ian Smith rkgime, which unilaterally proclaimed
independence in 1965 and which ignored the righht of
self-determination of the peoplesof the Territory. It is for
that reasonthat Belgiumhasscrupulouslyimplementedthe
decisions taken by the Council in connexion with the
breaking off of consular relations and the application of
economic sanctions.
156. My delegationhas participated actively in the work
of the Committee created by the Security Council under
the terms of resolution253 (1968). Sincethe fourth report
of that Committee of the Council is mentioned in our
agenda(S/1 0229 and Add. 1 and 21, I must emphasizehere
that the implementation of sanctionshas resulted in the
loss of very important traditional marketsfor Belgium.
157. Therefore, it is a function of a fundamental principle-namely, the inalienableright of the whole of the
Rbodesian population to self-determinationand independence-that my delegationhastaken note of the proposals
for a settlement known asthe Salisburyagreement.
158. We have appreciatedvery much the initiative under.
taken by the British Governmentto unfreezethe political
situation in Rhodesia.The state of stagnationandparalysis
which had occurred in the Territory was becomingmore
and more dangerous,sinceit wasleadinginevitably to the
creation of a new citadel of racismand intolerance.
159. The Security Council should take note of the
decision of the Government of the United Kingdom to act
as administering Power and elaborate a programme of
action in Rhodesia, designedto establisha government
founded upon the basis of the majority. We share the
opinion expressedby severalmembersof the Council that it
is for the United Kingdom to take the necessarymeasures
appropriate to the specialconditions which prevail in the
Territory, so as to set up machinery that would make it
possible for all inhabitants of Rhodesiato voice their
opinion freely, without pressureor constraint.On the other

152.
The African people of Rhodesia, whose right to
self-determination
has been recognized and repeatedly
reaffirmed
in this very place, is entitled to decideon its
own
future in some other way than by this travesty of
consultation
which we denounce most categorically.The
Security
Council must defend the rights of this peopleand
17

hand, it seems to us dangerous for the Council, or any other
organ of the United Nations, to arrogate unto itself the
right to dictate or to impose, so to speak, behind the back
of the administering Power, some political settlement.
However, the Council must follow very closely the implementation of the test of acceptability advocated under the
Salisbury agreement. We rely upon the loyalty and diligence
with which London will undertake the consultations with
the African people. Those consultations should be organized without delay and should make it possible for all
parties concerned to make known their opinion.

whole been thoughtful and deeply concerned. Indeed,
concern has been the principal element in this debate
-concern shared by us all for the future of the Rhodesian
Africans. If there is a difference between us, it would seem
to be this: some delegations are looking for what I might
call the ideal solution. My Government, on the other hand,
the Power which the Security Council has all along insisted
is the one which carries responsibility for achieving a
settlement, has had to take account of the harsh realities of
the situation and of the limitations on our effective power,
That, I believe, is the only real difference between us-the
difference between the ideal and the practicable.

160. In these two respects, namely the duty of the
Council and the prerogatives of the administering Power,
we wonder whether the United Kingdom, within the
framework of its responsibilities, could not undertake the
initiative, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, of inviting some personality to participate
in the work of the Pearce Commission.

166. I think that in the course of our discussions I have
dealt with most of the questions that have been raised in so
far as they are answerable or have not already been
answered in the text of the proposals themselves. There is,
however, the question of the participation of United
Nations observers in the test of acceptability, about which
questions have been raised in the past and which is covered
in operative paragraph 6 of the preliminary draft resolution.
My Government has carefully considered the suggestion for
United Nations involvement in the conduct of the test of
acceptability. It does not see, however, how such involvement could be reconciled with the principle-on which the
draft resolution is no less insistent-that the British Government is the administering Power and must carry full
responsibility for the exercise of its obligations. The first
and most important obligation we have laid on ourselves is
to be satisfied that any basis for independence is acceptable
to the people of Rhodesia as a whole. That is the task of
the Pearce Commission, which will, I can assure the
Council, carry it out thoroughly and impartially.

1G1. Furthermore, we would also have been in favour of
having the consultations undertaken among members of the
Council lead to a hearing by the Council of representatives
of the ZAPU and ZANU parties.
162. With regard to the draft resolution which the
representative of Somalia submitted yesterday to the
Council (1622nd nzeeting, prim. 8/, my delegation will not
be in a position to support it, In addition to the arguments
adduced a few moments ago, we continue to believe that it
seems premature to pass judgement on the Salisbury
agreement under present conditions, since that agreement is
only a proposed settlement and is not yet final. It seems
indispensable that we await the results, and the possible
recommendations, of the Pearce Commission. My delegation wil4 therefore have to abstain on the draft resolution.
We can hardly accept a text which takes a decision on the
substance of the matter without having all the necessary
elements in our possession in advance.

167. Perhaps this would be an appropriate moment to say
something more about the Commission. Since my state.
ment of 2 December [IbLUth meeting] the two other
Deputy Chairmen have been named. They are Sir Glyn
Jones and Sir Frederick Pedler. Both men have had
distinguished careers in Africa, in and out of Government
service. Sir Glyn Jones served for many years in central and
southern Africa. He was Governor-General of Malawi from
1964 until 1966, and before that his service included
eighteen years in what was then known as Northern
Rhodesia. The earlier part of Sir Frederick Pedler’s career in
Africa was also in Government service. He spent three years
in Tanganyika and was Secretary to the Commission on
Higher Education in East Africa and the Sudan in 1937.
Since 1947 his main interests in Africa have been of a
commercial nature, as he has been with the United Africa
Company for many years, becoming a director of Unilever
and its Deputy Chairman from 1965 to 1968. He is
currently Chairman of the Council for Technical Education
and Training for Overseas Countries.

163. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Before I get on
to the substance of my statement, and as this may be the
last chance for me to do so before the end of the year, may
I take this opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your tenure of presidency during what must have been
one of the most strenuous months for a President of the
Security Council in many years-indeed,
perhaps in the
history of the United Nations. The number and importance
of the subjects we have had to deal with in thismonth are
astonishing, and they were, indeed, extremely exhausting,
but you stood up to the pressures nobly.
164. I should also like to bid farewell to you and to our
colleagues from Nicaragua, Poland, Burundi and Syria, who
will be leaving the Council at the end of the year, to wish
them well and to say how much we have appreciated ad
valued their wisdom and co-operation. It has been a
pleasure to work with them.

168. The sixteen Commissioners to help Lord Pearce and
his four Deputy Chairmen are now being recruited. They
are being chosen amongst people with a background
knowledge of Africa, some of whom will be from within
the British Government service and some from outside. The
Commission will be supported by accurate and unbiased
interpreters in Shona and Sindebele. The Council may also
wish to know that the settlement proposals are being
translated into Shona and Sindebele, and half a million
copies are being printed in the first instance.

165. Before further consideration is given to the preliminary draft resolution which was outlined to us yesterday by
the distinguished representative of Somalia [ibid.], I feel I
should perhaps make a few further observations in the light
of the debate which has taken place, which has on the
18

169. I have assured the Council that the Pearce Commission will carry out its task thoroughly and impartially. As I
have pointed out, it is composed of members who have
judicial, administrative, commercial and political experience
of Africa, and they will not require any form of international supervision in order to establish whether or not the
proposed settlement is acceptable to the people of Southern Rhodesia as a whole. I should emphasize that there will
be nothing clandestine about the Commission’s approach or
method of operation. As Lord Pearce himself said on 20
December, “We have a strong feeling that the media should
be kept informed of what is going on, and we hope that
adequate coverage of our work can be arranged”,

174. Right up to the stage of parity, for any amendment
of the Constitution to be accepted, it will require not only
the affirmative votes of at least two thirds of the total
membership of the House of Assembly, but also the
affirmative votes of a majority of the total African
membership. This means that at all stages the directly
elected Africans cannot be bypassed. And in case there
should be any fear that such a majority could be obtained
through a prearranged absenteeism, let me quote what
Lord Goodman, who did much of the negotiating, had to
say about this in the House of Lords on 1 December:
“The idea that you have only to have one African who
has a cold or another who is knocked down and the
blocking mechanism ceases to function is, if I may say so,
disposed of by the terms of the White Paper which refers
to the majority of the total number of Africans in the
House. It is not a majority of the tota number present at
any moment, but a majority of those eligible to have seats
and to vote; one need have no apprehension that if an
African is detained by a social event, or is kidnapped or is
suborned so that he does not attend, that will enable the
blocking mechanism to be defeated.”

170. My Government is therefore confident that the
Pearce Commission has the integrity, qualifications and
experience necessary to carry out the task with which it is
charged, and we do not believe that any outside involvement is either necessary or justified in order that we may
carry out our responsibility. If, as has been suggested, the
Commission does not find the conditions required to enable
it to carry out its task I have no doubt it will promptly
report accordingly.
171. The debate has shown one or two possible misconceptions which I think it would be desirable to clear up.

Lord Goodman, added: “We were not, if I may say so, so
simple as that”.

172. In the first place, I have been asked more than once
what is the alternative if the test of acceptability shows that
these proposals are not acceptable to the people of
Rhodesia as a whole. As I said in my statement on
2 December, this is a good example of an unanswerable
question, because we cannot make commitments about
hypothetical
situations. 1 can, however, say that my
Government has no alternative proposals up its sleeve to
advance if the present proposals should prove unacceptable.
Indeed, it is difficult to see what other proposals could be
made. In another sense, however, the question is perhaps a
misdirected one. We should instead be asking ourselves
what the alternative is for the African majority in Rhodesia,
Are they to choose the road to which these proposals point,
hard and arduous though that road may be? Or are they to
choose the road which, as we see it, would lead to an
intensification of racial discrimination and qmtkeid? This
question of a practicable-I repeat, practicable-alternative
is one LO which the critics of our proposals have not
addressed themselves, as the distinguished representative of
Italy has rightly pointed out.

175. In his intervention yesterday /1622nd meethggl the
representative of Somalia suggested that the concept of
parity was a myth, since the 50 African members would
include what he called 24 “appointed” members. This
overlooks two essential facts. First, the indirectly elected
members are not nominees of the Government or of the
chiefs; they are elected by an electoral college in which the
majority of the members are themselves elected councillors.
These indirectly elected members of the House of Assembly
are not Government pensioners, and, as I pointed out in an
earlier intervention, their voting record shows that they
have aligned themselves with their directly elected colleagues on all contentious issues. Secondly, the representative of Somalia overlooks the fact that as soon as parity is
reached there is to be a referendum among the African
voters to decide on the future of the indirectly elected
seats.
176. A further misunderstanding that has been prevalent
concerns subparagraph 1 (k) of paragraph II of the proposals. It has been widely suggested that this subparagraph
means that the establishment of the Common Roll seats
after parity will be subject to a white veto. Again, I must
stress that this is not so. The establishment of the Common
Roll seats after parity will be an especially entrenched
provision of the Constitution. The Commission which is
provided for in subparagraph(k) *vi11have no power to
prevent the establishment of the Common Roll seats. Any
alternative arrangements, whether based on the recommendation of the Commission or otherwise, can be made
only by amending the Constitution, and this would require
a two-thirds majority. By the time the Commission has
reported, the African voters will already have held their
referendum to decide the future of the indirectly elected
seats. And at least 17 African votes in the House of
Assembly would be necessary for any change in the
constitutional provision for the creation of the Common

173. Secondly, there have been a good many questions
about guarantees to prevent the settlement’s being overturned, and in particular to prevent any retrogressive
amendment of the constitutional provisions. Now, we must
all admit that no constitution is foolproof against a coup
d’8tat. The only effective external guarantee against a coup
d’ktat would be the use of force, which has always been
ruled out for good reasons I do not need to repeat. Leaving
this aside, however, we believe that the internal guarantees
against retrogressive amendment of the constitutional provisions can indeed achieve their purpose. It has, for
example, been suggested that the white Members of
Parliament, together with the indirectly elected African
representatives, can put through retrogressive amendments
to the Constitution. That is not so, as a study of the
proposals will make clear.
19

Roll seats. Thus the Africans can effectively block any
proposals which would frustrate majority rule. I hope,
therefore, that this misunderstanding is now cleared up.
177. Perhaps I should also at this stage say something
about the proposal to invite Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole to
appear before the Council in order to state their views,
although in fact there is not much that I can add to my
letter of 21 December 1971 to the President of the Council,
which has been reproduced in document S/10470. AS I
explained to you during our consultations, we have no
objection to these invitations being issued by the Council.
Equally, however, I made it clear that my Government was
in no position to require the Rhodesian authorities to allow
the persons concerned to come to New York. Perhaps, since
at any rate in the English interpretation there was a
misquotation from my letter in the intervention of the
representative of the Soviet Union, I should stress that the
word I used was “require”, not “request”. An attempt has
been made to blow this question up out of all proportion.
The fact is that for the purposes of the test of acceptability,
the action lies not in New York but in Rhodesia itself. That
is.where Mr. Nkomo’s and Mr. Sithole’s views can be made
known to the Pearce Commission.
178. It is the test of acceptability which is the crucial next
stage. What we are concerned with at the present time is
not whether these proposals are acceptable to the United
Nations, but whether they are acceptable to the people of
Rhodesia. We do not feel that it is either necessary or
desirable for the United Nations to adopt resolutions at this
stage; let us suspend judgement until we can see what will
emerge from the test of acceptability.

:

179. But we now have before us a preliminary draft
resolution. I have already said that I do not believe that any
resolution by the Security CounciI is called for at present,
and that before contemplating any further action we should
all await the views of the people of Rhodesia as a whole, as
expressed by the Pearce Commission. This view is reinforced by an examination of the draft. I recognize that this
draft shows the deep concern of its author for the future of
the people of Rhodesia, but in all honesty I must say that it
seems to me to suffer from a basic defect. It fails to
distinguish effectively between, on the one hand, the
legitimate concern of the United Nations in this matter and,
on the other hand, the fundamental responsibility which, as
successive Security Council resolutions have insisted, lies
with the British Government and the British Government
alone. Thus it seeks to impose conditions and obligations
on us in the discharge of that responsibility. In operative
paragraphs 5 and 6 it seeks to telI us how we should
ascertain the views of the people of Rhodesia on their
political future. As I have already explained, this is a matter
which the British Government, as the administering Power,
must handle for itself. Moreover, in the earlier operative
paragraphs the draft takes a view on, and rejects, the
proposals. But this is precisely the matter on which we shall
be seeking the views of the Rhodesian people as a whole,
and prior judgement by the Security Council would be
premature. It also imposes conditions which successive
British Governments have made plain are not acceptable
because they do not lie within the realm of practical
possibility.
20

180. I said at the outset that the difference between my
delegation and some of the other delegations represented in
the Security Council was the difference between what was
ideal and what waspracticable. The present draft is, I regret
to say, far removed from what is practicable.
181. To sum up, may I suggest that there are six
propositions by which we should be guided in our approach
to this very difficult problem. One: The position of the
Africans in Rhodesia is not yet as bleak and hopeless as it is
in South Africa; but it has steadily deteriorated in the last
six years. The biggest danger is that they and their children
and their children’s children may be condemned to the
degradation and misery of apartheid; Two: Nobody in this
room wants that. But ruling out, as we must do, the
possibility of military intervention, the British Government,
even with the support of the United Nations, cannot
physically impose its will; Three: Therefore an agreed
settlement is the only way to avert the danger; Four: Some
details of the agreed proposals may be open to criticism. I
have already admitted freely that they are not ideal; Five:
Nevertheless the agreed proposals, if they are accepted, will
bring about a change of direction. They will give an
opportunity to halt and reverse the present downhill course
which is leading inexorably to the precipice of apartheid.
They can lead towards majority rule in a multiracial society
and in a prosperous and expanding economy; Six: The last
word on these proposals must rest with the Rhodesians
themselves. It is their views, based on a full understanding
of what the proposals mean in practice, that we shall now
be ascertaining in an open, impartial, painstaking and
protracted process of consultation.
182. We all owe it to the people of Rhodesia to allow
them to make up their own minds on their own future after
mature and quiet deliberation. Until they have done so, let
us suspend our own judgement.
183. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I have not asked for the floor to
object to the arguments which my good and esteemed
friend Ambassador Farah has used in his remarks concerning my statement. 1 have asked to be allowed to speak
simply to dispel or correct some impressions which our
colleague of Somalia appears to have drawn from my
statement.
184. Let me start by saying that we are not requested, as
far as we understand and even more so after what Sir Colin
Crowe has just stated, to endorse the proposals for a
settlement which have been reported to the Council by the
British Government; nor should we anticipate the result of
the test of acceptability.
185. I have made clear in my statement the limited scope
which, in our view, the negotiations held by the British
Government had from the beginning and the reasons which,
apparently, made the United Kingdom decide to resume the
negotiations with Salisbury in the light of the incomplete
results of the sanctions applied against Rhodesia and of
some unpleasant but inescapable realities. In short, the
limited scope seems to be to break the present deadlock
which has lasted for so many years and to put a new
process in motion. We are at the same time giving our
assessmentin general of the substance of the proposals.

186. There is not a word in my statement which can be
construed as a denial of the will of the majority or the
principle of one man, one vote. Italy’s record on this point
is unquestionable, and I would ask my good friend
Ambassador Farah to read my statement carefully. He will
notice also that we are not prejudging in any way the future
deliberations of the Council. My simple comment on the
test of acceptability was that it would provide the first real
opportunity to reach individuals and groups of people in
each corner of the Territory and to begin doing what has
been badly needed for a very long time, namely, to bring
the adult African population of Rhodesia to think about its
future and its fundamental rights-however
unsatisfactory
and incomplete this process may seem, it can be of some
use-m order to have millions of people know what they
have ignored until now and could go on ignoring for many
years to come. In other words, in spite of its shortcomings
that test could serve a useful purpose if it really succeeded
in breaking the deadlock and at the same time making the
people concerned aware of their fundamental rights. And
WC? all know that once an idea, revolutionary by nature, is
placed in the mind of a nation there is no will, no power on
earth, which can stop that nation from taking hold of its
own destiny. To recall the words of a well-known author,
“Nothing is stronger than an idea whose time has come”.

people as a whole. The position we have taken is based on
our concern to refuse no chance, however small, to open
the way to the implementation of this principle.
192. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation fvom Russian): Mr, President, I should like, in
exercise of the right of reply, to answer some of the
remarks made by the United Kingdom representative. The
important thing is not which English verb the Soviet
delegate used--(‘request”,
“demand” or any other English
verb. The important thing is the substance of the question.
We must not conceal the essence of the problem by
arguments having to do with semantics: For the Security
Council the essence of the problem is perfectly clear. The
United Kingdom Government has refused to co-operate
with the Council and enable two leading political figures of
Southern Rhodesia-Mr. Nkomo and Mr, Sithole-to appear
at a meeting of the Council, set forth their views concerning
the situation in Rhodesia and give their assessment of the
Smith-Home agreement.
193. This is how we must assess the attitude of the United
Kingdom Government to the Security Council’s decision.
The United Kingdom has violated that decision, it has not
complied with it, and the Council must take note of the
refusal of the United Kingdom Government to implement
the Security Council’s decision that the United Kingdom
Government, as the administering Power bearing full
responsibility for the situation in Southern Rhodesia,
should provide an opportunity for the CounciI to hear the
views of those two political leaders who represent the two
major political parties of the people of Zimbabwe. No
semantic arguments about English verbs-stronger
or
weaker verbs-can conceal this essence of the question,

187. Of course, our modest expectations could also be
frustrated. That is why we have submitted some suggestions
related to the test of acceptability and added that the
results of that test should be carefully studied by the
Security Council.
188. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation from
Freplch/: The few remarks I should like to make are
basically similar to those just expressed by the Ambassador
of Italy. Their purpose is to clarify our position following
the comments made immediately after my statement by the
representative of Somalia.

194. I believe that in the decision to be adopted by the
Council on the question under discussion we must take
note of the failure of the United Kingdom Government to
implement the Security Council’s decision concerning the
invitation to Mr, Nkomo and Mr. Sithole.

189. If I understood correctly what Ambassador Farah has
said, he considers that the position of my delegation, at
least to some extent, amounts to internationally endorsing
the proposals we are discussing. He points out also that the
solution proposed is not in keeping with the principles on
which my Government, among others, based itself when
seeking solutions to the problems which faced it in Africa.

195. That is the real picture and no arguments about
semantics can change the situation.
196. Now, as for the United Kingdom representative’s
proposal that the Council should do nothing and should
cease to consider the matter of Southern Rhodesia, a
question naturally arises: Why was he in such haste to put
the matter before the Security Council? SWhat did the
United Kingdom want? What aim was it pursuing? Was it
merely to inform the Council of that racist4mperialist deal
between the British lord and the Southern Rhodesian racist
and have the matter end there-in other words, to secure
the Council’s silent assent to that deal? I do not think that
the majority of members of the Council would agree with
that approach to the question under discussion. So why
have we been wasting time? If that were the case, there
would have been no need for the United Kingdom to
inform the Council about that deal; it could simply have
done whatever it, as the administering Power, saw fit.

190. On the first point, I should like to say that the idea
of granting international standing to the proposals in
question or the test of acceptability has never occurred to
us. For us it is simply a matter of following the experiment
and awaiting its results in the hope that maybe this
experiment will mark the end of the status quo and, as I
said just now, reintroduce momentum into a stagnant
situation.
191. As to the second comment of the Ambassador of
Somalia, I certainly concede his point; and I would remind
him that I said precisely that just now, when I noted that
the process of emancipation implemented by France in
&-mr African countries was very different from the system
described in the proposals which we are discussing-and
that, of course, tor us the Rhodesian problem should be
solved in keeping with the freely expressed will of the

197. But the question of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia now has an international dimension. It is being
dealt with by the United Nations and by the appropriate
21

United Nations bodies. This question now falls within the
competence of the Security Council. The Council has heard
the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom
and his report on the Home-Smith agreement. The members
of the Council have spoken and an dverwhelming majority of them have condemned that deal, regarding it as an
imperialist, colonialist, racist arrangement depriving the
people of Zimbabwe of the opportunity to attain national
independence and become full masters of their own
country in the near future. Many delegations of States
Members of the United Nations which are not members of
the Council have taken part in the discussion. Not a single
voice has been raised here in support of this deal, in support
of the position of the United Kingdom Government and the
Southern Rhodesian racists. Consequently, that aspect of
the question too is perfectly clear. The overwhelming
majority in the Security Council and those States whose
representatives have taken part in the discussion of this
question not only do not approve of this deal but they
decisively condemn and reject it.
198. For the representative of the United Kingdom it
would, of course, be more convenient to put an end to the
discussion of the question of Southern Rhodesia and forget
that the question has been discussed in the Security
Council. But it was the United Kingdom which initiated the
discussion of this question, the United Kingdom put it
before the Council. We have discussed it and how, when
dealing with such an important question which has now
become a United Nations question, i.e., an international
question and not just a Home-Smith question, could we fail
to take any decision?

leadersare in prison? They are not beingallowed to appear
before the Security Council, their documents are being
hidden from the Security Council and the United Nations,
The Council would know the views of the people if the
United Kingdom would submit to the Security Council-as
the Council hasinsistedand in accordancewith the special
decisionit hastaken-the memorandumsof Mr. Nkomo and
Mr. Sithole, which were handed by them to Lord Home.
The views of the people of Southern Rhodesiawould be
clear and there would be no need to talk of “ascertaining
views”. That is a totally unnecessaryexerciseand I am not
inclined to think that the Council would approve such a
procedure, which would clearly be calculated to delay
matters and to sanction the perpetuation of the terrorist
rule of the racist regimein Southern Rhodesia.
202. The United Kingdom representativecontrasts“idealism” with “reality”. But that is a play on words. Idealismis
not at issuehere. Weare dealinghere with a definite reality,
the reality that the people of Zimbabwe aspireto independence, that they wish to rid themselvesof racist rule, That
is reality. And that reality has been known for many years
to the United Nations and the Security Council. That is
indeed the reality. And what can be held up in contrast to
it? That which the distinguishedrepresentativeof Nigeria
spoke of here when he characterized the Home-Smithdeal
asa fraud.
203. Therefore, if we are going to make comparisons,we
must compare not idealism with reality but reality with
fraud. The Home-Smith deal, as the representative of
Nigeria said in his statement to the Security Council, is a
fraud. And that is a fact.

199. I think that the distinguished representative of
Somalia was acting correctly when he introduced his
proposals and considerations to the Security Council in the
form of a working document. We are expecting him to
formulate those proposals as a draft resolution and submit
it formally to the Council. The Council will considerthat
draft resolution, continue the discussionand conclude by
voting.
200. It is possible, of course, that the United Kingdom
representative will invoke the veto. But that will be an
unjust veto. It will be a veto in support of the racist regime
of Southern Rhodesia. It will be at variance with and in
violation of all the decisionsof the United Nations on the
question of the granting of help to colonial peoplesin their
efforts to attain freedom and independence.Whoever does
such a thing will appearbefore the whole world in that ugly
light, and that is perfectly clear.
201. The United Kingdom has spokenabout ascertaining
what are the views of the people of Southern Rhodesia.But
those views have long been known to the United Nations.
Those views are one-the desire for immediate independence, immediate national freedom. So why does the
United Kingdom still find it necessaryto conduct a lengthy
process of “ascertaining views”? The answe-is, of course,
that it seeksto muddy the waters and perpetuate the rule
of the racists in Southern Rhodesia. That is its only
purpose. That, too, is the purpose of the Home-Smith
agreement. What could “ascertaining the views” of a people
mean when they are struggling for their freedom and their
22

204. In view of all these circumstances, the Soviet
delegationconsidersit necessaryto continue the discussion
of Southern Rhodesia.We reservethe right to speakagain
on this matter after studying the proposalsubmittedby the
distinguishedrepresentativeof Somalia.The Councilshould
adopt a resolution on the question sothat we will not be in
the position of having discussedall this here in vain. For if
we end the discussionand fail to adopt a resolution in the
Security Council, that will enable the Southern Rhodesian
racists and their protectors to say that the Council has,
allegedly, discussedthe question, has consideredit at,great
length with the participation of many delegations,but has
nbt taken any decision and has put off the questionuntil
“views” have been “ascertained” on the spot. In doing so
the Council would in effect be formally cloaking with its
authority the Home-Smith deal and the fraud being
perpetrated by the Southern Rhodesianracists and their
protectors.
205. We insist that the discussionbe continued and that
the Council take a decision on the question of Southem
Rhodesia.
20G. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation .fivm cYzinese):
We have listenedcarefully to the statementsmadeby all the
representativeshere concerning this question. It seems
that
there isan argumentthat we should suspendany judgement
on the question of Southern Rhodesia.There seemsto be
another argumentthat we should stop interferencewith the
question of Southern Rhodesia, askingus to wait herefor

resolutions or decisions which would reflect the thinking of
such an august forum.

the result of some experiment-the
so-called test of
acceptability. We feel that we can accept neither of these
arguments.

213. The draft resolution which my delegation had the
privilege of introducing yesterday [see 1622nd meeting,
para. 81 does not condemn any country, but it speaks to
principle. In the course of the debate-and I trust it will not
be long-my delegation will ask that this draft resolution be
put to the vote and I will call for separate votes on certain
paragraphs which involve principle. I want to know then
whether or not delegations here believe that the principle of
adult universal suffrage should be applicable to the people
of Southern Rhodesia; whether or not they believe that in
the ascertainment of the political wishes of the people of
Southern Rhodesia the best course and the only course
should be through referendum by secret balloting; and
whether or not they believe that in the course of the
ascertainment of such views the principle of one man, one
vote, should be allowed or should at least be promoted. It
will certainly be a refreshing experience to see any
delegation voting contrary to those principles.

207. The question of Southern Rhodesia involves the basic
interests of 5 million people of Zimbabwe. It also involves
the basic interests of the African people and African
countries. In accordance with the decisions of the United
Nations and the Charter of the United Nations, the United
Nations and the Security Council are entitled to discuss, to
intervene, to judge and to take a decision on this question,
On the other hand, the United Nations has no right to
relegate its own responsibility to the Government of the
United Kingdom or to Ian Smith, The United Nations has
no right to ask a few peopIe chosen by the British
Government and the Smith regime to ascertain or to make
decisions.
208. Whether it is the colonial domination of the United
Kingdom in the past or the present Smith racist regime in
this Territory of Southern Rhodesia, in substance both are
racial domination. The domination of the regime of Ian
Smith is the direct result of the colonial domination of the
United Kingdom. Therefore, the colonial domination of
Britain in the past and the racist regime of Ian Smith at
present are both illegal, are in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, ‘and are against fundamental human
rights. Therefore, they have no right to decide the future of
the people of Zimbabwe.

214. The representative of the United Kingdom spoke at
great length. I appreciate his difficult position in trying to
explain a most unwelcome, unsatisfactory and unhappy
settlement-a settlement which has been condemned by the
whole of Africa, a settlement which has been condemned
by the vast majority of Member States of the Organization.
What we are asking the United Kingdom to do at this late
stage is to re-examine its position. The United Kingdom is
not infallible. Surely, if the United Kingdom believes that it
can at one time seek the co-operation of the Security
Council and of the United Nations as a whole in assisting it
to solve the problems of Southern Rhodesia, it must not
take exception when members of this Council come
forward with proposals as to how best the matter can be
approached.

209. The Chinese delegation maintains that the Security
Council should continue discussion of the question of
Southern Rhodesia. It cannot evade its political and moral
responsibility
to the people of Zimbabwe and to the
African countries and peoples. We have spoken on this
question of Southern Rhodesia in the past. We reserve our
right to comment again on this question.

21.5, Here we are dealing with the modalities of ascertaining the political wishes of the people of Southern Rhodesia.
I believe that if the test of acceptability, the conditions
which have been approved by the United Kingdom, were to
be applied to any other country it would be rejected
outright. I do not say that I know more about Southern
Rhodesia than most members here. I know something of it,
but I can tell you this. After the several weeks during which
I have studied this complicated piece of constitutional
trickery, I am still lost in its technical details. Yet I have
been blessed with an education and I have been blessed
with time in which to study these proposals. Can you
imagine what is going to happen to the 5 million Africans
who have not been privileged enough to have an education,
on being asked to commit their political future, being asked
to decide upon a constitution
of such intricate and
complicated detail, through interpreters and without the
assistance of their political leaders’?

210. Mr. FARAI-I (Somalia): First, I should like to address
my colleagues from France and Italy, pursuant to the rights
of reply which they exercised in reply to the statements
that I had made earlier in this meeting.
211. The statement I made was made in all sincerity
because I know that these two great countries are founded
on a great love and respect for the democratic rights of
people. I believe that here in this Council the least we can
do is to make sure that in our decisions we do not
compromise on commitments to principle, that any decision emanating from this Council must fully respect those
principles upon which we feel human dignity is founded
and which we ourselves wish to enjoy in our own
communities.
212. Unfortunately,
in the course of consultations that
my delegation has conducted over the past 24 hours, we
have to our great surprise encountered positions which
amount to the fact that whatever changes may be made to
the draft resolution, delegations will adopt either a negative
position or a position of abstention-as if their positions
Ilad been shaped out months in advance. This is a most
regrettable fact because in a Council of this importance, it
is only by an exchange of views and ideas and the
production of facts that we should be able to hammer Out

216. The representative of the Soviet Union quite rightly
said the other day that it was time we had the views of
Mr. Sithole and Mr. Nkomo. When he made the proposal
my delegation supported it. Now we have seen the reply
from the United Kingdom. Unfortunately, it is a negative
reply. But one would have thought that in such circumstances the least the United Kingdom Government could
23

have done was provide this Council with authenticated copies of the s&missions made to Sir Alec Douglas-Home
by those two leaders when he went to Salisbury. Of course,
the press has carried details of those memoranda. In fact I
have here, from 5’7re Times of London of 7 December 1971,
a dispatch from Salisbury which says:
“A Rhodesian African Nationalist leader today called
on his countrymen to try to force Britain to renegotiate
the settlement terms reached with the Government of
Mr. Smith.
“Mr. Edson Zvobgo, former deputy secretary-general of
the banned Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU)
rejected the terms ‘totally and without qualification’.
“He said: ‘The African people should recognize that
they and their country are on auction for $50 millionthe so-called British development aid promised in the
proposals. The promises of more jobs, more schools and
more development will not gratify our desire to rule our
country and our yearning for a dignified existence.’ ”
217. I am not more erudite or knowledgeable about
conditions in Southern Rhodesia than perhaps some of the
white Rhodesian leaders. Yet we have Mr. Garfield Todd,
former Prime Minister of Southern Rhodesia, who came out
against the settlement terms only a few days ago in these
words: “Now I have been able to study the White Paper
more fully I will not recommend anyone to accept its
terms .”

letter to Z%e Observer of London of 12 December. He
spoke about the so-called constitutional arrangements by
which after several decades the black majority might reach
parity and eventually might reach majority rule. He said
this:
“ . . . This is the most impeded constitutional progress
ever devised, impeded mainly by indefinite delay, but also
impeded by a complicated series of formidable electoral
obstacles, impeded by the banning of African nationalist
parties and the elimination by detention of African
nationalist leaders; impeded by the system of indirect
election; impeded by dependence on the readiness of the
illegal regime (a regime utterly opposed to treating the
Africans as equals) to facilitate African economic and
educational advance, impeded by white immigration and
impeded by the elimination, probably for ever, of the
majority of Africans from the exercise of the franchise, If
these are not impediments, I don’t know what impediments are.”
221. He spoke about white immigration. In this respect I
should iike to refer to two reports. One is an extract from
Mr. Smith’s statement in the Rhodesian House of Assembly
on 25 November. He had this to say on the proposals:
“Rhodesians will no doubt try to assess how long it
would take under this system for the Africans to reach
parity of representation with Europeans in Parliament.
This, I would suggest, is a fruitless exercise for there are
many imponderables which could affect the position. It is
our carefully considered assessment that in view of the
expansion of the economy and the increase in immigration to which we can confidently look forward, no
European need harbour any anxiety about the security of
his future in Rhodesia .”

218. Of course, there is a campaign going on in Southern
Rhodesia to the effect that these terms of settlement must
be accepted. There is growing opposition, but always
opposition within those limits allowed by the police State.
However, it is coming to the surface and it has compelled
Mr. Ian Smith to tell former African detainees that his
Government would take action against them if they tried to
intimidate Africans into rejecting the Anglo-Rhodesian
settlement proposals. The word “intimidation”
naturally is
subject to very wide interpretation.

222. On immigration, this report from The Daz@ Telegraph dated 7 December said:
“Rhodesia is planning to attract 15,000 white immigrants a year with a big campaign if the agreement with
Britain is ratified . . . .

219. The representative of the United Kingdom said that
this was the best settlement that could be obtained under
current circumstances. It is not a settlement for which the
Africans asked. It is a settlement which was arranged
between a delegation from the United Kingdom and the
Smith regime. When this Organization was asked to enforce
sanctions against the Smith regime, the United Kingdom
Government did not tell us we should first of all ascertain
exactly what the black majority felt about it? because it
realized that the black majority was muzzled, manacled,
unable to express itself politically. But we, because of our
position, felt that the best we could do would be to assist,
and we did assist in some respects. Now we are told by the
United Kingdom Government that we have no right to spell
out or even to suggest ways and means by which conditions
could be created to allow the people of Southern Rhodesia
to express themselves freely and equally on their political
future.

“Salisbury City Council has already taken steps to
strengthen its forward planning department to prepare for
an immigrant influx. The decision was taken after
Councillor Jock AIves, Chairman of the Public Works
Committee, declared that Rhodesia ‘might have to cope
with 50,000 or more immigrants, within the next two
years’.”
223. While the representatives of Italy, France and Belgium speak about waiting until the test of acceptability has
been concluded, it is not simply the modalities which are to
govern that test but the substance of the Constitution
which these people are being asked to accept. This seems to
have eluded those gentlemen.
224. The representative of the United Kingdom spoke
about apartheid and said that the constitutional changes
which might result if this test of acceptability had positive
results could lead to a halt in the spread of apartheid to
Southern Rhodesia. Yet on 26 December, just four days

220. Lord Caradon, who used to be here, wrote at great
length on the proposals of the British Government in a
24

ago and one month after the Home-Smith agreement was
concluded, we received a report from Salisbury stating that
the Rhodesia Government was examining a plan to issue
identity cards to adults living and working outside their
designatedracial areasin order to control the flow of blacks
into towns and cities.
225. The hour is late, but the situation is serious. My
delegation will reserve its right to speak, perhapsin some
detail, on someof the other points which it has not had
time to cover in this very brief intervention. But it is our
hope that delegationswill not sit on the fence. What is at
stake is the future of 5 million Africans. Two hundred and
fifty million Africans are watchingthis Council to seewhat
action it will take, The least that this Council can do is to
ask the United Kingdom to re-exarnine its position, to
renegotiate its so-calledagreementwith Smith, to ensure
that the rights of the Africans arefully protected, are fully
respected and are fully implemented.
226. The PRESIDENT: The list of speakershasnow been
exhausted.

230. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi): I think that the suggestion
of the representativeof Somaliais subjectto the reaction of
those memberswho have somereservationswith respectto
the draft resolution. Therefore, if thosememberswho have
expressedsome reservations do not need additional time,
we can recessthe meeting and resumetonight in order to
take a decision. I do not think that the fact that some
membersare to leave the Council is a sufficient reasonto
vote prematurely. I think rather the most fundamental
reasonto act quickly would be to give the .Smillion people
of Zimbabwe a New Year’s gift from the Security Council.
That is why I think it would be of the utmost importance
to take a decision, if not tonight, then at the latest
tomorrow.
231. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): In order to speedup matters,
I shall now introduce the draft resolution. The draft
resolution is more or less contained in the working paper
which my delegation read into the record at yesterday’s
meeting[see I622nd meeting,para. 81,
232. The preambular paragraphsremain the same. The
operative paragraphs also remain the same, except for
paragraph6, which should readasfollows:

227. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I wasprevailed upon at the
outset of this meeting to endeavourto conclude our work
on this question so asto enablesomedelegationsto have a
little rest. My delegationis alwayshappy to co-operate with
other delegations.Wewould have no objection to having a
brief recess, after which we could resume and I would
submit a draft resolution for the consideration of the
Council. If that draft resolution is voted upon, the Council
would be spared the task of having to meet again
tomorrow. However, if somedelegationswould like to have
time in which to reconsider their position on the draft
resolution, or to receive instructions, naturally my delegation would be quite happy to wait until tomorrow or the
day after.

“6. Further calls upon the United Kingdom, after
ensuring the establishmentof conditions under which all
the people of Southern Rhodesiaare abIe to exercise
freely and equally their right to self-determinationon the
basis of paragraphs 3 and 5 above, to facilitate the
participation of a United Nations team of observers
during the preparation for, and in the actual conduct of,
any exercise to ascertain the wishesof the people of
Southern Rhodesiaasto their political future;“‘.

228. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof Somaliahas
made his position quite clear with respect to his draft
resolution. While that draft resolution has been discussed
by members in the Council, it has in fact not yet been
formally submitted to the Council. The representative of
Somalia has suggestedthat, either we should suspendthe
meeting and he shouldformally presenthis draft resolution
after we resume, or we should adjourn the meeting and
meet tomorrow or at a later date. I am in the handsof the
members of the Council on this matter. If it is the wish of
the members of the Council to meet tomorrow, I would
strongly suggest that the meeting be held tomorrow
afternoon, becausethere should be sufficient time for all
members to have a last opportunity to decide whether or
not a vote shouldbe taken.

233. It is my hope that the Council will give this draft
resolution a better welcome than it hasso far received, and
that some delegation,that hashitherto decided to abstain
will be in a position to vote for it. However, if those
delegationshave any amendmentsto suggest,my delegation
will be happy to receive them.
234. The PRESIDENT: I do not know whether members
have before them the latest amendment to the draft
resolution.
235. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): There is only one version,
the version which was read into the record yesterday,
together with the amendmentI have just read out. I had
hoped to draw up a revisedversionhad it been possibleto
secure the support of two or three delegations that I
thought were sitting on the fence. But since they have
decided to abstain no matter what I do to the draft
resolution, I feel that I should adhereto the original draft
resolution asI read it out yesterday.
236. The PRESIDENT: It appearsnow that the representative of Somalia,aswell asother members,would wishthe
draft resolution to be put to the vote. So I have no
alternative but to put it to the Council for decision.
However, I understand that it will take some60 minutesto
processthe draft resolution.

229. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Since I am always given to
further reflection, it strikesme that if we do not dealwith
this matter before the end of the year, we shall lose the
presence of four memberswho will be leaving the Council
and who have been quite familiar with the progresson this
problem since its inception. Rather than confront new
members with this whole problem, I would suggestthat we
either disposeof the draft resolution this evening or meet
tomorrow morning and do so.

237. As a result of past experience,I feel that membersof
the Council may wish to have sometime to consider their
25

position further. It is for the Council to decide whether it
wants to suspend and come back again this evening, or
adjourn until tomorrow morning or tomorrow afternoon, in
order to dispose of this question, The representative of
Somalia is most anxious that the outgoing members be
present when the draft resolution is finally disposed of.
238. Mr. BENNETT (United States of America): Since
there seems to be a general disposition to finish with the
item this evening, I suggest that we stay here and vote. We
have the draft resolution before us. It is in the record.

247. There is one slight correction that we made to
operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, which should
read as follows:

239. Mr. CARASALES
(Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation would like to support the suggestion that we dispose of the matte1 this evening. The text of
the draft resolution has been known to us since yesterday,
with only the slight modification made this evening by the
Ambassador of Somalia. Therefore, from our point of view,
we would prefer the matter to be decided this evening. We
would’ support a short suspension; we would then recona
vene to proceed to the vote.

“Rejects the ‘proposals for a settlement’ as they do not
guarantee the inalienable rights of the majority of the
people of Southern Rhodesia;“.
248. Apart from that one amendment and apart from the
addition of the names of the two co-sponsors, the draft
resolution as it stands is the final draft resolution submitted
by the four delegations.

240. The PRESIDENT:
I understand that it will take
about one hour to process the draft resolution.
241, As there is no objection,
hour.

of memory. It would, in fact, be unusual at this time of the
year, when they are about to leave the Council, for both
Burundi and Syria to be omitted from the list of sponsors
of a draft resolution which promotes an African cause so
dear to their hearts. I am glad they have reminded me of
the omission. Their names will no doubt appear on the next
version of the draft resolution.

249. Yesterday in my statement to the Council I explained at length the consideration that was paid to the
formulation of each paragraph of this draft resolution,
Having listened to the views expressed by members since
the submission of the working paper, and knowing, also,
that there is a feeling within the Council that members
would like to express themselves on certain principles of
political action which they themselves accept as part and
parcel of their own normal lives and, no doubt, wish also to
accord to people abroad in whose fate the Council has been
involved for the past five years, I will ask that separate
voting take place on two of the preambular paragraphs,
namely the second and the fifth.

we shall suspend for one

The meeting was suspended at 735 p.m. and resumed at
9.55 p.m.
242. Mr. TERENCE
(13urundi) (interpretation
from
R-en&): I feel I must address the Council because the name
of one of the African members of the Council has been
omitted from document S/10489-perhaps because Burundi
is about to leave the Security Council. My country however
is an integral part of Africa not only by reason but by
nature, since it occupies a central position in Africa.
Therefore I believe I should claim the right to representation, and I should be grateful if Burundi could be listed as
one of the sponsors of the draft resolution. I reserve my
right to intervene again at a later stage if necessary.

2.50. The second preambular paragraph reads:
‘Having noted that these proposals were not negotiated
in consultation with the accredited political leaders of the
majority of the people of Southern Rhodesia,“.
Of course, much has been said on this point, and 1 do not
wish to repeat all the facts and all the views that have been
advanced on so many occasions when this particuIar point
has been raised.

243, The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Burundi for his statement. The necessary action will be
taken.
244. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): To console the
representative of Burundi I would tell him that the letter B
is much further removed from the letter S than is the
letter S from the letter S. As can be seen, Syria also has not
been named in the draft, and it is one of the sponsors. I
would ask you to take that into consideration, Mr. President.

251. The fifth preambular paragraph reads:
“Mindful of the conditions necessary to permit the free
expression of the right to self-determination,“.
Well, of course, this is most fundamental to the draft
resolution and is likewise most fundamental to the attitude
which the Council must adopt upon this very important
political exercise. The right to self-determination does not
exist in a vacuum; it has to exist within a certain
framework, and that framework must involve a climate
where people have the right of assembly and can assemble,
where they have the right of free speech, the right of full
political activity within their society, and the right to be
informed upon all aspects of any proposal that affects their
political destiny.

245. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Syria
for his statement. His request will be attended to, I would
add that the final version of the document wiIl show the
additional sponsors.
246. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): First, I apologize profusely
for omitting to inform the Secretariat of the co-sponsorship
of both Burundi and Syria. It has been a very trying day,
and I think this is one of the reasons why I have had a lapse
26

2.52. My delegation will also ask for separate voting to
take place on three of the operative paragraphs. The first is
operative paragraph 3 which asks this Council to consider

country. Since the Second World War the storm of the
struggle for national liberation has swept the whole of
Africa. In order to preserve its colonial interests in central
and southern Africa British imperialism rigged up in 1953 a
so-called “Federation of Central Africa” with the white
colonialists as the main body. It devised a “new Constitution” for Southern Rhodesia, which provides in explicit
terms for white minority rule and for deprivation of the
political rights of the Zimbabwe people.

“that the principle of universal adult suffrage for the
people of Southern Rhodesia without regard to colour or
race must be the basis for any constitutional and political
arrangements for the Territory;“.
As a member of a delegation that has served for the past six
and a half years on the Special Committee on Aparrheid,
and having been involved in many issues concerning the
rights of peoples, it would be difficult for me, having heard
the positions of principle taken by practically every
delegation around this table on human rights, to envisage
not having this principle put before the Council and voted
upon. This is a principle on which there cannot be any
compromise.

258. However, those tactics have failed one after another.
With the disintegration of the “Federation of Central
Africa” in 1963 and the mounting struggle of the Zimbabwe people for national independence and liberation, the
colonial interests of British imperialism in Southern Rhodesia have been jeopardized. In these circumstances the
white racists headed by Ian Smith, with the connivance and
support of Britain, declared their so-called “independence”
on 11 November 1965. The British Government sanctimoniously indicated its readiness to impose “sanctions” on
them, but in fact it is giving direct military, political and
economic support to them in many respects through the
South African racists and Portuguese colonialist regimes.
Such double dealings of sham sanctions and genuine
support employed by the British Government have long
been seen through by the African people and the peoples
throughout the world.

253. The second operative paragraph on which we shall
ask for a separate vote is paragraph 4, which
“Urges the United Kingdom, pursuant to paragraph 3
above, not to accord any form of recognition to an
independent State of Southern Rhodesia which is not
based on majority rule or on the will of the majority as
determined by universal adult suffrage;“.
254. The last paragraph upon which my delegation asks
for a separate vote is operative paragraph 5, which

2.59. Second, the recent agreement between the British
Government and the racist regime in Rhodesia on what
they call ending their dispute on the question of the
“independence” of Rhodesia is a new fraud played by the
British Government and the reactionary authorities of
Southern Rhodesia, as well as a big revelation of the
hypocritical features of British imperialism. Under this
agreement Britain will have a free hand to recognize the
“independence” of Rhodesia under the camouflage of the
so-called “final” realization of “majority rule”, thus placing
a legal mantle on the notorious white racist regime of Ian
Smith, and Britain even tries to make the United Nations
annul its resolutions on imposing sanctions against the
Smith regime.

“Calls upon the United Kingdom to ensure that in any
exercise to ascertain the wishesof the people of Southern
Rhodesia as to their political future, the procedure to be
followed will be by secret referendum on the basisof one
man, one vote, without regard to race or colour or to
educational, property or income considerations;“.

255. I trust that members will be in a position to express
themselves fully and clearly on this very important draft
resolution, and that they will take into account in their
voting that what is good for them can also be good for
Southern Rhodesians, for the black man in Southern
Rhodesia. What we want, what my delegation and the other
sponsors are asking for here, is a commitment to principle.
We know that no society is perfect, but this Council must
at least go on record as trying to seek a commitment to
principle which cannot be compromised.

260. Internally, the racist regime in Rhodesia headed by
Ian Smith has been practising an extreme fascist rule and a
barbarous policy of racial discrimination, depriving the
African people, who comprise the overwhelming majority
of the population, of all their political rights; externally, it
has acted in collusion with the South African white
colonialist regime and the Portuguese colonial rulers in
jointly repressing the national liberation movement of the
people of southern Africa. It is a criminal tool for the
colonialists and neo-colonialists in opposing the people of
Zimbabwe and the rest of Africa.

256. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
During the discussions on the question of Southern
Rhodesia in the Security Council meeting of 8 December
f 1609th meeting] the Chinese delegation already stated the
Chinese Government’s position on this question. Now I
should like to add the following remarks in connexion with
the draft resolution submitted by the representative of
Somalia.
257. First, it should be pointed out that the racist regime
of Ian Smith is in itself a direct product of the British
colonialist policy. Back in 1923, when the British CO~Onialist authorities declared the so-called “internal selfgovernment” of Southern Rhodesia, all power wasconcentrated in the hands of the minority white racists of that
27

261. Not long ago the British Government openly resumed
its selling of arms to South Africa in defiance of the
opposition of the people of Africa and the world, as well as
the United Nations resolution on sanctions. Furthermore,
the British Government has now openly reached a so-called
“agreement” with the reactionary authorities in Southern
Rhodesia. This is a new step taken by the British
Government to preserve its colonial interests in southern
Africa and to support the white racist regime in Rhodesia,

proceed to the vote on draft resolution S/10489. Members
of the Council have heard the request of the representative
of Somalia on behalf of all the sponsors that separate votes
be taken on the second and fifth paragraphs of the
preamble, and on operative paragraphs 3, 4 and 5. Accordingly, I intend to put those paragraphs to the vote
separately. After the separate votes, the Council will vote
on the draft resolution as a whole.

as well as a grave provocation to the 5 million African
people of Zimbabwe and the people. of other African
countries.
262. Third, it must also be pointed out that the British
r” Government has received the supportbf
the United.States
/
Government ln its act of blatantly shielding the reactionary
authorities of Rhodesia. Not long ago, in disregard of the
opposition of the overwhelming majority of States Members of the United Nations, the United States Government
openly approved the decree to import chrome from
Rhodesia. And the United States State Department expressed its satisfaction immediately upon the release of the
news about the agreement reached in the talks between the
British Government and the colonial authorities in Rhodesia. In giving such hasty support. to Britain the United
States Government has once again revealed its imperialist
features before the peoples of the world.

267. I shall not put to the vote the Second preambular
paragraph.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.
In favour: Argentina, Burundi, China, Japan, Nicaragua,
Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: None.

263. Fourth, the fraud played by the British Government
and the reactionary authorities in Southern Rhodesia is like
a rock they have lifted only to drop it on their own feet.
Where there is oppression there is resistance. The national
independence of the Zimbabwe people will never come
from the favours of British imperialism, nor from the
so-called “constitutional
reform” by the Smith white racist
regime. It can only rely on the unity and struggle of the
Zimbabwe people. Therefore, no matter how obdurate the
British Government and the Smith regime may be, whether
or not the United Nations can earnestly safeguard the
principles of its Charter and whether or not it can give
support to the just struggle of the Zimbabwe people, the
5 million Zimbabwe people will further strengthen their
unity and intensify their struggle for national liberation.
The Chinese Government and people are deeply convinced
that the heroic Zimbabwe people, with the solidarity and
support of the peoples of the world and the countries that
uphold justice, will certainly overcome all difficulties and
obstacles, shatter all schemes and tricks .of colonialism and
neocolonialism and finally win true national independence.

Abstaining: Belgium, France, Italy, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
The second preambular paragraph was adopted by 10
votes in favour, none against, and 5 abstentions.
268, The PRESIDENT: The Council will now vote on the
fifth preambular paragraph.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Syrian Arab Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United States of America.
Against: None.
Abstaining; United
Northern Ireland.

264. Fifth, the Chinese delegation maintains that in order
to safeguard the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations it stands to reason that the Security Council should
sternly condemn the fraud’ played by the British Government and the racist regime of Rhodesia; condemn the
United States Government and the British Government for
their open violation of the sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia; and condemn the South African and Portuguese
authorities for their collusion with the racist regime in
Southern Rhodesia. In order to fulfil its obligations under
the Charter it stands to reason that the Security Council
should call upon all the Governments and peoples of the
world to give firm support to the Zimbabwe people’s
struggle against British imperialism and white colonialist
rule and for national liberation.

Kingdom

of Great

Britain

and

The fifth preambular paragraph was adopted by 14 votes
in favour, none against, and 1 abstention.
269. The PRESIDENT:
operative paragraph 3.

The Council will now vote on

A vote was taken by show of hands,
In favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Syrian Arab Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United States of America.
Against: None.

265. The present draft resolution fails to contain the
above and is therefore quite inadequate. With the above
statement in mind, the Chinese delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by the Somali and
other representatives.

Abstaining:
United
Northern Ireland.

266. The PRESIDENT: As I have no other names on my
list of speakers, I take it that the Council is ready to

270. The PRESIDENT:
operative paragraph 4.

Kingdom

of Great

Britain

and

Operative paragraph 3 was adopted by 14 votes in favour,
none against, and 1 abstention.

28

The Council will now vote on

A vote was taken by show of hands.

275. As the Government of the United Kingdom, the
administering Power, is going to ascertain the will of the
Zimbabwe people with regard to these proposals, we think
that we should wait until such a survey of the popular will
has been conducted and the result is known.

In favour: Argentina, Burundi, China, Japan, Nicaragua,
Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: None,

276. In the view of my delegation, whether or not the
international community accepts a settlement on the basis
of the proposals put forward by the United Kingdom
Government depends, after all, on the freely expressed will
of the Zimbabwe people itself.

Abstaining: Belgium, France, Italy, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.
Operative paragraph 4 was adopted by 10 votes in favour,
none against, and 5 abstentions.
271. The PRESIDENT:
operative paragraph 5,.

277. Of course, in the meantime, the Security Council can
fully reserve its position vis-a-vis the so-called proposals for
a settlement. We can consider all the relevant elements,
including the method utilized in conducting the survey and
the results arrived at, in rendering our final judgement on
those proposals.

The Council will now vote on

A vote was taken by show of hands.
278. For those reasons, my delegation abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution as a whole. However, we
should like to place on record that we fully share the basic
thinking underlying the draft resolution, and that we fully
support the principle of universal adult suffrage and
majority rule for the people of Zimbabwe.

In favour: Argentina, Burundi, China, Japan, Nicaragua,
Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: None,
Abstaining: Belgium, France, Italy, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.

279. As this meeting seems to be the last one of 1971, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to five
of our fellow members who are leaving after finishing their
terms as non-permanent members. Their contributions to
the noble work with which this Council has been vested
have been very remarkable indeed. It has been the great
privilege of my delegation to have worked during the course
of the current year in close collaboration with the
delegations of Burundi, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone
and the Syrian Arab Republic.

Operative paragraph 5 was adopted by 10 votes in favour,
none against, and 5 abstentions.
272. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now vote on the
draft resolution as a whole.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

280. I also wish to express the thanks and appreciation of
my delegation to you, Mr. President. You have conducted
the proceedings of the Council with utmost skill, moral
force and perseverance during one of the busiest months in
the history of this Council. My delegation wishes to
associate itself with the other delegations in thanking you
for your untiring efforts in conducting the affairs of the
Council.

In favour: Argentina, Burundi, China, Nicaragua, Poland,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
Abstaining:
of America.

Belgium, France, Italy, Japan, United States

281. Mr. BENNETT (United States of America): For six
years the question of Southern Rhodesia has been before
the United Nations, which in an action by the Security
Council approved a programme of sanctions that the United
States has faithfully observed. A good many Members of
the United Nations have not so faithfuliy observed this
programme. All during this period the United Kingdom, as
the administering Power, has attempted at various times
and places to negotiate the future status of the Territory, a
process that has finally culminated in the settIement
proposals we are discussing here. As our colleague from the
United Kingdom pointed out when he presented them to
this body [1602nd meeting], the proposals for a settlement
are complicated and detailed, covering many elements of
the question and including the test of acceptability.

The result of the vote was 9 in favour, 1 against, and
5 abstentions.
The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative vote
being that of a permanent member of the Council.
273. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on representatives
who wish to explain their votes.
274. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): Although, as I indicated
in my intervention of yesterday [1622nd meeting], my
delegation has serious doubts and reservations regarding the
so-called proposals for a settlement, we do not consider it
appropriate for the Security Council to reject them at this
stage.

282. The draft resolution on which we have just voted
makes a judgement opposing the proposals for a settlement
29

288. Finally, I should like to express to you,
Mr. President, my congratulations on the way in which you
have conducted our deliberations in a particularly turbulent
and eventful period. I should also like to express our
respectful wishes for a Happy New Year.

between the United Kingdom and Southern Rhodesia
before the people of Southern Rhodesia have been consulted. We believe it inappropriate for the Security Council to
make such a judgement before the test of acceptability has
run its course. Therefore the United States, which strongly
supports the right of the people of Southern Rhodesia to
self-determination, has found it necessary to abstain on the
draft resolution as a whole. We voted in favour of two
paragraphs on which separate votes were asked, since they
represented principles which we generally support and
wished to support in this voting.

289. Mr. VAN USSEL (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): I should like quite briefly to explain the vote of
my delegation on certain operative paragraphs of draft
resolution S/10489.
290. We voted in favour of operative paragraph 3 because
Belgium fully supports the principle of universal adult
suffrage without regard to colour or race. This principle
appears in our Constitution and it is implemented without
any restriction every time the people vote. We would
express the hope that this fundamental principle will not be
just the privilege of a few countries, but rather will enter
into the constitutional practice of all Member States of cur
Organization.

283, I would not wish to close my remarks without
saluting and paying a tribute to those members of the
Council that are leaving us at the end of the year for the
contributions they have made to the work of this important
body and for the dedication with which they have pursued
their responsibilities.
284. Similarly, Mr. President, we all are indebted to you
for your devotion during a most trying month and for the
good humour with which you have guided us during this
month. We thank you and we wish you a Happy New Year.

291. As to operative paragraphs 4 and 5, my delegation
abstained not because we are opposed to the principles
expressed in these paragraphs, but because we continue to
believe that it is for the administering Power to determine
the manner of voting and the most appropriate procedure
to lead Southern Rhodesia to independence. On the other
hand, we feel that it is not proper to isolate certain
paragraphs from the whole of the operative part. The first
five operative paragraphs form a whole and cannot be
dissociated one from the other. But once again I should like
to recall that Belgium is greatly attached to the universalization of the principle of majority adult suffrage, just as we
have used the procedure of the referendum on several
occasions.

285. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation from
French): The statement that I made this afternoon is
sufficient explanation of our vote and the reason for our
abstention on the draft resolution as a whole. I should
simply like to say a few words to explain the abstentions of
my delegation on two paragraphs of the operative part of
the draft resolution. The French delegation voted in favour
of operative paragraph 3, which reaffirms the principle of
universal suffrage and proclaims that this principle must be
the basis for constitutional arrangements in Southern
Rhodesia. However, we abstained on operative paragraphs 4
and 5, and this flows logically from our vote on the draft
resolution as a whole.

292. I should also like to join my colleagues who have
preceded me and express the deep regret which my
delegation feels that the Council will soon be deprived of
five members. During this first year of Belgium’s tenure, we
have been able to benefit from the very fine co-operation of
the five member States which will be leaving the Council
and from the friendship of their eminent representatives.
We should like to express our gratitude to them and our
great esteem for them.

286. I said before that in spite of the reservations we had
about the proposed settlement, it did perhaps offer a
chance to put an end to the deplorable status quo, and to
introduce momentum into a stagnant situation. That is why
in our view we should not prejudge the results of the test of
acceptability but let the experiment run its course and
await results. The sense of operative paragraphs 4 and 5 is
hardly, therefore, compatible with the position we adopted
on this point. My delegation was unable to vote in favour of
these two paragraphs. Of course, there is hardly need for
me to say that our abstention is due to the very special
circumstances of this debate and detracts in no way from
our absolute attachment to the principles mentioned in
these three paragraphs.

293. To you, Mr. President, we would address our
congratulations upon the masterly and orderly manner in
which you have presided over the debates in the Security
Council during the month of December. We wish you a very
Happy New Year.
294. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): The vote that
the Council has just taken has much more meaning than
appears at first glance. On the final vote this draft
resolution, which obtained 9 votes, namely, the necessary
number of votes to pass, received the negative vote of the
United Kingdom. Nevertheless, the votes taken separately
on the second and fifth preambular paragraphs and on
operative paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 are very significant. They
are significant because those preambular paragraphs contain
principles on which the majority of members of the
Security Cound! and of the United Nations at large agree.
The first of these principles is that no negotiations should

287. I should like to add a word to associate myself with
previous speakers who have expressed their good wishes and
thanks to those who leave the Council at the end of the
year. I should like to say how much we regret their
departure. But perhaps in a few days’ time they will be
rather less regretful of the night meetings which we may
have next year, and I presume that they will think of us
with some compass;on. However, I should like to assure
them that we will preserve excellent memories of their
presence amongst us, and to express our gratitude for their
valuable contributions to the work of this Council.
30

ke place except with the accredited political leaders of
e majority
of the people of South&n Rhodesia. The
:ond principle is that the necessity to establish conditions
permit
the free expression of the right to selftermination
is universally acknowledged. It is on those
inciples that the operative paragraphs of the draft
solution are based. The record will show that those basic
inciples and the operative paragraphs which ensue,
bowing them logically and by necessity, have been
proved
by a large majority of the members of the
nmA.

‘5, The vote is meaningful in the sensethat it hasshown
polarization and a contradiction. On the one hand, we
w the forces that defend the freedom of peopleandsee
it that principles which they acclaimpiously are carried
t meticulously.
It is a contradiction too evident andtoo
bar to need explaining that whereaswe accept, vote for,
d say very clearly that we are in favour of the right of
f-determination and that we are in favour of the free
pression of the right of self-determination,yet, when it
mes to the actual practical measuresto apply those
inciples, we deny the measuresto apply them. That by
elf is a condemnation of those who have placed themves at one of the two poles on this issue,those who,
stead of standing for principles and the application of
Inciples, stand for principleswithout their application,
6. As for the negative vote of the United Kingdom, in
w of tile large number of resolutionsadopted by the
neral Assembly, by the Security Council, by the Comttee on Decolonization4 and by the Fourth Committee
the General Assembly concerning the very clear connlnation of Ian Smith’s rebellious minority regime, it
:ans only one thing: that the negativevote castagainst
s draft resolution is designedto support and co-operate
th the Ian Smith minority regime, in other words, to
Ipress tile rights of 4 million or 5 million Africans as
Grist a minority of 250,000. It meansonly that and
thing else. Therefore my delegation is greatly amazed
It people and representativesshould uphold principles
d simultaneously,
in the samecontext and on the same
BbIern, negate those same principles. Actions speak
lder tllan words.
7.

However,

the problem is not ended, for what is

rolved is more than a vote taken by the Security Council.
lat is involved is the right of a whole people to selftermination.
Neither the people nor their right will die
cause a draft resolution wasnot adopted.Thosewho are
strutting
the application of the right to selftermination
are only giving power and force to those
LOdefend these sacredrights and standfor them.

As my delegationis finishing its term on the Security
and as it is a sponsorof this draft resolution,I wish
a special tribute to Mr. Farah of Somaliafor his
efforts in working out this draft resolution.I wish
o to thank those delegationsthat have beencourteous
ough to refer to the fact that my delegationis finishing
8.

luncil
pay
tiring
term

on the Security Council.

I Special Committeeon the Situationwith regardto the ImpleMation of the Declaration00 the Grantingof Independence
to
lonial Countries andPeoples.

2%). Lastbut not least,Mr. President,I wishto associate
myself with all thosewho paidtribute to you, because
you
have conductedthe work of the Councilin a most trying
month and, ashasalreadybeensaidby manybefore me,in
a month perhapsunique in the annalsof the Security
COUnc%becauseit wasso filled with greatevents,andyou
displayedpatience, wisdomand endurancein the face of
great oddsand greatdifficulties.
300, Mr. VINCI (Italy): TheItalian delegationhasalready
had the opportunity of explainingits positionon the draft
resolutionasa whole, in the statementI madea few hours
ago, which makesclear the reasonswhy we abstainedon
the draft resolution.
301. As far asthe separatevotes are concerned,I wishto
state that my delegationwasable to vote in favour of the
fifth preambularparagraphand of operativeparagraph3,
both of which in cleartermsreaffirmedprincipleswe have
alwayssupportedandwill continue to support.My delegation had to abstain, on the other hand, on the second
preambularparagraphand operative paragraphs4 and 5,
because,althoughthey referredto principleswhich wefully
share,they were relatedto fundamentalprovisionsof the
draft resolutionwhich, for the reasonsI have given, my
delegationcouldnot support.
302. I wish only to add onesimpleremark,and it relates
to operative paragraph4. The reasonswhy we abstained
from voting on that paragraphare not. I reiterate, that we
do not sharethe principle containedin it, but becauseof
the positionwhich wehave explainedconcerningthe testof
acceptability, a matter on which I dealtat greatlength this
afternoon whenI gavethe reasons
why we thought that this
could start a new processto break the deadlockandgive
someuseful results.Besides,we feel that it is not up to US
to decidethis matter, but that it is the wholepopulationof
Zimbabwewhich shouldfreely expressits will. Of course,
we shallhavethe opportunity to considerthe resultsof that
test of acceptability andto see,in the light of thoseresults,
the developmentsto which they might lead.
303. Since this is the last meeting in which someof our
colleaguesare taking part, we would wish to join previous
speakersin sayinga heartfelt farewell to the five outgoing
members.I refer to our colleaguesfrom Burundi, Nicaragua, Poland, Syria and SierraLeone. My delegationalso
joins in paying a tribute to them for the wayin which they
have carried out their high responsibilities
in participating
in the work of the Security Council. I shouldlike to add
that we had the closestco-operationwith someof these
colleagues,and we shall cherish the memory of some
col~structivework that wasdonetogetherin the mostactive
momentsof the activitiesof the Security Council.
304. Mr. President,this bringsme to say a few wordsto
you, since, as previous speakershave stated, You Were
Presidentduring the most active and hectic month ever
lived through by the Security Council during its whole
existence,This is what I havebeen told andI believeit is
true. Wehave highly appreciatedand admiredthe wayYou
assumed
your responsibilities,
faced all the complicationsof
procedural
problems and met your high responsibilittes
wit11 great
good humour and a senseof friendship,

co-operation and understanding with respect to each of us.
We shall miss you. In expressing our gratitude we wish you
a Happy New Year and great success in your further career.
305. Mr, CARASALES (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation did not ask to speak in order to
explain its vote in connexion with the draft resolution on
which the Council voted a few moments ago. Our Vote was
very clear and, I think, self-explanatory.
306. My delegation asked to speak in order to express its
great regret that the delegations of Burundi, Poland, Sierra
Leone, Syria and our Latin American brother from Nicaragua are bound to leave the Council. During the past year,
since Argentina joined the Council, we have had many
occasions to admire the spirit of co-operation always shown
by these delegations, as well as their constant determination
to work in order to find constructive solutions for the
various problems which have been considered by the
Council. The delegation of Argentina has the very best
memories of that co-operation, and hopes to continue to
find it in other organs of the United Nations.
307. Mr, President, I should like to pay a tribute to you
for the patience, serenity and kindliness with which YOU
have presided over our work during this difficult month of
December. During the prolonged and sometimes tense
meetings we have held we have had an opportunity to
appreciate those personal qualities very highly. Therefore,
we extend to you our most sincere congratulations, as well
as our wishes for happiness in the coming year.
308. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): The vote which has just been
taken on the draft resolution submitted by a group of
countries on the initiative of the distinguished representative of Somalia reminds me of the years long ago when the
cold war was in its infancy. There were many votes of this
kind at that time, particularly when the question of the
admission of socialist countries to membership in the
United Nations was discussed. The Western countries did
not cast negative votes, they abstained and thus frustrated
the possibility of the admission to the United Nations of a
number of socialist countries. The Soviet Union, protecting
the interests of the socialist countries, was obliged to apply
the veto; we used the veto often but we used it in a just
cause. The Soviet veto secured membership for Albania,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and other socialist countries. It
was only this which helped overcome the opposition of the
Western countries with their tactics and practice of abstention.
309. There were abstentions again today when the voting
took place. But those abstentions were virtually negative
votes, which means that a certain group of countries is
against Southern Rhodesia becoming free and independent,
against
the 5 million people of Zimbabwe ridding &emselves of the tyranny of the racists, against the liquidation
of the last bastion of colonialism, racism and neocolonialism and neo-imperialism in southern Africa, against
the African continent finally becoming fully free and
cleansed of the last stains of colonialism and racism.

paragraphs. The separate votes on individual paragraphs of
&e preamble and the operative part of the draft show that
two thirds and more of the members of the Security
Council definitely not only took a stand but voted to
condemn the United Kingdom Government, which has
refused to make it possible for Mr. Nkomo and Mr. Sithole,
leading political figures in Southern Rhodesia, to take part
in fie discussion of the question in a meeting of the
Security Council.
3 11. More than two thirds of the votes favoured enabling
the people of Southern Rhodesia to exercise the right to
self-determination. More than two thirds voted in favour of
giving the population of Southern Rhodesia the opportunity, regardless of colour or race, to take part in any
constitutional and political settlement. More than two
thirds voted in favour of a referendum by secret ballot on
the basis of one man, one vote, without regard to race or
colour or to educational or property considerations. This is
a positive factor, it reflects the attitude of an overwhelming
majority of States Members of the United Nations, who
stand for genuine justice and equality among peoples, for
the liberation of those peoples who are still subject to
colonialist oppression. But, unfortunately, the draft resolution could not be adopted because the United Kingdom
representative used the veto, an unjust veto, in defence of
racism and a racist regime and against the freedom and
independence of the people of Zimbabwe. This is a
challenge first of all to the whole of Africa and a challenge
to the whole of world public opinion. There will be very
few people anywhere in the world who will approve today’s
veto by the United Kingdom of such a draft resolution.
312. Objectively speaking, the Security Council has badly
ended 1971, its last meeting, on the eve of the new year,
and has failed to adopt a just resolution. The reasoI1 is that
the United Kingdom used the veto and its NATO allies
abstained. The outcome, on the eve of the neti year, at the
end of 1971, is a major failure of imperialism in the United
Nations and its principal organ, that is, the Security
Council, the isolation of imperialism, the isolation of
NATO. Everyone will remember the history of the establishment of NATO, when that aggressive military bloc was
aimed against the countries of socialism. Even at that tilne
the representatives of the socialist countries said that that
alliance was directed not only against the countries of
socialism, but also against the national liberation movcments, against the national liberation struggle. Today’s vote
confirms this. Only by reaching such a political conclusion
can we interpret the results of today’s vote. And the
peoples of the world will, of course, draw the appropriate
conclusions.
313. The Soviet delegation believes that this does not
conclude the discussion of the question of Southern
Rhodesia; that discussion must be continued, for the issue
involves the fate of 5 million people who, in the second half
of the twentieth century, are groaning under the oppression
of the racists, imperialists and colonialists. Furthermore, in
discussing the Home-Smith agreement-that
document
which was designed to cover up and assist the racist rdgimc
in perpetuating its existence in Southern Rhodesin-the
Security Council did not consider two other questions
which were on its agenda. 1 refer to subitem /6/-“Fourtll

310. The distinguished representative of Syria has already
presented an analysis of the separate votes on hidividual

32

report of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968)“-%
other words,
the report on the question of the application and violation
of sanctions against the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia.
That report should have been considered, by the Security
Council and the appropriate decision should have been
taken, condemning those States which have violated the
,decisions of the Security Council and the General AssembIy
concerning the application of sanctions against the Southern Rhodesian regime. There was also subitem fC), the
‘interim report of that Committee, relating to a single
question-the violation of the United Nations resolution on
sanctions by the United States in connexion with the
problem of chrome. I feel that the. Council should reque’st
the next Council President, Ambassador Farah, the distinguished representative of Somalia, to convene the Sedurity Council’ with its new membership in the very near
future, at the beginning of January, in order to continue
discussion of the question we have been considering and
discuss the two questions which I have mentioned.
314. Thus, the Security Council has not concluded its
work in this field and must continue it.
315. In conclusion, I should like to associate myself, on
behalf of the Soviet delegation, with the words that have
been addressed to our five colleagues who are leaving us. We
should like to express to them our gratitude for their
co-operation, mutual understanding and friendship, and for
their useful contribution to the work of the Security
Council in the course of their two-year terms as members of
the Council, to extend our best wishes to them for the new
year and to wish them personally good health and success
and further co-operation in the strengthening of the cause
of peace, the strengthening of international security and
friendship among peoples and the liberation of all peoples
who are still groaning under the oppression of the colonialist yoke.
3 16. I should also like to congratulate the President of the
Security Council on his tireless efforts and commend him
for making the members of the Security Council work hard.
This past month under the leadership of our distinguished
President was most eventful; I should say that it was one of
the months in which the Council has had to work hardest.
The one who worked hardest of all was, of course, the
President. We sympathize with him and we congratulate
him on the successful completion of his term as President.
3 17. On behalf of the Soviet delegation I should also like
to associate myself with the w&ds addressed by the
representative of Syria to the representative of Somalia on
his very active work in formulating the draft resolution and
organizing the discussion of the problem of Southern
FUlodesia. We often call him the “freedom fighter” and I
feel that he has earned that title and that is what we shall
continue to call him: Ambassador Farah, freedom, fighter
-fighter
for the freedom of peoples. We wish him happiness, the best of health and great success in that lofty
endeavour in the new year.
3 18. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): In taking up where the
representative of the Soviet Union left off, I would say that
I would like to be known more or less as a peacemaker,

.because I feel that what we are trying to seek here is peace,
peace through justice. And this is what I think our whole
debate has been about in connexion with the situation in
Southern Rhodesia.
319. My delegation, first of all, fully subscribes to the very
careful analysis. which the representative of Syria gave to
the voting pattern on the two preambular paragraphs and
on the three operative paragraphs. Yet, it is distressing to
note that those delegations which abstained on the paragraphs made no mention whatsoever in their interventions
about the modalities for carrying out this so-called test of
acceptability. They acted as if everything was in order and
in full, accord with accepted political standards and the
wishes of the Africans.
320.. The former ‘Permanent Representative of the United
‘.Kingdom, Lord Caradon, speaking on this particular aspect
very recently, on 24 December, said:
“The African nationalist leaders may be brought like
animals in a cage to be seen and heard by the Commission, but they will not be allowed’ to speak to anyone
else. Freedom of political organization and assembly will
be subject to long-standing emergency regulations. The
interned African leaders cannot communicate with their
own people. The great debate which is supposed to settle
the future of Rhodesia for generations to come is to take
place without the participation of the nationalist parties
and their leaders.”
321. Yet not one of the delegations that abstained on the
draft resolution addressed itself to this particular point.
They dismissed any idea of having normal political conditions restored or of individuals being able to vote in a
secret referendum. In fact, there were five abstentions on
this very important paragraph, in which it is asked that the
procedure for determining the political future of the people
of Southern Rhodesia be “by secret referendum on the
basis of one man, one vote, without regard to race or colour
or to educational, property or income considerations”.
322. Nor did they address themselves to a very important
point I raised quite early in the debate, which the
representative of the United Kingdom attempted to answer
today, but ,not satisfactorily. I asked what was the
alternative for the people of Southern Rhodesia if they said
no to the so-called test of acceptability. That very same
question has even been asked by a white Southern
Rhodesian, the former Rhodesian Federal Prime Minister,
Sir Roy Welensky. Now, while I do not subscribe to his
politics, it is quite pertinent to point out that even he was
baffled by the whole purpose of this Commission’s
visit to
Southern Rhodesia. He said that the Commissionwas
seeking only ‘a “yes” or a ‘no” answeron the questionof
acceptability. It was a packagedeal.If the answerwasyes,
Rhodesia’s Constitution would be amended, but if the
answer was no Rhodesiawould continue to be governed
under the 1969 Constitution.
323. Now what would Britain’s position be then? Would
Britain then say to the Africans, “Becauseyou voted no,
this is all we can do for you, so goodbye! “? Or would it
maintain its hostility towards the Smith regimeuntil such

time as the African people decide their own political
future? That is a question to which I would have thought
five delegations here would have been able to address
themselves, but none did, and that is a matter for great
regret.
324. The African people are watching and listening carefully to the proceedings of this Council. The issue is by no
means dead. As the representative of the Soviet Union has
pointed out, perhaps the first item on the agenda for the
next year will be the issue of Rhodesia. The fact that this
draft resolution, which was sponsored by four delegations,
was vetoed does not mean that the Council will have to
abandon its consideration of this matter, nor will we refrain
from considering other aspects of the Southern Rhodesian
question, as was quite rightly pointed out by the representatives of China and the Soviet Union. We must go into the
whole substance of the Southern Rhodesian question. We
must examine the mandate of the Committee on sanctions.
We must examine its report. We must determine in what
way sanctions can be extended and intensified. We must
also take into account the very serious development that
has taken place with the United States decision to enact
legislation which would permit, when that Government so
decides, importation of chrome into the United States from
Southern Rhodesia.
325. Mr. President, I should like to associate myself with
what other speakers have said about your good self and the
delegations of Burundi, Poland, Nicaragua and Syria. In the
one year my delegation has been a member of the Council
it has been an enlightening, refreshing and encouraging
experience to be closely associated with five eminent
diplomatic representatives. I have learned a great deal from
them. I have been encouraged by their actions, and I am
sure they will support the many causes in which we have
joined hands in other forums of the Council. But certainly
on African causes these five delegations have always given
Africa the fullest possible support, without any qualification, and my delegation appreciates it, as I am sure the
whole of Africa does.
326. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi)
(interpretation
from
French): I have a very brief statement to make despite the
lateness of the hour. However, I know how patient you are,
Mr. President, so perhaps I may be allowed to voice my
final thoughts here. This is not my last will, as it were, for I
shall never abandon the cause of Africa or the cause of
peace throughout the world,

the 5 million people of Zimbabwe. But, alas, now we are
going to send them a very bitter gift for the new year. Thus
we are deeply disillusioned. But it comes as no surprise to
my delegation because we know the position of the
administering Power in connexion With Rhodesia.
328. It is true that we attach very little importance, for
our part, to the details of the draft resolution, to a given
word or paragraph or clause, because these are factors that
will not prevent the people of Zimbabwe from acceding to
their independence. Rather, we should concentrate upon
the need to grant independence to the Zimbabwe people
without requiring them to go through a process which I
have often labelled as inextricable. I might give a few
examples, those of Zambia and Malawi: at one time they
were part of a confederation with the present Southern
Rhodesia, and culturally and from the point of view of
tradition and custom, their peoples are essentially very akin
to the inhabitants of Southern Rhodesia. The Malawians
and Zambians attained independence without being required to go through a complicated process in which, as I
said in my statement just now, even the most erudite
experts find it difficult to understand the terms of the
agreement.
329. You will easily understand that there may well be a
snake in the grass, since a double standard is being used.
From the beginning we expressed doubts as to the viability
of this agreement and as to the good intentions of the
administering Power to grant independence to the colonized people. We trust that the Security Council, in spite of
the departure of five non-permanent members, including
Burundi, will continue to keep this matter on its agenda
and to try to get out of the impasse in whi’ch we have found
ourselves this evening. But I would repeat once again that it
is not resolutions that will solve the fundamental problem
that persists in Southern Rhodesia; rather it will be the wifl
of the people of Zimbabwe together with genuine cooperation on the part of the United Kingdom that will
allow the Zimbabwe people finally to enjoy the fundamental rights enjoyed in the adjacent and fraternal African
countries that have succeeded in achieving an independence
not hemmed in by so many conditions that are so
perplexing to the Zimbabwe people.
330. The PRESIDENT: My humble duties having thus
been concluded, may I be permitted now to speak as
representative of SIERRA LEONE.
331. I should like to state that my delegation voted in
favour of draft resolution S/10489 because of our commitment to help erase colonialism in all its manifestations from
the continent of Africa. My delegation would be remiss in
its duty to our brothers and sisters in Zimbabwe if it failed
to take a strong stand on the issue and allowed political
control in that Territory to remain permanently entrenched
in the hands of a handful of white settlers. Many of the
5 million black people of Zimbabwe are men and women
who, had they been fortunate enough to live north of the
Limpopo River, could have been eminent politicians,
ambassadors and statesmen of their countries. Colonial
usurpation has, however, robbed them of their dignity and
pride. How long this state of things will continue will
depend on the will of the international community. We
hope it will not be too long.

327. Recently I read an article entitled “Alice in Wonderland”, and although it was written in English, I feel I have
correctly translated it into French. It criticises the position
of the Afro-Asian Group in connexion with certain African
problems. According to its author, the Afro-Asians forced
the Security Council and other organs to vote on certain
resolutions not acceptable to the great Powers. According
to that author, it is the Afro-Asians that are visionaries and
not realistic. Yet, we do not think we should always take a
defeatist attitude just because we know in advance that we
may not be successful. In my delegation’s opinion we
should try all means to triumph in such a vital cause, Thus,
at the beginning of this meeting, I was hoping that the
Security Council might be ready to make a pleasant gift to
34

332. Still speaking as the representative of Sierra Leone, I
wish to thank all of you, my dear colleagues, for the deep
understanding and the co-operation you have shown the
President during his tenure of office at a time when the
Council was seized of problems of grave magnitude. But for
your co-operation, my delegation and I would have been
immobilized and it would have been virtually impossible to
achieve even a modicum of success. It is not an overstatement to say that during our presidency the Council has
had a hectic and exhausting month, replete with numerous
activities. We have dealt with matters ranging from the
admission of a new Member State to the handling of an
ultra-delicate situation involving a shooting war between
two Member States. While in some areas the Council was
able to reach agreement in a relatively short time and after
comparatively brief deliberations, in others no such quick
solutions were forthcoming, The main reason for this is not
difficult to come by. My delegation is left to reason
whether some of the great Powers that possess the veto
have always used it in a genuine and responsible manner.
We are more than convinced that a few of them often do so
either out of spite or out of a feeling that their special or
vested national interests have been threatened. Of course, I
do conceive that on a few occasions we do within these
precincts agree to disagree on problems of which this
Council is seized, although we do not disagree to deter
progress.

witnessed this august body stricken with paralysis during
dire moments of international crisis. It would be unjust to
accuse the Council of a lack of direction or initiative. The
root of this problem can be found essentially in the
unworthy use of the veto to stifle demands for resolute
actions which run counter to the great-Power interests. Is it
not possible that one way to improve the efficiency of the
Council would be to eliminate the veto completely? This is
a question that members of the Council, and in fact all
Members of the United Nations. should reflect on.
335. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I should like to thank the
representatives who spoke today for the kind remarks they
made about me.
336. As we take our leave of the Council, as well as of the
presidency, we wish to reiterate our gratitude to each
member individually and collectively for the co-operation
and courtesy extended to my delegation and me during our
membership.
337. Our sincere thanks go also to our retiring SecretaryGeneral, U Thant, whom we shall miss in these halls. To his
able assistants at all levels and to the silent or unseen staff
whose contribution to the Organization is essential to its
effective operation we also extend our thanks.
338. To the verbatim reporters, the interpreters, and the
security staff which has been protecting us all along, I also
extend our deep appreciation.

333. Our long-sustained efforts in calling for an immediate
end to the tragic situation in the Asian subcontinent met
with little immediate success. The reason was obvious.
National power politics was being injected into matters of
which the Council was seized and thus criticisms have been
levelled-and often rightly so-by well-meaning people
within and outside the United Nations at the apparently
selfish cynicism manifested by some at a time when
thousands of human lives were being summarily annihilated.

339. I cannot end without registering my gratitude to my
President and Government for affording me this opportunity to serve my country and to be involved in the very
important activities of the international community.
340. To all of you I wish a happy and prosperous New
Year.
341. In order to allow my successor an opportunity to
hold consultations
before convening meetings I shall,
subject to the Council’s approval, adjourn this meeting si?ze
die. Since there is no objection, it is so decided.

334. The deep sense of frustration that surrounds the
work of the Council, as well as the lack of accomplishment
that envelops this body, cannot be better observed than in
situations involving breaches of the peace. Although the
Council, like a policeman, is expected not only to arrest but
also to prevent the commission of crime, yet we have often

The meeting rose at 1 I.35 pm

35

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
dbpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
& : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.
ICAIC IIOIIYYMTb
RsAaauR

FiBAAHMJI

OpraHN3auMH

JWH&X

II

~arnem

KH~~HoM

a~'en~cTBaX

Haquii,

CeKgua

COMO

CONSEGUIR

a0

OPIY’AHN

BAIqE%R

CK+be#irieHHbrx

Haquti

~Cex

pai?OHaX

&nip&

mimwre

no

Maraame

wci

no npanaHce

U~A&HHB,

PUBLICACIONES

in United

Nations,

Ndw York

Price:

MOXHO xyna~b
a KH~~KH~IX
raw&Haso~~~e
cnpamcu
06 Ers~aHnlrx
B
Opraausaqafl
06zeAmieHHhIx
unu Zeuesa.

H~+Ffoprt
DE LAS

$U.S. 2 SO (or equivalent

HAlJETFf

ap(pecy:

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

OB%EAMHEHHbIX

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

82290-November

1974-2,050
