as a springboard for perpetrating acts of aggression
against the People's Republic of Angola, as well as sustaining its occupation of part of the territory of that
country;
3. Demands once again that South Africa cease immediately all acts of aggression and unconditionally
withdraw forthwith all military forces occupying
Angolan territory, as well as scrupulously respect the
sovereignty, airspace, territorial integrity and independence of the People's Republic of Angola;
4. Reaffirms the right of the People's Republic of
Angola, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular Article 51, to take all the measures necessary to defend and
safeguard its sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence;
5. Calls upon all States to implement fully the arms
embargo imposed against South Africa in Security
Council resolution 418 (1977);
6. Renews its request to Member States to extend all
necessary assistance to the People's Republic of Angola
in order to strengthen its defence capability in the face of
South Africa's escalating acts of aggression and the occupation of parts of its territory by the South African
military forces;
7. Requests the Security Council Commission of Investigation established in pursuance of resolution 571
(1985), consisting of Australia, Egypt and Peru, to
report urgently on its evaluation of the damage resulting
from South African aggression, including the latest
bombings;
8. Decides to meet again in the event of noncompliance by South Africa with the present resolution
in order to consider the adoption of more effective
measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions
of the Charter;
9. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

At its 2616th meeting, on 7 October 1985, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Ghana, Morocco
and Tunisia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representatives of Burkina Faso, Egypt
and Madagascar,7' to extend an invitation to Mr.
Mfanafuthi J. Makatini under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

Resolution 574 (1985)
of 7 October 1985

The Security Council,
Having considered the request of the Permanent
Representative of the People's Republic of Angola to the
United Nations contained in document S/17510,
Having heard the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Angola, 1 •
Bearing in mind that all Member States are obliged to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity
or political independence of any State and from acting in
any other manner inconsistent with the principles and
purposes of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 387 (1976), 428 (1978), 447
(1979), 454 (1979), 475 (1980), 545 (1983), 546 (1984),
567 (1985) and 571 (1985), which, interalia, condemned
South Africa's aggression against the People's Republic
of Angola and demanded that South Africa should
scrupulously respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Angola,
Gravely concerned at the persistent, hostile and unprovoked acts of aggression and sustained armed invasions committed by the racist regime of South Africa in
violation of the sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity of the People's Republic of Angola and, in particular, the armed invasion of Angola carried out on
28 September 1985,
Conscious of the need to take effective steps for the
prevention and removal of all threats to international
peace and security posed by South Africa's acts of aggression,
l. Strongly condemns the racist regime of South
Africa for its latest premeditated and unprovoked aggression against the People's Republic of Angola, as well
as its continuing occupation of parts of the territory of
that State, which constitute a flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola and
seriously endanger international peace and security;
2. Strongly condemns also South Africa for its
utilization of the illegally occupied Territory of Namibia

Adopted unanimously at the
2617th meeting, following a
separate vote on operative
paragraph 6.

Decisions

In a note dated 15 November 1985, 77 the President of
the Council stated that the Chairman of the Security
Council Commission of Investigation established under
resolution 571 (1985) to evaluate the damage resulting
from the invasion of Angola by South African forces,
had informed him that the Commission was still in the
process of finalizing its report to the Council and required one week to complete its task, and that the Commission, accordingly, had requested an extension of the
date of submission of its report until 22 November. The
President added, that after informal consultations on
the matter, it had been found that no member of the
Council had any objection to the request of the Commission.

7~ Document S/17541, incorporated in the record of the 2616th
meeting.
76
See Official Records of the Security Council, Fortieth Year,
2612th meeting.

77 S/17635.

18
