4.

UNITED NA TrONS

SECURITY

COUN

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

RECORDS
YEAR

212gth

MEETING:

NEW

16 MARCH

1979

NOV 2

64%2

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 128). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the occupied Arab Territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13115) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2128

1
1

1

‘.

.,

.
“.
1.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of cabital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
.Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OflcialRecorrLF of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2128th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 16 March 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Lau (Viet Nam), Mr. Al-Haddad
(Yemen) and Mr.
Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor them at
the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:

I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Tunisia, in which he asks to be invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2128)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/131 15)

At the invitation of the. President, .Mr. Mestiri (Tunisia)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT:
At this point I wish, on behalf of
the Security Council, to welcome His Excellency M. Paul
Lusaka, the new representative of Zambia, who is with us
in the Council for the first time.

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

4. Members of the Council have before them, in document S/13171, the text of a draft resolution sponsored by
Bangladesh, Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia.

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 23 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13115)

5. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Even though the Zambian
delegation has already had an oppportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, I wish to express my personal compliments to you for the able and wise manner in which you
are guiding our work and, in particular, for the dynamic
leadership you gave the Council during its consideration
of the question of Southern Rhodesia a few days ago. I
wish also to acknowledge with thanks your words of
welcome to me as I take up my duties as Permanent
Representative of Zambia. I look forward to working
with you closely, as indeed with my other colleagues on
the Council, in the cause of freedom, justice and peace in
the world.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings, I invite the representatives of
Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon,
Mauritania,
Pakistan, Qatar, Senegal, Somalia, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Viet Nam, Yemen and Yugoslavia, as well as the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate in the debate without
the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan),
Mr. Cahana (Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took places at the Council table and Mr.
Abdei Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Florin (German Democratic
Republic), Mr. HoBai (Hungary),
Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia), Mr. Shemirani (Iran), Mr. Bafi
(Irad). Mr. Tut%ti (Lebanon), Mr. Kane (Mauritania), Mr.
Naik (Pakistan), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Fall (Senegal).
Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Sahiout(Sudan). Mr. El-Choufi
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. EraIp (Turkey), Mr. Martynenko (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic). Mr. Ha Van

6, I have been informed of the untimely death of Amb.assador Jamil Baroody of Saudi Arabia. I wish on this
occasion to express my delegation’s deep sense of sorrow
at his passing away. I pay a tribute to the late Ambassador Baroody for his outstanding contribution
to the
attainment of the ideals of the United Nations since it was
founded, more than 30 years ago.
7. Once again the Security Council is considering the
question of Israeli practices in the occupied territories, in

1

particular its deliberate and systematic attempts to erode
the status of Jerusalem in utter defiance of United
Nations resolutions and in flagrant violation of the
norms of international law.

13. Finally, Zambia will continue to uphold principles
and the rule of law as the only realistic basis for the
settlement of the problem of the Middle East. We will
continue to stress the urgent need for a comprehensive
and just settlement. With particular regard to the item on
our agenda, my delegation will-as has, indeed, already,
been clearly indicated-support
any draft resolution
which clearly expresses the Council’s abhorrence and
disapproval of Israeli practices in the occupied territories
and demands an immediate end to them.

8. At the commencement of this debate [2I23rd meeting], the representative of Jordan, at whose request we
are meeting, gave us a succinct, detailed and well documented account of the situation. At the same meeting,
the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization also gave us a clear and convincing account as well as
an analysis of the actions of Israel in the occupied territories and against the Palestinian people. A large number of
non-members of the Council have also participated in
this debate and reinforced the arguments of the representatives of Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization. Thus, in the light of the facts available, the Council
cannot be oblivious of the grave situation in the occupied
territories, nor should it seek to minimize the implications of that situation for international
peace and
security.

14. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The General Assembly and the Security Council
have in recent years deliberated upon the situation in the
occupied Arab territories on numerous occasions and
adopted a number of resolutions thereon. However, the
Israeli Zionists have not only failed to show the slightest
restraint, but have stepped up their policy of aggression
and expansion in the occupied territories, committing a
new series of crimes against the population in these territories. Under these circumstances we consider it entirely
necessary for the Jordanian Government to request the
covening of the Council meetings for the consideration of
this question. The Chinese delegation deeply sympathizes
with the sufferings of the Arab and Palestinian people in
the Israeli-occupied territories, and firmly supports the
solemn position of the Arab countries in strong condemnation of Israeli Zionism.

9. Naturally, my Government cannot condone the current situation, and it therefore condemns the Israeli policy and practice of establishing settlements in the
occupied territories and its persistent attempts to alter
their natural, political, cultural, religious and demographic conditions. In the view of my Government, these
‘Israeli attempts at a fait accompli are illegal, null and
void. We also view the disturbing situation in the occupied territories and in the Holy City of Jerusalem as part
and parcel of the entire Middle East conflict, the cause of
which is the continued denial of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people.

15. Over a long period, Israeli Zionism has carried out
one war of aggression after another, occupying large
tracts of Arab land and enforcing the “zionization”
schemes in the occupied territories in a deliberate attempt
to change the legal status, geographic nature and demographic composition of these territories. There the Israeli
aggressors have destroyed civilian houses, demolished
buildings, and illegally confiscated large tracts of fertiie
land belonging to the Palestinian people. They plunder
the natural resources in the occupied territories and carry
out devastating exploitations. They have destroyed valuable Moslem historical relics, grossly trampling upon the
freedom of religious belief. They carry out large scale
arrests of inhabitants of these territories, inflict torture
on them and execute them at will in a sanguinary and
brutal repression. For several days running the Israeli
authorities have again sent armed forces to shoot at the
demonstrators on the West Bank. Israel’s perversity has
placed all the occupied territories under a rule of darkness
and terror.

10. The Israeli misdeeds in the occupied territories are
certainly not conducive to the search for a just settlement
of the conflict. They in fact constitute further aggression
against the Palestinian and Arab peoples.
11. The Security Council has an inescapable duty to
compel Israel to put an immediate end to its policies and
practices in the occupied territories in conformity with
United Nations resolutions and the norms of international law. Israel must be told in no uncertain terms that
its stubborn persistence in seeking to alter the natural,
political, cultural, religious and demographic conditions
of the occupied territories, including Jerusalem, does not
and cannot serve the cause of peace, which is attainable
only on the basis of a comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East conflict.

16. What warrants special attention is the fact that
Israeli Zionism has during the past year intensified its
practice’ of colonization and zionization in a policy of
aggression and expansion. Not only is it multiplying
settlements and military installations on the West Bank
and in other areas, but it is resorting to various schemes to
formulate bills in an attempt to change the status of
Jerusalem and of all the occupied territories and to perpetuate its occupation there. The military occupation and
brutal repression practised by Israeli Zionism have
aroused firm resistance and heroic struggle on the part of
the Arab and Palestinian people in the occupied territories, where they have dealt increasingly heavy blows to
the Israeli aggressors.

12. Indeed, Israel must be made to understand that the
Middle East will continue to be characterized by conflict
and war for as long as Israel does not withdraw from all
occupied Arab territories and allow the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable right to selfdetermination, including the right to establish their own State. One
other reality Israel must accept is that the Palestine Liberation Organization is the legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people, which of necessity should be included
in the search for a just and comprehensive settlement of
the Middle East problem.
2

.

17. We have consistently maintained that the question
of the Israeli-occupied territories is an inseparable part of
the whole Middle East question. In the final analysis, the
dire miseries of the Arab and Palestinian people in the
Israeli occupied territories are caused by Israel’s policy of
aggression and expansion and the super-Powers’
rivalry
in the region, Therefore, to achieve a fundamental solution of the question of the occupied territories and the
whole Middle East question, it is imperative to do away
firmly with super-Power
interference and sabotage,
regain the national rights of the Palestinian people and
secure’ the complete withdrawal of the Israeli aggressors
from all the occupied Arab territories.

name of international peace and security involved in the
situation in the Middle East. In the circumstances, it is
astonishing and regrettable that such practices can have
been continued and even developed, because they seem to
some to run counter to the desires for peace that have
been expressed and create new obstacles in the difficult
peace-making process. In its resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) the Security Council has indicated clearly
that peace would not be possible unless Israel withdrew
from the territories it has occupied since 1967.
23. While on the subject of the practices in those territories, we would call today for respect for the provisions of
international law and ask that an end be put to actions
which can only perpetuate tension and violence and jeopardize the chances for a settlement in the area which the
community of nations and the peoples of the region so
ardently desire.

18. We hold that the Security Council should adopt a
resolution strongly condemning the various crimes committed by Israeli Zionism and voicing firm support to the
just struggle of the Arab and Palestinian people. The
Council should also adopt effective measures to put an
end to the Israeli authorities’ atrocities in the occupied
territories. We are convinced that the heroic Arab and
Palestinian people will continue to persevere in their
struggle, redouble their efforts to strengthen their unity,
and, with the support of the third world countries and
peoples as well as that of all the countries and peoples
that love peace and uphold justice, will win final victory
in putting an end to Israeli aggression and expansion,
recover their lost territories and regain their national
rights.

24. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): I should like very briefly to
introduce the draft resolution contained in document
S/l3171 on behalf of the sponsors: Bangladesh, Kuwait,
Nigeria and Zambia.
25. By way of introduction, I wish to state that the draft
resolution consists of two sections: the first section is
based on numerous resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly. It does not go beyond what
has been stated and reaffirmed in previous resolutions,
whether in this chamber or in the General Assembly hall:
it simply reiterates the general principles which all
Member States hold in high esteem and respect. These
principles are reflected in the Charter of the United
Nations and reinforced in various international covenants
and conventions. The second section is different in a way,
as, for the first time, it initiates action and calls for it. It is,
in brief, action-oriented.
The language of the draft is
restrained, mild and, in my view, business-like. The sponsors have painstakingly avoided reiterating words or language which some members may have some difficulty
with.

19. Mr. LEPRE’ITE
(France)
(interpretation
from
French): Once again the Security Council has been called
upon to consider and assess facts pertaining to the occupation of Arab territories since the 1967 conflict.
20. On a number of occasions over the past few years,
both here and in the General Assembly, my delegation
has had occasion to state that it considers illegal and
contrary to international law not only the creation of any
settlements in those territories, but also any unilateral
measure which might change their physical and demographic status or the character of their beliefs. In particular,
we have always felt that such practices ran counter to the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.’

26. In the preambular part, the Council would reaffirm
the applicability of the fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including, undoubtedly, Jerusalem. There is, in our view,
no controversy over this.

21. Two kinds of consideration
have prompted the
French authorities to reaffirm that position today as
clearly as possible. It has been clear over the past two
years that the practices contrary to international law
which we denounced at the Council meetings on the same
subject towards the end of 1976 were not diminishing in
scope. On the contrary, they have even been accompanied, at certain times and in certain cases, by political and
legal claims which make them even more serious. Furthermore, and again during the same period, a number of
initiatives, some of an all-encompassing nature, others of
a more limited character, have been taken to promote a
peace settlement in the Middle East.

27. In operative paragraph 1 the Council determines
that Israel’s policy and practices in the occupied territories are invalid. There is nothing new in this proposition,
which has been continually reaffirmed in various resolutions. It is also true that such practices constitute an
obstacle to the achievement of a durable peace. No one in
this world believes that these practices are conducive to
peace.
28. Operative paragraph 2 is an expression of a state of
mind: it states the indignation of the Council at such a
policy. The word “indignation”
was very carefully
selected to strike a balance between those who want
stronger phraseology and those who prefer accentuation
of principles to expressions of state of mind.

22. All these efforts make it quite clear that States are
more than ever aware of the major risks for the mainte1United Nations, Trenrv Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
3

29. The failure of Israel to comply with the various
resolutions of the Council and of the Assembly is deplorable, to say the least, and that is what operative paragraph 3 states. There is nothing new, again, in this
paragraph; it only shows how Israel treats the Council’s
resolutions.

gladesh has co-sponsored this draft resolution in its firm
belief that the Security Council has a duty to move
beyond mere reaffirmation of principles and past resolutions and take an effective and useful forward step which
would directly involve the Council in the search for
solutions.

30. Operative paragraph 4 calls upon Israel to do three
things: first, to apply the fourth Geneva Convention and
to respect its provisions; secondly, to rescind previous
measures that have been taken in contravention of international law and the Charter of the United Nations;
thirdly, to desist forthwith from taking action that would
result in changing the legal status of the occupied territories, as well as their geographical and demographic composition. We believe that there is no disagreement over
this paragrah. Its tenor has been reaffirmed in various
resolutions either by the Council or the Assembly. Its
main elements have been emphasized in numerous
resolutions.

36. I wish also to state in passing, with reference to
remarks made by the Israeli representative yesterday
[2127th meeting], that Bangladesh refuses to be drawn
into the trap ofdiverting attention from the issue at hand.
We shall not demean ourselves by replying to the Israeli
representative’s vituperation and abuse, the content and
tone of which has served only to lower the prestige and
authority of the Council. As they stand, his remarks
against Bangladesh are irrelevant, false and distorted-a
clear ploy to circumvent and camouflage Israel’s long
history of illegality and the immoral and inhuman measures it has taken in the Arab occupied territories. This is
the heart of the item of which we are seized. This is the
question on which we await Israel’s response. This is the
judgement of virtually all the speakers, from every nation
and every continent in the world, who with singular
unanimity, have exposed Israel’s designs. Israel’s blanket
counter-allegations cannot detract from this fact. They
merely serve to heighten Israel’s isolation. In saying the
above, I am sure I am echoing the sentiments of other
representatives whose countries have been subjected to
similar indignities.

31. The second section of the draft resolution is to be
found in operative paragraph 5. It simply asks for the
establishment of a commission of five members of the
Council to investigate the situation in the occupied territories. Here there is action. Here there is a tangible step to
be taken by the Council, a step which goes beyond the
usual reaffirmation of principles.
32. The representative of Israel in the course of this
debate has portrayed the situation in the occupied territories in rosy terms, so much so that one get the impression
that suddenly a new paradise has descended on the occupied territories. The best way to confirm whether it is a
paradise or less than a paradise, or an inferno, or something that borders on an inferno, is to send a commission
of the Security Council. It is the view of the sponsors that
such a commission will be appointed by the President of
the Council in consultation with its members and bearing
in mind the usual principle of equitable geographical
representation. The history of Palestine is replete with
commissions and such a proposal is not a novel one in the
history of the conflict, but its importance arises from the
fact that the Council will be physically involved: The
Council will not be satisfied with a repetition of general
principles but will take action to ensure the observance of
those principles. There is a time-frame within which the
Commission will submit its report, and that is the end of
May.

37. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
38. Mr. MARTYNENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President,
the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the Presidency of
the Security Council for March and wishes you successin
guiding the work of this important body and in resolving
the complicated tasks facing it. I should also like to
express our gratitude to you and through you to the other
members of the Council for having allowed us to take
part in this discussion.
39. Yet again the Security Council is discussing the
question which is of primary importance for the elimination of the dangerous hotbed of tension in the Middle
East. Raising the issue, as has already been note-d, is quite
justified, timely and relevant. The documents available to
the Council show that Israel’s continued policy of occupation in the territories appropriated by it is hampering a
peaceful settlement in this region and is increasing the
threat to international
peace and security and the
national existence of the Palestinian people.

33. The final paragraph of the draft resolution is a
decision by the Council to meet again in June in order to
study the findings of the commission and inorder to take
appropriate action in the light of those findings.
34. That is all that the draft is about. I believe that it
commends itself for adoption as soon as possible since
the situation in the occupied territories is deteriorating.’
Two Palestinians were gunned down yesterday in the
occupied territories.

40. By exploiting the failure to resolve the Middle East
conflict and by. taking refuge behind separate deals, the
Israeli aggressors in recent times have actively increased
their poIicy of expansion, colonization and annexation in
the occupied Arab territories and are implementing in
practice plans for creating a Greater Israel at the expense
of the Arab lands.

35. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Ambassador Bishara’s
eloquent introduction of the draft resolution contained in
document S/l3171 leaves very little for me to add. Ban4

4I. The whole. world is witness to-, the campaign of;
repression and mass terror perpetrated’against ihe Arab
population by the Israeli authorities irrits planned mass
expulsion of the Arab population from the occupied
territories. The occupiers systematically destroy Arab
villages and in their place create Israeli settlements. Having created more than 120 of these settlements in the
occupied territories, Tel Aviv, despite decisive condemnation throughout the world and in violation of Uaited
Nations resolutions,-.has begun to implement a programme Of mass infiltration by the Israeli colonists in the
West Bank of the Jordan, thus creating an infrastructure
which will ensure the further development and colonization of more and more expropriated Arab lands.
42. Those who have already spoken in this debafe h&e
already emphasized that the aggressors have confiscated
and colonized 29 per cent of the territory of the West
Bank, including the most fertile lands. In that expropriated territory the Israeli occupiers have deprived the
local Arab population of their life-giving water resources.
The seizure by the aggressors of the fertile lands, their
irrigation sources and the water resources themselves
have forced the Palestinians, when they are not expelled
.by force, to leave their homelands. All this leads to a
change in the demographic structure of the territory for
the purpose of creating the notorious “living space”.
43. Other no less perfidious methods are used to create
Israeli settlements and communications in the occupied
territories which are planned and set up in such a way as
to stake out “new borders” for Israel and break up what
was once a unified territory into separate portions, isolated from each other by three belts of ever newer Israeli
settlements.
44. As certain representatives have already pointed out,
it is planned to settle about half a million Israeli colonists
in that territory. It is not, then, merely a question of
illegal occupation, mass repressions, violations of the
rights of the Palestine people, expropriation of their
property and natural resources and confiscation af their
land. The policy of the Israeli aggressors aims at destroying the very national existence of the Arab people of
Palestine. However, neither is ir merely a question of
violating the fourth Geneva Convention. Israel’s policy
aims at subverting a comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East, which significantly adds to the explosive
situation in that region.
45. Moreover, the representative of Israel has demonstrated during this debate utter contempt-which
is typical of Tel Aviv-for the United Nations, its Members and
the Security Council and resorted to hackneyed tactics of
rrying to justify ‘Israel’s policy of occupation. He has tried
in an unseemly manner to lead the Security Council away
from the real truth, making slanderous and indiscriminate attacks on ,a11 participants in the discussion and
adducing completely irrelevant matters of simply imaginary issues in an attempt to divert attention from the
cubstance of the huestion under discussion-the scandalous crimes agairist the Arab population in the occupied
territories that are pe.rpetratdd kvery hour by the o&upiers, crimes against the Arab people of Palestine and the
cause of peace in the Middle East.

452 What is promoting~ that abnormal and dangerous
@fit&n in the MiddleEast
is the support and connioaiice of the forces of imperialism and international reactisn-for the Israeli expansionists and colonizers, as well as
the shameful separate deals at the expense of the legitimate rights, interests and aspirations of the Arab peoples,
first and foremost the Arab people of Palestine. There are
ever more obvious attempts-though
sometimes hidden
behind a screen of “autonomy” and “self-govemment”to oust the Palestine Liberation Organization or simply
to remove the Palestinian problem from the process of
arriving at a Middle East settlement and to impose capituIatory and newolonialist conditions on the Arab peoples
ind the Palestinian people. This does not lead to a just
and lasting peace but merely contributes to recarving the
map of the Middle East in favour of Israeli expansionism,
thus complicating the situation in the Midlle East and
sowing the seeds of a new armed conflict.
47. During the discussion of this question in the Security Council, many delegations have already pointed out
the illegal activities of Israel at Jerusalem. In its resolutions the General Assembly has repeatedly emphasized
the inadmissibility of Israel changing the statuS of occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem. However,
flouting United Nations decisions, international law, and
world public opinion, the Israeli aggressors have annexed
Jerusalem by force and are at the present time taking
feverish steps to legalize that illegal act.
48. Events in recent months have made it even clearer
that the backing of the forces of imperialism and reaction
is sharpening the insatiable appetite of the Israeli expansionists, who are unwilling to take any account of the
rights of other peoples or international opinion and completely ignoring the realities of the Middle East.
49. All this must compel the Security Council to takk
tiosi decisive measures under Chapter VII of the Charter
in order to halt the expansionist, aggressive policy of
expropriation by the Israeli leaders, and to defend, guarantee and impleinent the exercise of the national rights
of the Palestinian people.
50. The Ukrainian SSR has always been strongly of the
opinion that the way to peace and security in the Middle
East does not lie through pandering to the aggressor but
through halting aggression, eliminating its consequences
and restoring the usurped rights of the Palestinian people
who live under the heel of the occupiers. We are staunchly
on the side of the Arab peoples, who are struggling for the
elimination of the consequences of Israeli aggression, for
freedom, independence and social progress, and we
uphold their legitimate interests and rights. Wedemand a
just and comprehensive political settlement in the Middle
East.
51. That position of principle in support of the just
struggle of the Arab peoples has been taken by the
Ukrainian SSR in the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, of which it is
a member. We should like once more to point out that

that Committee’s
recommendations, which have been
endorsed by the General Assembly, emphasize that,
unless the Palestinian problem- is resolved, unless the
national rights of the Palestinian people are restored,
peace and security in that region will be unattainable.

mitigate the almost universal and unequivocal condemnation.
58. The representative of Israel has consistently
attempted to divert the Council’s attention from the fundamental and substantive basis of our complaint,
namely, the ruthless, systematic and accelerating process
of Israeli colonization, expropriation; emasculation and
desecration of Jerusalem and the ather Palestinian and
Arab occupied lands, the seizure of the water and other
resources which have placed the very survival of the
remnants of the Palestinian people in their ancestral
homeland in the gravest jeopardy and seriously undermined the possibilities for a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East and beyond-which we
all cherish, provided it is not such a deceptive and clear
sham..

52. Any further postponement of a solution of this problem is tantamount to connivance in the annexationist
policy of Israel and its scorn for the fate of peace in the
Middle East and throughout the world.
53. Only a comprehensive, just settlement can bring
peace to the peoples of the Middle East and ensure the
legitimate rights and interests of the people of that region.
Such a settlement, as has been emphasized several times
in United Nations resolutions, should first of all eliminate
the reasons for the Middle East conflict and imply Israel’s
withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied since 1967.
It should give the Palestinian people the opportunity fully
to exercise their inalienable right to create their own
national homeland and State. Finally, it shouid ensure
the most stringent international security guarantees for
all States of the region without exception. A comprehensive and radical settlement is possible, obviously, only
with the participation on an equal footing of all interested
parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organization.

59. When South Africa pursued an identical policy
towards the fate of Namibia and uparrheid, the world
community responded by ridding itself of that bloodsucking monster which adamantly refused to respect a
decent international
order or the millions of decent
human beings enslaved in their own country.
60. Israel, legally and morally, has even less entitlement
to membership in the United Nations, because its very
admission was conditional upon its complying with two
basic conditions, namely, the territorial settlements
based on the United Nations partition plan in General
Assembly resolution 181 (II). This plan specifically provided for the establishment of a Palestinian Arab State
which included, in addition to the whole of the West
Bank, the Gaza Strip, the greater part of new Jerusalem
and the whole of old Jerusalem and Western GaliIee,
including Nazareth, almost all the fertile plains in Central
Palestine, including Lydda-which Israel calls Lod-and
Ramleh, with a corridor to 100 per cent of the city of
Jaffa, a substantial strip of coastal area right up to the
Askalan port-at present known as Israeli Ashqelonparts of the Negev and other areas which the Council can
see on United Nations maps.

54. The interests of international security demand that
this dangerous situation in the Middle East beeliminated
as soon as possible and that all peoples of the region be
allowed to live and work in conditions of a just and
lasting peace.
55. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
56. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): It is my privilege and
pleasure to extend a warm welcome to the new representative of brotherly Zambia, His Excellency Paul Lusaka.
I am confident that this contribution will be wise, dedicated and exemplary.

61. Equally important was General Assembly resohttion 194 (III), which laid down the second basic condition
and provided for the inalienable right of every Palestinian
refugee or displaced person to return to his ancestral
home.

57. I have been genuinely amused over the past week
watching the representative of Israel-the twin brother of
racist South Africa through Oppenheimer and his
conglomerates-sitting
in the dock, indicted, seIfindicting and ostracized by every Member State which
spoke in the Council. They represented every region,
ideology and religious and political affiliation. These are
great and proud nations which represent the rich and
variegated heritage of humanity. Instead of heeding the
voice of humanity and reporting it to his Government,
the representative of Israel has prepared texts passed to
him to read out---papers which were evidently stored in a
computer-maligning
and abusing. indiscriminately and
viciously each and every State which dared speak according to its conscience and uphold the principles of the
Charter. I am looking forward to hearing what the President will have in store for him and the wrath stored in the
Israeli computer against friendly Nigeria. I think that this
is the pathetic sight of a self-convicted entity, unable by
its pohcies and undisguised deeds even to-attempt a semblance of defence on the subject of the compraint; if only to

62. Having solemnly committed itself to implementing
those two mandatory resolutions and having obtained
admission to the United Nations, the Israelis renegedand yet they still hold a seat in the council of nations. Not
a single refugee has been repatriated, not a single inch
returned. But, to compound the original sin and infamy,
since 1967 they have been diligently devouring the tiny
remnant that remained in the hands of the Palestinians
with the eventual aim of obliterating their very existence.
63. The position of the Security Council, the General
Assembly -and other United Nations organs has been
consistently forthright and they have shown themselves
to be undaunted. But then the tantalizingquestionsarise:
Are the Israelis above the law? Has the world been polarized into an omnipotent race and subservient Gentiles
6

.-

born into this world to serve the aims of the “master
race”? We, the Gentiles, are several billion human souls,
and yet how much weight, I wonder, do we carry in the
councils of some of the mighty?

1utio.n 242 (1967) and the’ repatriation
numbers of Palestine refugees.

of substantial

72. In 1967 the Sixth Fleet was held up for nine hours by
Israeli air and naval forces and was prevented from coming to the rescue of one of the beleaguered United States
sister ships that was under merciless- attack, which
resulted in numerous casualties among United States citizens, not to mention the damage to. the prestige of the
United States of America. One of the two Rostrow brothers, both ardent Zionists, prevailed upon the late President Johnson not to take any action, on political
grounds.

64. Some time ago, Time magazine published a revealing story that every day a Mr. Rothschild meets with a
cabal in London, behind closed doors, to decide on fixing
the price of gold. A flash is sent out to agents around the
world to observe the price. That, of course, extends to
monetary and other financial manipulations. HOW can
the billions of struggling human beings-and
we are
trying to build a new international economic order based
on justice-compete
with such awesome powers, except
by their indomitable spirit and their unshakeable faith in
justice, equality, goodness and the inherent worth of the
individual?

73. Governor Scranton, former Permanent Representative of the United States to the United Nations, after his
return from a Middle East trip, committed the unforgivable sin of suggesting that the United States policy towards
the Middle East should be “even-handed”.
What a crime!
Those two words cost him his political career.

65. I know that the representative of Israel will accuse
me of anti-Semitism,
even though we consider antiSemitism as our greatest enemy, not only because it runs
counter to our basic beliefs but also functionally because
it triggers greater immigration that would hasten further
dislodgement from our homeland and diminish our
hopes-dim
as they seem now-of
our eventual redemption. Hitler’s abominable behaviour, more than anything
else, contributed to the innocent Palestinians’ undoing.

74. I think that all countries in the world, including
ours, would cherish the most friendly and mutually beneficial relationships with the great American people, as we
have always done. But we are forcibly prevented from
having such relationships by the evident dominance of a
Zionist Power which is bent on our destruction. Even
normal and friendly relationships between the two superPowers, upon which the survival of the human race
hinges, are made hostage to this invisible-or,
rather,
visible-Power,
which sees the American national interest only in proportion to the enhancement of Zionist
goals.

66. But, notwithstanding,
I have no doubt that the
B’nai B’rith, the Gestapo of the Zionist movement, will
put me on their long black list as anti-Semite-together
with large segments of honourable American citizens,
whom they place on their all-encompassing black list and
blackmail-simply
because I seek justice and redemption
for my fellow countrymen in dispersal and agony.

75. I would be a happy man if I could find that the great
American people had unshackled themselves from these
narrow-gauged
and selfish constraints, Then and only
then. would we see the dawn of a happy and peaceful
future in which all of us would work,in concert and amity.
Gunboat diplomacy is no substitute for winning the
hearts and minds of men and women everywhere-and
without having to waste any bills, or even a single cent,
which could be spent more usefully elsewhere, at least in
the United States.,

67. If anyone doubts the truth of my statement let him
throw a cursory glance at the Israelis’ sordid record-and
the list of their misdeeds is just the tip of the iceberg.
68. In the mid-1940s Lord Moyne, Minister of State and
member of the British War Cabinet, was murdered in
cold blood at Cairo, because the Zionist movement did
not feel comfortable with his views. He was in charge of
the British war effort in the entire Middle East.

76. I had intended yesterday to read out a telex message
from our Foreign Ministry which replies to the Israeli
representative’s
gleeful information, about the terrible
situation in Yemen. That I thought would please him and
give him a good night’s rest. The telex message said that
Mr. Hassan Ibrahim, the Jordan Minister .of State for
Foreign Affairs and member of the Arab mediation mission, had returned after conducting talks in. both Sana
and Aden, in implementation
of the decision of the
League of Arab States to resolve the dispute between the
two parts of Yemen. The Minister declared that the mediation mission had succeeded in its efforts to ensure observance of the cease-fire and the withdrawal of the armed
forces on both sides. He added that it had been agreed to
stop the verbal attacks between the two countries and
also to reopen communications. The message added that
the mediation mission ,had succeeded in establishing an
atmosphere propitious to the start of a brotherly dialogue
between the two Yemens-although,
really, there is only

69. Towards the end of the 194Os, one of the most
patriotic and dedicated American statesmen and the first
United States Secretary of Defense was dismissed and
subjected to such ruthless harassment for almost six
months that, in disgust and fury, he committed suicide.
Of course, Mr. Truman, who dismissed him, became
President of the United States-hardly
a compensation
for the loss of such a great man.
70. Count Bernadotte, the United Nations Mediator,
was shot dead on the streets of Jerusalem because the
Israelis did not like his views on the peaceful settlement of
the conflict.
71. Mr. William Rogers, a man of great integrity and
patriotism, was thrown out of office as Secretary of State
because he dared present a solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict based on the provisions of Security Council reso7

Israelis visualize the self-rule project. That report contained the following:

one Yemen. The twentieth of thismonth has been agreed
upon as a day of solidarity, coinciding with a meetingin
Kuwait between the Presidents of North and South
Yemen.

-First, the self-rule wouid apply only to the Arab
Palestinian residents, and not to the Israeli colonizers in
the area, who would enjoy extraterritorial rights.
-SecondIy, the ultimate authority in the self-rule areas,
already largely vivisected and cut into bits and pieces,
would reside in the Israeli army, and the centre of this
ultimate authority would be vested in the specified locations of Israeli military presence, it being understood that
the Palestinian inhabitants would never be given the
jurisdiction that might enable them to establish theirown
State.
-Thirdly, the Israelis woulh enjoy unrestricted freedom
of colonization and the freedom to buy and seize iand,in
the civil-rule areas.

77. His Majesty King Hussein of Jordanpresided over a
special meeting of the Cabinet in the aftermath of the
declaration pertaining to agreement onthe conclusion of
a bilateral peace between Egypt and Israel. An extensive
review of the situation was carried ant in relation to the
consequences in the Arab world and on the international scene, and the dimensions of the challenge which
confronts the Arab nation as a result oftheconclusion of
a separate peace between Israel and Egypt, His Majesty
King Hussein stressed the grave responsibilities which
devolve upon the entire Arab nation in confronting the
dangers and acting collectively and in close concert to
meet them. King Hussein asserted the imperative need to
consolidate and augment collective Arab strength to enable our nation to safeguard and restore its rights.

- -Fourthly, the Israeli Government would retain control
of what are called miri, or State domains, even though, as
I explained earlier, these are the communal possession of
the indigenous inhabitants.
-Fifthly,
Israel would remain in control of the water
resources and would strive to establish a common water
authority.
-Sixthly, the Israeli army would remain in the military
camps to be agreed upon during the period of talks on
self-rule; it would also retain the right to conduct military
exercises and manoeuvres in those areas earmarked for
self-rule, as it seesfit.
-Seventhly, free movement of Jews and Arabs would be
ensured in the self-rule areas.

78. King Hussein reiterated that Jordan’s position had
always been committed to the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace in which all parties participated
and to the soltition of all aspects of the conflict on the
basis of total Israeii withdrawal from all the occupied
Arab lands, foremost of which is Holy Jerusalem, and to
the restoration of all the national rights of the Palestinian
people.
79. King Hussein emphasized the imperative need to
mobilize all thecomponents of the Arab nation’s capabilities and resources. He also reiterated Jordan’s abiding
adherence to common Arab action in accordance wi*‘the resolutions of the Arab summit conference at
Baghdad.

-Eighthly, the law would remain as it is and a common
higher judicial commission should be formed between the
self-rule administration
and Israel to add what. Israel
regards as other appropriate laws.

80. It will be seen from what I have said that Jordan,
while striving, as it has always done, fora just, lasting and
comprehensive peace, will never accede to a sham and
humiliating peace imposed by Israeli diktat.

83. The Israeli ministerial-committee
has also recommended that the self-rule set-up should comprise the
following:
1. An economic department, provided it has na
authority to issue money or impose customs duties; its
authority would be restricted to imposing direct taxation
on the inhabitants;
2. A department of the interior which would have no
power to issue passports; the Palestinian Arabs would
have the choice of carrying either Israeli or Jordanian
passports;
3.’ A cultural department which would be responsible
for education and the issuing of books, but Israeli censorship would retain jurisdiction over the supervision of all
publications in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip;
4. A department for agriculture;

81. Resolution 242 (1967) is categorical and forthright
in stating the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by fo.rce. We are now being asked, under the socalled self-rule project, to sanctify and legalize the
military occupation indefinitely; .we are being asked to
forgo our glorious legacy and religious attachment to
Holy Jerusatem and its environs, which extend from
Bethlehem to the doorsteps-of Ramallah. We are being
asked not only to accept as a permanent featyre the 80
settlements already established in JerusaIem and the
West Bank-not
to speak of the ‘60 or so settlements in
the Gaza Strip and the Golan-but
alsoioacquiesce in
ongoing- and relentless colonization, which’ has been
given the green light. The refugees and the displaced are
sidetracked by a conspiracy of sile~nce. For who would
invoke the wrath of emperor Begin by raising these elementaf rights?

5. A department for religious affairs which would
handle wad charitable foundations;
6. A department of labour which wouldbe incharge
of social affairs and trade unions;

82. It might be illuminating to refer the Couficil~to a
report on provisional recommendaations by an Is%aeli ministerial committee to the Israeli Cabinet, as to how the

7. A department of health in charge of health problems under the over-ail supervision of Israel;
8

8. A department of transport which would apply
Israeli rules and regulations;
9. An Arab police department which would handle
crime and other offences, but the Israeli army and the
Israeli internal security department would retain over-all
authority for internal security.

@T--The annexation of the Arab civil courts to the
Israeli courts;
(c) Making the Shariah religious courts accountable to
the Shariah court at Jaffa-there are only 5,000 to 10,000
Arabs at Jaffa, as far as I know-1 may be wrong-and
severing its links with the other Shariah courts in the rest
of the West Bank;
(d) Severance of the civil courts at Jerusalem from the
other civil courts in the rest of the West Bank;

84. Is the afore-mentioned consonant with the Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions? Does it constitute the comprehensive, just and lasting peace about
which we all talk? Or is it not a final liquidation of the
rights of the Palestinian people in the homeland of their
forefathers? When South Africa had the audacity to present its bantustan policy-and
I think in many aspects it
was much more charitable-the
Assembly’s first resolution two years ago was a resounding and scornful no. I
am sure that the Council will be no less vehement in
saying NO with capital letters.

(e) The transfer of the Arab Supreme Court from Jerusalem to Ramallah; the Arab legal profession, including
the lawyers, have ever since, over the past 11 years,
boycotted the courts in consequence of this resolution;
u> The transfer of all Arab medical departments,
including the blood bank, the anti-tuberculosis centre,
laboratories and government pharmacies and all other
employees to other locations in the West Bank;

85. The civil rule proposals which I have outlined do
not, of course, include Jerusalem and its environs from
Bethlehem to Ramallah, for Israel had already annexed
the city by taking the following steps.

(g) The linking of postal and other communications
facilities to the Israeli network; the linkage included the
Arab villages of Sur Baher, Shu’faat, Beit Hanina, Silwan, West Sahur, Urn Tuba, Eissawiya, Tur and parts of
Abu Dees and Eastern Sahur;
(h) The application of the law called “the present
absent”; I am sure this is a jigsaw puzzle which takes time
to work out and a very curious phenomenon for the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, who did not happen to be at
Jerusalem when the census was carried out in July 1967
even though they resided in other parts of the West Bank;
(i) Twenty Arab philanthropic societies were closed
down, reducing the number of such societies in Arab
Jerusalem from 100 to 80;
0) Transfer of the headquarters of the Israeli policeand I mean the headquarters of the Israeli police of the
State of Israel-to the Arab city of Jerusalem; they are
now housed in a hospital building erected by the Jordan
Government in the mid-1960;
(k) Transfer of the offices of the Histadrut-the
Israeli
labour union-to
Jerusalem in 1977;
(r> Transfer of the offtces of the World Jewish Congress to Jerusalem in 1979; during 1977 plans were made
to transfer all Israeli government offices to Jerusalem in a
period of two years, and work has started on the construction of 50,000 square metres for their offices;
(m) Transfer of the residence of the Israeli Prime Minister from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem in June 1977;
(n) Transfer of the Supreme Court of Justice and the
offices of the Israeli Ministry of Justice to Arab Jerusalem; on 17 November 1976 Teddy Kollek, the mayor of
occupied Jerusalem, requested that the United States
transfer its embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem and
recognize Jerusalem at the capital of the State of Israel.

86. On 28 June 1967 the Knesset adopted a resolution
to annex Arab Jerusalem to Israel and to apply Israeli
laws therein as in an Israeli territory. Following that
resolution a spurt of executive resolutions were put into
effect:
--First, the dissolution of the municipal council at
Arab Jerusalem and its replacement by the municipal
council of the other part of occupied Jerusalem, headed
by Teddy Kollek; it was accorded the duties of municipal
services; in addition, Palestinian Arab employees were
requested to work for the Israeli municipality.
-Secondly, the closing down of the Directorate of
Education at Jerusalem, forcing-the government schools
to become branches of the Israeli municipality, and the
forcible adoption of the Israeli education curricula in
those schools, making the Palestinian teachers accountable to the Israeli municipality.
-Thirdly;
the closing down of all the Arab banks as
well as the branches of foreign banks at Arab Jerusalem.
-Fourthly,
the application of Israeli customs duties
on the borders of Arab Jerusalem with the rest of the
West Bank; including the imposition of customs duties of
all commodities coming from the West Bank.
-Fifthly,
the carrying out of a special census of the
Palestinian inhabitants of Arab Jerusalem different from
the census carried out in the restof the WestBank; Israeli
identity cards, not passports, were issued to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, different from those given to the
inhabitants of the West Bank, which are issued by the
military governors; as a matter of fact, they are of two
different colours.

87. On 29 January 1979 the Israeli Parliament’s governing coalition tabled a draft law which would make Jerusalem the seat of foreign diplomatic missions. According
to this law Israel will request all States with diplomatic
missions in Isra-el to transfer their offices to Jerusalem
within a certain period of time and full diplomatic

-Sixthly,
the Judaization of both the civil and the
Shariah courts by the folIowing method:
(a) Dismissing all the Arab judges and forcing them to
submit new applications for employment as judges to
apply Israeii law;
9

(6) Erasing the Arab and Islamic tradition andcharacter. Digging operations are still being carried on by the
Israeli authorities under the Al-Aqsa Mosque, under its
western and southern walls, and under the Buraq Wall.
These diggings have reached the point where they could
cause large parts of the Mosque and other historic and
religious sites to cave in in ruin. This includes 300 homes
housing about 3,000 Arab citizens. I have heard from
citizens living in that quarter that they have to walk,
literally every day, over great mounds of debris just to
move from their houses to some other destination, and of
course they know that they are living in the shadow of
death and collapse.

immunities will be given to foreign embassies at Jerusalem only, while a minimum of diplomatic immunities will
be given to embassies in Tel Aviv. Israeli ministries were
instructed
to deal with foreign ambassadors
at
Jerusalem.
88. In September 1978 Menachem Begin decided to
transfer his office and the offices of the Minister for Foreign Affairs from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.
89. As regards expropriation
of land and forced Arab
emigration, more than 1,654 homes and properties were
demolished in the Arab quarter of Al-Sharaf alone.
They constituted 1,215 homes, 427 commercial stores,
5 Islamic theological centres, 3 monasteries and 4’schools;
6,500 Arabs were forced to leave the city of Jerusalem
during a period of five years after the occupation.

(e) The historical reminder of the burning of the AlAqsa Mosque on 21 August 1969.
u> The usurpation of the Palestine Museum at Jerusalem and its being claimed as the property of the Israeli
Government.

90. To force the Jewish character on the Arab city of
Jerusalem by way of increasing its population to half a
million people by 1975, the Israeli authorities carried out
a crash programme of settling tens of thousands of Jews
in the heart of the Arab city and its suburbs.

(g) The replacement of Arab and Islamic street names
and the names of other historic Arab sites by HebrewJewish names.
(h) The demolition of Mamilla Cemetery, the l,OOOyear-old Islamic cemetery at occupied Jerusalem, since
1948 and its transformation
into an Israeli park, as I have
explained in an earlier statement.

91. On 18 September 1968 the Israelis expropriated
three Arab quarters-namely,
Al-Magharbeh,
Bab AlSilsileh and parts of the Al-Sharaf quarter, from which
6,500 Arabs were evacuated to make room for 300
Jewish families. To name just a few Israeli colonies that
stand witness to Israeli designs in the Holy City of Jerusalem: Ramat Eshkol, in the Sheikh Jarrah area, where
1,800 housing units were built to house 30,000 Israelis;
Mount Scopus, the French Hill and the Mount of Olives,
where 2,000 housing units were built up to 1973-this, of
course, must be updated, because I looked it up in the old
records-on
land owned by 500 Arab citizens; and the
Nabi Samuel colony, built on lands owned by the Arabs
of Beit Hanina. An additional 8,000 apartments are
under construction.

(9 The expropriation
of vast areas of Christian
Islamic land and property.

(j) The application of Israeli tax laws and customs to
Arab industrial products in the city of Jerusalem, with
preferential treatment to Israeli products.
(k) The application of Israeli commercial-laws to Arab
commercial activities to burden Arab businessmen with
high taxation.
(r) In an attempt to force bankruptcy and liquidation
on it, the forcing of the Arab Electric Company by the
Israeli authorities to supply Israeli settlements around
Jerusalem with power, without those settlements being
forced to pay for it. The Arab Electric Company of
Jerusalem was catering to a relatively small part of Jerusalem, so it is also beyond its physical capacity to service
the expansion that has occurred in that part of Arab
Jerusalem.

92. I could go on listing Israeli cannibalization of Holy
Jerusalem district by district, but let me sum up the Israeli
plan for Greater Jerusalem.
93. In its issue of 26 March 1969-that
is almost a
decade ago-the
Israeli newspaper Ma’ariv uncovered
the details of the Israeli plan for Greater Jerusalem, since
augmented, as the capital of Israel. Ma’ariv pointed out
that drawings for the plan had begun in June 1967 and
provided for increasing the population of the city eventually to 900,000, of which, of course, the overwhelming
majority would be Jews. The plan is described as:
(a) The annexation of 400 to, 500 square kilometres
Arab land .surrounding
Jerusalem, from Ramallah
Bethlehem.

and

94. Is it at all surprising that for six days on end the
inhabitants of Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank
have been demonstrating in anger over the ugly reality
of their dumping and over the perpetuation of their
capacity in the clutches of Israeli occupation? And is it at
all suprising that the Baghdad Arab summit had vehemently rejected the proposed solution, not because it is
against peace-on the contrary, it is for a just, comprehensive and lasting peace-but
because of the substance
of the peace proposed?

of
to

95. If illegality and occupation must continue, it is not
required that we legalize it. There are limits beyond which
enough is enough.

(b) The evacuation of no less than 130,000 Arabs from
that area by all means.
(c) The vivisection of the West Bank-and
it is a
known fact that the larger portion of this plan is being
impiemented in lands of Beit Jala, Anata, Jabal Tawil at
Al-Bireh and land from Beit Sahur.

96. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom
I call.
10

97. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
The fourth Geneva Convention stipulates, inter al& in
article 49 that:
“The occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies.”
Apparently the Supreme Court of Israel thinks otherwise. In its Daily News Bulletin of 16 March 1979 the
Jewish Telegraphic Agency reports this item, datelined
Jerusalem, 15 March:
“The Supreme Court ruled today that Jewish settlements in the occupied Arab territories are legal if their
existence is necessary to the security of the State as long
as a state of war exists. The unanimous ruling by the
panel of five justices put an end to legal challenges to
Israel’s settlement policy and was seen as opening the
way to the proliferation of settlements in the occupied
areas.
“The court rendered its decision on an appeal by
Arab residents of Bet El and Tubas on the West Bank
against the seizure of their lands by the army for eventual settlement. They contended that this did not serve
any military purpose and was in conflict with international law. But the court accepted the Government’s
contention that the lands seized were strategically sensitive and therefore important to security. It also
claimed that the seizures were in accordance with article
53 of the Geneva Convention which permits the seizure
of land for military purposes.
“A representative of the International Red Cross
who attended the hearings said he would report to his
headquarters in Geneva. Settlers in the Jordan Valley
were relieved by the decision. They had feared that if
the Arabs’ appeal succeeded, Arab landowners in the
Jordan Valley would be in a position to challenge the
legitimacy of their own settlements.
“Agriculture Minister Ariel Sharon, who heads the
ministerial settlement committee and is a strong advocate of massive Israeli settlement in the occupied territories, told settlers in Be! El that the court ruling
cleared the way for more settlements on hitherto disputed land.”
98. That decision accords exactly with our position,
namely, that these colonies are military installations
erected by the occupying Power and consequently are
legitimate military targets for legitimate action by -the
Palestinian freedom fighters in the exercise of their right
to resist alien domination and foreign occupation. That
right includes armed resistance.
99. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the German Democratic Republic has asked to speak in exercise
- of his right of reply. I invite him to take a’seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
100. Mr.

FLORIN

Democratic Republic)
Mr. President I am compelled to ask for the floor once more since the representative of Israel in his lies and slander has gone beyond all
the bounds which even the representative of a State which
(interpretation

(German

from Russian):

&an aggressor might have been expected to observe in the
United ‘Nations and in such a responsible body as the
Security Council. First of all, I must point out that the
State which goes by the name of East Germany does not
exist. My State is called the German Democratic Republic but it seems that we could not even expect the elementary rules of politeness to be observed by the
representative of a State whose attack on the 4-millionstrong Arab people of Palestine has been condemned by
the whole world.
101. I should like to take one example of his scornful
lies to show how we should evaluate the statement made
yesterday by that gentleman. It would seem from his
statement that the German Democratic Republic is a
country without a Jewish population. I have before me
the bulletin of the Union of Jewish Communities of the
German Democratic Republic, which is published periodically. This is the December issue for 1978. Under the
heading “To all our anniversary celebrators we wish
many more happy and healthy years” we read “The
Jewish community of Berlin, the Jewish community of
Dresden, the Jewish community of Halle, the Jewish
community of Karl-Marx-Stadt,
the Israeli religious
community of Leipzig, the community of the Magdeburg
Synagogue, Union of the Thuringia Jewish community’*.
That issue tells us at what time sabbath music will be
broadcast by Berlin radio, and about religious services
for the Jewish communities and much more besides. The
following words from the introductory article of that
Jewish publication, the December issue, are I think significant. I shall quote:
“Foreigners often ask us whether Jews can live at all
in a German State after all these difficult years. We who
live in the German Democratic Republic would like to
confirm that decisively. And here freedom of religious
observance, guaranteed by our Constitution, social
security and full integration in State and social life are
only one side of the matter. The other side is our
conviction that the historical birth of the State from the
anti-Fascist and anti-democratic regime is becoming
the heritage of the younger generation and is constantly
being understood by them. The historical experience
gained by the older generation is handed on to many
young people who themselves did not live through
those terrible events. The crimes of the National Socialist dictatorship, in particular the extermination of millions upon millions of people in Europe who were
killed in the Fascist war and as a result of the deliberate
extermination in death camps, are constantly being
unmasked.”
102. I should like to mention one more thing; during the
fortieth anniversary of the so-called Kristalhacht of 1938
the President of the State Council of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, sent a message to the
President of the Union of Jewish Communities of the
German Democratic Republic from which I quote the
following:
“The pogroms perpetrated against people of Jewish
descent four decades ago and which revealed the very
essence of the Hitlerite regime in its most disgusting
form should have shaken all anti-Fascists. In the state-

ment of November 1938 called ‘Shame on the Jewish
pogrom’ the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Germany most resolutely condemned these
bloody excesses.The aims of the joint struggle after the
liberation of the people by the Soviet army have been
implemented in the German Democratic Republic.
Imperialism and militarism, racism and anti-Semitism
have been completely eliminated. In building socialism
our people is building a new life. In doing this citizens
of the Jewish faith play an active part. In observing
their religion and their traditions they can count on the
full understanding of our State and our society.‘*

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
108. Mr.mI.K.
(Pakistan): I have asked to exercise my
right of reply to the statements made by the representative
of Israel at the 2124th meeting. In referring to the statement I had made earlier in the same meeting, the representative of Israel made some totally irrelevant and
incorrect remarks about my country. It is significant that
he did not mention any of the arguments or facts presented in my statement on the actual issues before the
Council, namely, the continued illegal occupation by
Israel of Arab territories, the consistent, illegal measures
by Israel to alter the legal status, geographical nature and
demographic composition of the Holy City of Jerusalem
and the continued denial of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian
people, including. their right to seifdetermination and a sovereign State in their own homeland under the leadership of their sole representative; the
Palestine Liberation Organization. Instead, he indulged
in attempts to divert the attention of the Council by
making disparaging observations about nearly every
country whose representative has so far participated in
this debate. He even assailed the United Nations for
showing partiality to the Arab cause.

103. These are the facts. One might ask why the representative of Israel is filled with such hatred for the German Democratic Republic, that anti-Fascist German
State which in fact is not even thinking of halting its
investigations of war criminals. It is not difficult to
answer that question: he does this because the German
Democratic Repubiic consistently rejects any imperialist
deal with Israel which would serve the purposes of
aggression and supports the just cause of the Arab peoples, particularIy the Arab people of Palestine. In doing
so we respect the right of each people in the Middle East
to create its own State.

109. But, in doing so, the representative of Israel was
only highlighting the total isolation in which Israel finds
itself today. Moreover, he demonstrated his lack of
knowledge of the developments in several countries,
including my own. Above all, however, he dispiayed his
ignorance of the glorious contribution of Islam in raising
human values in all spheres of our endeavour. The introduction of Islamic laws in Pakistan, as indeed in several
other Islamic countries, demonstrates our resolve to
reorder our lives in accordance with the eternals tenets of
Islam.

104. The German Democratic Republic is well known
for its solidarity with all enslaved peoples fighting for
their liberation. And we are proud of that solidarity.
105. My ambassador colleagues who haveexercised the
right of reply in this forum have repeatedly pointed out
the tactics of the representative of Israel in the present
deliberations. By slandering other States he attempts to
divert attention from the shameless aggression and the
colonial policies of the ruling circles of Israel.
106. My delegation is firmly convinced that distinguished members of the Security Council understand full
well the intention of the representative of that aggressive
State and that the Security Council will adopt decisions
which respond to the just demands voiced by the distinguished representatives of Jordan and Kuwait.

110. In conclusion, what the Israeli representative frivolously termed a “barren ritual” has been a fruitful and
comprehensive debate. The international community has
once again unanimously deplored Israel’s indefensible
conduct in the occupied Arab territories and its illegal
measures to colonize and annex the Holy City of Jerusalem and has called upon it to halt its intransigence.

107. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Pakistan
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite

The meeting rose at 6.00 p.m.

12

HOW

TO OBTAtN-UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section. New York or Geneva,
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLtCATtONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLtCATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publicatiqns
des Nations
Unies sont en venta dans les librairies
et les agences
dCpositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. Nrw York ou Gem&e.
KAK

COMO

lIO~7S1IHTb

CONSEGUIR

U3~AHHII

OPI’AHH

PUBLlCACt0NE.S

3AUBU

DE LAS

QG’bE.!WHEHH6IX

NACtONES

HAUUH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nationes
Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su lihrero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas. .Secribn,de
Ventas. Nucva York o Ginebra

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

79.X002-October

1482-2150

’
