Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commiuee

Noting also with satisfaction . t~~ inte!lti~m of the
Special Committee to send a v1S1tmg ~mssion to the
liberated areas of Angola and Mozambique,
1. Reaffi.rms the inalienable right of t~e ~eoples of
Angola and Mozambique and other :rer!1tones ~nder
Portuguese domination to self-determmahon and ~nd_ependence as recognized by the General Assembly m its
resolutio~ 1514 (XV), and the legitimacy of their
struggle by all ways and means at their disposal to
achieve that right;
2. Reaffirms that the national liberation m?vements
of Angola and Mozam~iqu~ are the authentic representatives of the true aspirations of the _peoples of th?se
Territories and recommends that, pendmg the accession
of those Territories to independence, all_ Go_vemm~n~s,
the specialized agencies and other organtz~ttons w1~hm
the United Nations system and the Umted Nations
bodies concerned should, when dealing with matt~rs
pertaining to the. Territories,. ensu~e the representation
of those Territones by the hberat1on movements concerned in an appropriate capacity and in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity;
3. Condemns in the strongest possible terms the
persistent refusal of the Government of Portuga; to
comply with the provisions. of the_ relevant r~solut!ons
of the United Nations and, m particular, the intensified
armed repression by Portugal of the peoples of the Territories under its domination, including the brutal massacre of villagers, the mass destruction of villages ~nd
property and the ruthless use of nap_a~m and c~e~tcal
substances in order to stifle the legitimate asp1rat1ons
of those p~oples for freedom and independence;
4. Demands that the Government of Portugal should
cease forthwith its colonial wars and all acts of repression against the peoples of Angola and Mo~ambi9ue,
withdraw its military and other forces and dIScontmue
all practices which violate the inalienable rights of those
populations, including the eviction from. thei! homes
and the regrouping of the African populations m aldeamentos and the settlement of foreign immigrants in the
Territories;
5. Demands that the Government of Portugal treat
the freedom fighters of Angola and Mozambique captured during the struggle for freedom as prisoners of
war in accordance with the principles of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of
War, of 12 August 1949,25 and in that connexion invites the International Committee of the Red Cross to
continue to maintain close contact with the liberation
movements as parties to the conflict, to provide reports
on conditions in prisoner-of-war camps and on the
treatment of prisoners of war detained by Portugal and
to make the necessary arrangements to secure the exchange of prisoners of war:
6. Appeals to all Governments, the speciali_zed
agencies and other organizations within t~e _United
Nations system and non-governmental orgaruzatlons to
render to the peoples of Angola, M?za~biq~e and _other
Territories under Portuguese dommat1on, m part1cul~r
the populations in the libe_rated areas of _those. femtories all the moral matenal and economic assistance
neces~ary to continu~ their struggle for the achievement
of their inalienable right to freedom and independence;
7. Urges all Governments, particularly those members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization which
continue to render assistance to Portugal, to withdraw
1111 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 7S, No. 972, p. 135.

97

any assistance that enables Portugal . to prosecute the
colonial war in Angola and Mozambique, and to prevent the sale or supply of all arms and military materiel
to Portugal including civi1 aircraft, ships and other
means of tr~nsport capable of being used for transp<;>rting military materiel and personnel, as well as suppli~,
equipment and material for the manufacture or maintenance of weapons and ammunition that it uses to perpetuate its colonial domination in Africa;
B. Appeals to all States to refrain from any collaboration with Portugal involving the use of any of
the Territories under its domination for military purposes;
9. Calls upon all States to take forthwith all possible
measures:
(a) To put an end to any activities that _hell? to exploit the Territories under Portuguese dommat1on and
the peoples ,therein;
( b) To discourage their nationals and the bo~ies
corporate under their jurisdiction from entering mto
any transactions or arrangements that contribute to
Portugal's domination over those Territories;
( c) To exclude Portugal from taking part on beh~f
of Ang0!a and Mozambique in :.:ny bi!ateral or multtlateraf treaties or agreements relating parti~ul~rly to
external trade in the products of those Temtones;
10. Draws the attention of the Security Council,
having regard to the explosive situation re_suJt_ing from
the policies of Portugal in the colonial Terntones u~der
its domination and from its constant provocations
against the independent African States bordering those
Territories and in the light of the outright disregard
by Portug~l of the relevant resolutions of the United
N r. tions, particularly Council resolutions 312_ (1972)
and 322 (1972), to the urgent need for takmg, as a
matter of priority, all effective steps with a view to
securing the full and speedy implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and of the related
decisions of the United Nations;
l t. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
session;
12. Invites the Secretary-Genera], bearing in mind
the urgent need for mobilizing world public opinion
against the criminal war of repression being waged by
the Government of Portugal against the peoples of the
Territories under its domination, to continue to take
effective and concrete measures through all the media
at his disposal to give widespread and continuous pu~
licity to the critical situation obtaining in those Terntories and the heroic struggle of their peoples towards
freedom and independence;
13. Decides to keep the situation in these Territories
under continuous review and to include in the agenda
of its twenty-ninth session an item entitled "Question
of Territories under P.:>rtuguese domination".
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
3114 (XXVIII). Establishment of the Commisi-ion of Inquiry on the Reported Massacres
in l\lozamhique

The General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the reported massacres in Mozambique,

98

General Aseembly-Twenty-eighth Session

Recalling the consensus adopted on 20 July 1973
by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 26 in which the Special Committee stressed that the
Government of Portugal must allow a thorough and
impartia1 investigation of the reported atrocities,
Convinced of the urgent need for such an international investigation,
1. Decides to establish a representative Commission
of Inquiry on the Reported Massacres in Mozambique,
consisting of five members to be appointed by the
President of the General Assembly after due consultation with Member States;
2. Instructs the Commission of Inquiry to carry
out an investigation of the reported atrocities, to gather
information from ·all relevant sources, to solicit the
co-operation and assistance of the national liberation
movement and to report its findings to the General
Assembly as soon as possible;
3. Requests the Government of Portugal to cooperate with the Commission of Inquiry and to grant
it all necessary facilities to enable it to carry out its
mandate.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

Having heard the statement of a petitioner/11
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonia'1 Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions relating to the question of Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe) adopted by the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Special Committee,
Taking into consideration the programme of action
adopted by the International Conference of Experts
for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973, 32
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, has the primary responsibility
for putting an end to the critical situation in Southern
Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) which, as repeatedly affirmed
by the Security Council, constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
Reaffirming that any attempt to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal regime on the basis of
independence before majority rule would be in contravention of the inalienable rights of the people of
that Territory and contrary to the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and of resolution 1514
(XV),

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-General21 that, in pursuance of paragraph I of the above resolution, he had appointed the members
of the Commission of Inquiry 011 the Reported Massacres in
Mozambique.
As a result, the Commission of Inquiry will be composed of
the following Member States: GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, HONDURAS, MADAGASCAR, NEPAL

and NORWAY.

3115 (XXVIII). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implemen-tation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,28
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the Zimbabwe African People's Ui;iion and the Zimbabwe African N ationa! Union, 29 w,-o participated in
an observer capacity in the Fourth Committee's consideration of the item in accordance with .the decision
taken by the General Assembly at its 2139th plenary
meeting, on 3 October 1973,30
26 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session.. Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/Rev.1 ), chap. IX,
para. 27.
21 A/9496.
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supp'-nt No. 23 (A/9023/Rev.l), chaps. I and

Condemning the continued oppression of the people
of Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority regime, the
arbitrary imprisonment and detention of political leaders and others, and the continued denial of fundamental
human rights, including in particular the criminal
measures of collective punishment, as well as the establishment of the so-called "tribal trust lands", which
creates an apartheid State in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Condemning the continued illegal presence and intensified military intervention of South African forces
in the Territory, which assist the racist minority regime
and seriously threaten the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of neighbouring African States,
Strongly deploring the failure of the Government of
the United Kingdom to comply with provisions of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Special Committee, and in particular its persistent
refusal to co-operate with ,the Special Committee in the
discharge 01 the mandate entrusted to it by the Assembly,
Deeply disturbed at the attitude taken by the United
Kingdom authorities in respect of the activities of the
national ,liberation movements of Zimbabwe, including
the refusal of those authorities to issue passports and
travel documents to members of the movements,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure
by aH the means at their disposal the enjoyment of that
right as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in conformity with the objectives of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);

IV-VII.
29 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2038th,
2039th and 2045th meetings.
ao See "Other decisions", p. 111.

3 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Fourth Committee. 2039th meeting.
32 A/9061, annex, sect. IV.
