United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9315th meeting

Wednesday, 3 May 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl/Mr. Hauri/Mrs. Chanda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Lima
Mr. He Zhiqiang
Mrs. Barba Bustos
Mrs. Aubert
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Anyanah
Mr. Tamaura
Mr. De Bono Sant Cassia
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Suprunenko
Ms. Alawadhi
Mr. Weld-Blundell
Ms. Strainic

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Futureproofing trust for sustaining peace
Letter dated 18 April 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/283)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-12613 (E)
*2312613*

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than three minutes in order to enable the Council to
conclude its work on time. Flashing lights on the collars
of the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Latvia welcomes this
high-level open debate on building and sustaining
peace. We appreciate Switzerland’s leadership in
organizing this meeting and thank all the briefers for
their valuable insight.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Latvia shares the view that trust is a key ingredient
when it comes to building and sustaining peace. We
all know well that trust takes a long time and patience
to develop; at the same time, it is very easy to break.
Therefore, we should focus on solid building blocks of
trust, which in turn can play a crucial role in upholding
global peace and security.
First of all, trust depends on adherence to rules
and norms by everyone who has signed up to them.
The international rules-based order was established
to prevent the darkest pages of the history of the
twentieth century from ever repeating themselves
again. Therefore, every case when a State attempts to
divert from that order should cause the deepest alarm
in the global community. One clear example is Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine, which constitutes a blatant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
other key tenets of international law and international
humanitarian law.
It is imperative that all members of the Security
Council strictly reject such behaviour by Russia and
continue efforts to stop its aggression in order to preserve
the trust and credibility of this body. The international
community, by having entrusted significant powers
to the Council, has every reason to expect from its
members, in particular the five permanent Member
States, to hold international norms to their highest
standard, rather than brutally trample upon them.
Secondly, trust goes hand in hand with confidence
in the ability of the international community to
successfully manage and overcome crises and
2/42

03/05/2023

challenges. From the coronavirus disease pandemic to
the climate crisis, we have seen inconsistent responses,
which often leave vulnerable groups, including women
and girls, as the most exposed. Therefore, we believe
that strengthening resilience is an important priority in
the context of improving governance at local, regional
and global levels, as it can help to absorb shocks,
manage crises and prevent further disruption.
While acknowledging the importance of national
efforts in building resilience, the international
community, and the United Nations in particular, has an
important role to play in supporting and coordinating
those efforts in various areas, including cyber security,
sustainable energy, media and information literacy
and others.
Thirdly, Latvia strongly believes in the importance
of ensuring accountability as a vehicle for building trust
and sustaining peace. As a donor to the Peacebuilding
Fund and a former member of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we have noted that in many successful
peacebuilding cases accountability and justice has
played a key role in post-conflict transition, helping
communities to reconcile with the past and to focus on
building a peaceful future — while, on the contrary,
impunity always creates fertile ground for more crimes,
violence and suffering.
Therefore, in our view, the theme of accountability
deserves more attention in the peacebuilding and New
Agenda for Peace deliberations, which should aim at
closer collaboration among the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council. Ensuring adequate funding for the respective
peacebuilding and human rights mandates and activities
is equally important.
Before I conclude, let me assure you, Madam
President, of Latvia’s commitment to continue
contributing to our collective efforts to build trust as a
central element of sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): It is an honour
to be able to address the Security Council during
Switzerland’s first presidency of the Security
Council. I thank Switzerland for its leadership on this
important issue.
I deliver this statement on behalf of Canada,
Australia and my own country, New Zealand (CANZ).
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In 1992, when former Secretary-General BoutrosGhali released the original Agenda for Peace, he
articulated the United Nations modern peace and
security mandate: preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. While activities under those headings
have evolved since 1992, the fundamental ingredients
for sustainable peace remain the same, namely, trust,
inclusivity, predictability and adaptability. Trust in the
Council’s ability to effectively discharge its mandate
to maintain international peace and security and
implement resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace is unfortunately low. That trust has been shaken
in many contexts across the globe, and further eroded by
Russia’s illegal war of aggression on another sovereign
Member State, Ukraine.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for international peace and security under the Charter.
Yet its members should be reminded of Article 24,
that is, that responsibility is conferred by the entire
membership, and the Council acts on our behalf. A
year on from Russia’s invasion, and 30 years since
contemporizing efforts began in the Agenda for Peace,
the reform of the Security Council remains long overdue.
Building trust and confidence in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace necessitates inclusion. CANZ sees the
need for greater inclusion in several places.
First, we must deliver on our commitments to
realize the full, equal and meaningful participation
and leadership of women in all aspects of peace and
security, as noted by many speakers this morning.
Rhetoric must finally be matched with decisive action
by all of us.
Secondly, our three countries are engaged in
ongoing efforts to promote the participation of all of
our diverse peoples in our own political and peace
processes. That is especially so for First Nations and
Indigenous persons. We are not perfect; far from
it. However, we are committed to ensuring the full
participation and engagement of groups whose voices
have been traditionally marginalized. We believe the
Council and the wider United Nations system must do
the same.
Thirdly, we should enhance engagement with
relevant organizations, not limited to the African Union,
the Organization of American States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum. Genuine
engagement with those organizations would support

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

the democratization of the Council’s work and result in
better outcomes on the ground.
To guarantee peace, the Security Council and all
Member States must ensure the continued predictability
of adherence to the normative and legal frameworks
that we have collectively developed. Without those
established rules and norms, which have promoted
trust, transparency and mutual understanding for the
past 70 years and supported the resolution of emerging
challenges, peace will prove elusive. Prioritizing the
establishment of resilient institutions, the protection
and promotion of human rights and the rule of law
strengthens the potential for peace.
Sustainable peace also means predictable
financing for peacebuilding. In 2023, CANZ countries
have together committed $22 million in voluntary
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund. CANZ
encourages States to expeditiously agree to the
proposal for an assessed contribution for the Fund in
the Fifth Committee. To futureproof peace, the United
Nations must adapt its practices. That includes using
data, science and technology. Tools and partnerships,
such as the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs Innovation Cell, can better equip the Council
to meet some of the evolving challenges it faces.
Climate-related security risks are compounding and
exacerbating existing security challenges and straining
already limited resources. An effective peacebuilding
architecture would respond to those risks in the Sahel,
the Lake Chad basin, the Pacific and beyond.
Finally, as the New Agenda for Peace takes shape,
CANZ wishes to ensure that we avoid duplication
or overstretching the efforts of the United Nations.
We agree with others that there is much scope to
futureproof trust for sustainable peace. We can
succeed if we are collectively committed to weaving
together the formidable strengths of the United Nations
across its three main pillars, the lessons learned from
past missteps, and actions that are more inclusive,
predictable and adaptable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Let me thank the briefers
for their contributions.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to make the following marks in our national capacity.

23-126133/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/05/2023

The focus of today’s debate on building trust to
secure our future is important for my country, Slovenia,
as trust is the cornerstone of effective multilateralism
and ensuring global peace and security. Building
sustainable peace requires adopting a holistic and
inclusive approach beyond the efforts to end conflicts.
Successful peacebuilding demands our long-term
commitment to making coordinated and collective
efforts to build resilient societies, address root
causes and promote good governance and sustainable
development. When addressing the complexities of
global challenges, the Security Council can benefit
from working in synergy with other United Nations
bodies and agencies. In particular, the linkages and
cooperation between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council should be strengthened.

Their participation can play an important role in the
prevention of conflict and the promotion of social
cohesion. We therefore warmly welcome today’s
participation of the AU Youth Ambassador for Peace
for Southern Africa, Ms. Chigwenya. Respect for
international law is the foundation of our trust and
sustainable peace and security. It provides a stable and
more predictable international environment in which
States may engage and work together to seek collective
and sustainable solutions to global challenges. The
existing international normative framework, with the
Charter of the United Nations at the centre, remains
the bedrock of our global peace and security. Slovenia
is committed to continuing to work with all partners
to build and foster a more secure and peaceful future
for all.

Trust and resilience require regional, national and
local ownership and strong and inclusive partnerships.
Cooperation among the United Nations and regional
organizations in maintaining peace and security is
therefore critical. Slovenia supports predictable and
sustainable financing and the use of United Nationsassessed contributions for African Union (AU)-led
operations, as authorized by the Security Council, and
looks forward to the upcoming discussions on that issue.
It is essential to create an environment in which all
segments of society can work together and peacefully
resolve their differences. Building consensus and
trust calls for inclusive engagement with all members
of our societies, including women, young people,
marginalized groups and civil society organizations.
Only when all voices are heard, all human rights are
respected and diversity is embraced can we address the
root causes and find solutions that are the foundation
for sustainable peace. We therefore welcome the recent
united response of the Security Council to the violations
of women’s human rights and fundamental freedoms by
the Taliban in Afghanistan.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.

We need to do more to support the crucial role
of women in peacebuilding and decision-making
processes. Peace processes and post-conflict
reconstruction that include women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation lead to a more durable
peace and stability. Nationally, we have been steadily
raising the bar on women’s political participation,
which has contributed to Slovenia being the seventh
most peaceful country in the world, according to the
2022 Global Peace Index. Empowered young people
can be critical agents of change and drivers of peace.
4/42

Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to congratulate Switzerland on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council and to thank
you, Madam President, for convening today’s debate.
Our statement will be focused on the normative
frameworks for conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
as we move towards the New Agenda for Peace called
for by the Secretary-General. The first prerequisite for
confidence-building is good faith — better known as
the pacta sunt servanda principle — as set out in article
26 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
If freely agreed upon international obligations are not
fulfilled in good faith, then the framework of rules that
we have painstakingly built is useless. The international
community has succeeded in regulating the most
diverse aspects of international relations. We do not
lack rules but rather respect for sovereign obligations.
And when a dispute arises, international law remains
the common language left for States to seek a solution
by peaceful means.
The Security Council has a privileged role to
play in promoting trust by ensuring compliance with
legal obligations on matters within its competence
and by requiring States to comply with them in good
faith. In addition to ensuring compliance with its own
resolutions, the Security Council can also make use
of its powers under the Charter of the United Nations,
for example as provided in Article 94, paragraph 2, to
make recommendations to give effect to the judgments
of the International Court of Justice if any party to a
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

case fails to perform the obligations incumbent upon
it, just as it can use the powers conferred upon it by
Article 96, paragraph 1, to request an advisory opinion
from the Court, which has occurred only once. The
advisory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice can help to prevent conflicts, as evidenced
by the increasingly frequent requests of the General
Assembly for advisory opinions. As previously noted,
a close relationship between the Security Council and
the International Court of Justice is necessary for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. More broadly, it can
also be said that better collaboration among all the
principal organs of the United Nations is key for conflict
prevention, the strengthening of the rule of law and
sustainable peacebuilding, as previously recognized
by the Security Council, including in its presidential
statement S/PRST/2021/23 of 16 November 2021, which
was adopted under the presidency of Mexico.
For those reasons, Mexico supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call to develop a New Agenda for Peace that
seeks to better and more comprehensively understand
structural factors and their impact on conflicts, while
promoting the strengthening of the rule of law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan congratulates
Switzerland on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. And it is a great pleasure for me
personally to see you presiding over today’s open
debate, Madam. We are also grateful to Switzerland for
convening today’s open debate.
The erosion of trust in the international political
and economic system has been gradual, but it is now
pervasive. While the trust deficit cannot be attributed
to a single factor or event, it can be attributed to the
evolution of a toxic global security environment in
which States have come to believe that equipping
themselves for war is the best guarantee of preserving
their national security, sovereignty and independence.
In Pakistan’s view, trust among States has eroded
primarily because the fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations have been consistently
violated by powerful States and their allies and because
insufficient attention has been paid to securing the
implementation of the Security Council’s resolutions,
as required under Article 25 of the Charter. Both the
Charter and the Council’s resolutions are cardinal pillars
of international law and the world order. Compliance

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

with them is binding and obligatory for Member States.
That is the critical prerequisite for restoring mutual
trust among Member States.
The Secretary-General should prepare an annual
review of situations on the Security Council’s agenda
where the Charter’s principles are being violated and
the Council’s resolutions remain unimplemented. The
Council can then utilize the various means available
under the Charter — for example, in Chapters VI,
VII and VIII — to secure compliance by States that
continue to violate the Charter’s principles and the
Council’s own decisions. That would be the best way to
futureproof — and even present-proof — international
peace and security.
Building international trust also entails addressing
the root causes of conflict, including poverty, hunger,
foreign occupation and oppression, the denial of the
right to self-determination, injustice, human rights
violations and climate impacts. Those are all conditions
that should take centre stage in the Secretary-General’s
New Agenda for Peace. Moreover, an equitable and
non-discriminatory arms-control and disarmament
regime is indispensable to averting conflicts and
mitigating their effects.
It is evident that conflicts, violence and terrorism
have proliferated, particularly in the poorest parts of the
world. Resilient peace is impossible without resilient
development. The multiple economic shocks of the past
three years have reversed the prospects for achieving
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. During
the pandemic, and in the subsequent development
crises, trust has eroded in the international system
owing to a wide deficit in solidarity and support for
those who have suffered the most in these crises,
through no fault of their own. Even today, the Bretton
Woods institutions continue with policies that directly
exacerbate the fiscal and development challenges of
the developing countries. Today 54 States are in debt
distress and in danger of default, more than 100 million
people have fallen back into poverty and 300 million
are in need of food aid every day. Meanwhile, climate
impacts are mounting, and the planet is becoming a less
friendly habitat, especially for the poor.
We know what needs to be done. We need to
provide adequate finance — $4.2 trillion annually — to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
through the creation of special drawing rights and
reallocation through the recapitalization of the

23-126135/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

multilateral development banks; we need to fulfil
official development assistance and climate finance
commitments, as well as ensuring sustainable resolution
of the debt crises and an end to illicit financial flows; and
we need development-oriented policies in international
trade, taxation and access to technology. If we are to
restore trust, it is essential for decisions to be taken on
those issues at the forthcoming SDG Summit.
As mentioned in the concept note for today’s
open debate (S/2023/283, annex), evidence-based
insights are critical to strengthening transparency and
decision-making in the Council and elsewhere. Yet
the Council’s failures are not failures of insight or of
recognition of realities. Of course, modern technological
advances such as artificial intelligence are useful
tools in building such insights. However, reliance on
technology should not lead us to underestimate the
unique value of the human factor in shaping the right
and humane decisions at the United Nations, including
in the Security Council. It is only by emphasizing
and ensuring the values of humanity, morality and
ethics that imbue the system of international relations
constructed under the Charter that we, the world’s
nations, can futureproof peace, security and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Greco (Italy): I would like to commend you,
Madam President, for convening today’s timely open
debate, and I extend my best wishes to you for the
month of your presidency.
Italy aligns itself to the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union, and I would like to add
the following comments in my national capacity.
When peacebuilding and sustaining peace are at
stake, we must be ready to set aside national priorities
and find common ground, showing that the United
Nations is able to listen, understand the root causes of
conflict and deliver. To achieve that goal and restore
the circle of trust, we need to fill the gap between
societies and the United Nations bodies entrusted with
maintaining their peace and security. It is essential
to respect the needs, aspirations and proposals of the
countries and communities under consideration.
The Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) have a special responsibility in that
regard. They should engage societies beyond political
elites, grounding action in a deep knowledge of the
6/42

03/05/2023

communities and peoples affected; promote peaceful,
just and inclusive societies centred on human rights and
a solid relationship between people and their territories;
integrate a gender perspective into all policies and
advance the participation and protection of women,
young people and marginalized groups or communities,
while prioritizing the protection of their rights. The
PBC should therefore build its work on ensuring the
peacebuilding needs of the communities affected,
without reference to other agendas. On the other hand,
the Security Council should consider the input of the
PBC, based on a genuinely inclusive approach, as a
natural starting point for its decision-making.
Let us consider the New Agenda for Peace, a call
for action to restore trust in an effective multilateralism
able to prevent conflict and maintain lasting peace that
includes the following objectives.
The first is getting back on track with the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, starting with food security and making
sure that no one is left behind.
The second is respecting national ownership and
supporting regional prevention efforts.
The third is supporting human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, as well as
the systematic integration of the women and peace and
security agenda, the rules-based international order
founded on the Charter of the United Nations and the
protection of children in armed conflict.
The fourth is recognizing the climate-security
nexus and its wide implications, investing in
inclusivity and preserving access to resources for
borderland communities.
The fifth is considering peacebuilding and
peacekeeping as parts of a unique peace continuum
to achieve sustainable political solutions, as
well
as
supporting
peacebuilding
through
assessed contributions.
The sixth and last involves aligning international
support with the communities’ priorities through a
people-centred approach to crises. I know that those
priorities are widely shared in this Chamber. Our
common ground is much greater than our differences,
and Italy is committed to bridging the current
devastating divide and restoring trust.
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Vidal (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Madam President, please accept our heartfelt
acknowledgement and congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of this organ for the current
month. We wish you and your team every success.
We are grateful for the opportunity to participate in
this open debate and to reaffirm the importance that
we attach to this topic. Accordingly, we take note of
the briefings that we heard today and appreciate the
briefers’ time.
We must build trust among the various actors
working for peace. Trust is the fuel that drives
relationships in all social dynamics, which is
especially relevant in cases of conflict by enabling
fluid communications, lowering transaction costs and
promoting the institutionalization of the behaviours of
the actors concerned, and it leads to minimizing the
risks associated with confrontation and uncertainty. It
is imperative to carefully analyse the underlying causes
of conflicts in order to understand the differentiated
needs and vulnerabilities that may be at the root of
violence. We would like to underscore that building
lasting peace is possible only with the participation of
civil society at all stages of conflict resolution.
It therefore follows that the Security Council must
strengthen its engagement with local actors, while
judiciously including civil society organizations,
women’s and youth groups, academics, journalists
and activists in general, in order to ensure that their
perspectives and experiences are taken into account
in decision-making processes. The comprehensive
inclusion of civil society can help countries that are in
conflict and are transitioning to peace to reach innovative
solutions by implementing public policies that enjoy
broad consensus and support. Both the Security Council
and the decision makers of Member States will be able
to better envisage future situations by considering the
positions of historically marginalized groups in terms
of peace and security, as civil society has consistently
been a positive source for understanding the evolution
of conflicts and the situation of the most vulnerable
population affected by them. Similarly, the Security
Council must also improve its coordination with the
various United Nations agencies, regional organizations
and other partners in order to support peacebuilding
efforts, including through joint programming and the
garnering of resources. The knowledge on the ground

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

of regional organizations and other local partners can
facilitate the work of the Council and help build lasting
peace in countries suffering from conflict or in which
violence has begun to spiral out of control.
It must be underscored that, in order to build and
consolidate lasting and sustainable peace, we must
decrease the flow of weapons to conflict zones, whether
traditional or not. It should be noted that regulatory
frameworks are already in place to control the illicit
trafficking and diversion of arms. Adherence to,
compliance with and the enforcement of the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition
and the Arms Trade Treaty are key to reducing their
flow. In addition, arms-producing countries must
commit to implementing those mechanisms in a
compulsory manner, while integrating practices such as
on-site verification to prevent the diversion of weapons
of war.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): As we all know, trust is in
short supply in the United Nations. We are ranked in
our regional and economic groupings, debating each
other across gulfs of understanding, of solidarity and
sometimes even of goodwill. We fully subscribe to your
concept note (S/2023/283, annex), Madam President,
which embraces strengthening trust through inclusion,
implementing the norms of accountability and
predictability for all States in all situations and making
decisions on the basis of objective evidence. Those are
fine principles, and we will join with other Members in
realizing them practically. However, given the current
low levels of trust, we want to propose specific actions
by the Security Council, which we believe is suffering
the greatest trust deficit.
First, existing pen-holding responsibilities should
be shared with non-permanent members. Specifically,
we would like to see Africa files with African
penholders and co-penholders. That does not require
elaborate reform; it can be implemented in January
2024 and beyond.
Secondly, there will be little trust if there is no
urgent reform of the Council’s membership. The attitude
of the permanent members to the intergovernmental
negotiation process will reveal their individual
commitment to reform and rebuilding trust. The New
Agenda for Peace will be made new by furthering

23-126137/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the demand for reform. Trust will also be built by
the countries that aspire to permanent membership
demonstrating, through action and not just through
rhetoric, that they will take their responsibilities
seriously. They should start immediately by showing
concretely that they are listening and responding
positively to the views of the African Union, African
countries and small island developing States. Trust
demands new permanent members that will stand for
our values and collective interests, not the narrow
pursuit of national interests.
Thirdly, during the annual consultations between
members of the Security Council and members of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, participation
by all at the level of permanent representatives, will
increase trust, as will ensuring that every annual
meeting has at least one practical and impactful
outcome. Let us move beyond ceremonial meetings.
Fourthly, the Council needs to be more welcoming
and actioning of the advisories of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Enhanced coordination will be even
more effective if efforts are made to reinforce the
Peacebuilding Commission and deliver an adequately
resourced Peacebuilding Fund.
Fifthly and lastly, trust will be increased if States
ensure that the Fifth Committee acts on General
Assembly resolution 76/305, of 8 September 2022,
on financing for peacebuilding. The current delay
is degrading trust. Let us deliver a way forward that
includes assessed funding. There is a famous saying that
a single thread of trust can hold together the strongest
bond. Our suggestions can be taken as the threads that
we all urgently need.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): I congratulate you,
Madam President, and the delegation of Switzerland
on assuming your maiden presidency of the Security
Council and thank you for convening this important
open debate. I also thank the briefers for their
important contributions.
Futureproofing trust for sustaining peace is a timely
and relevant topic given our present-day reality as we
strive to strengthen multilateralism and build trust in
the multilateral rules-based system. That in turn has
to led to a situation in which peace and security can
be maintained and conflicts prevented. Sierra Leone
8/42

03/05/2023

strongly believes that the international community,
including the United Nations system, can do more
to build peaceful and resilient societies. That view
is definitely in line with resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262, twin resolutions
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture adopted in 2016. For our part, at the
domestic level, Sierra Leone recently established and
operationalized the Commission for Peace and National
Cohesion, with a mandate to prevent, manage and
resolve conflicts, build, promote and maintain trust
and sustainable peace and advise the Government on
all aspects of conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Futureproofing trust to sustain peace requires a
multifaceted approach that involves various actors,
including Governments, international organizations,
civil society and communities. With regard to the
United Nations system’s part, we would like to point to
some of the steps that can be pursued.
First, we should promote inclusive dialogue and
participation, which are crucial to building trust
between countries, including among marginalized
groups and communities within those countries.
Governments and other stakeholders should create
platforms and mechanisms that enable communities to
engage in dialogue, participate in decision-making and
hold Governments accountable.
Secondly, we should invest in education and
information, both of them essential tools for building
trust and promoting peace. Member States and other
stakeholders should pursue education and information
programmes that promote understanding and tolerance
and counter hate speech and misinformation.
Thirdly, we should foster economic development.
Economic development can help to create opportunities
and reduce poverty, which in turn can reduce tensions
and promote peace. Governments and other stakeholders
should prioritize policies and programmes that promote
economic development, job creation and social
protection. In that regard, reforming the international
financial system is fundamental.
Fourthly, we should strengthen institutions.
Strong and accountable institutions are critical to
building trust and sustaining peace. Member States
and other stakeholders, such as international financial
institutions, should invest in institutions that promote
the rule of law, human rights and good governance and
that are responsive to people’s needs.
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Fifthly, we should address the root causes of
conflict, which are vital if we are to futureproof trust
and sustain peace. That requires confronting issues
such as inequality, exclusion, discrimination and
marginalization, as well as working to promote social
cohesion and inclusion.
Sixthly, we should foster international cooperation,
which is a vital part of building trust and sustaining
peace. Governments and other stakeholders should work
to address global challenges, including climate change,
poverty, terrorism and conflict, as well as promoting
international norms and standards that support peace
and security.
In conclusion, trust is essential for peace. When
people and countries trust each other, they are more
likely to cooperate and resolve their differences
peacefully. However, trust can be fragile and easily
broken. In order to futureproof trust and sustain peace,
we need to take into consideration the steps we have
highlighted, among others, to strengthen trust and
make it more resilient.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to Switzerland
for convening today’s open debate.
Faced with increasingly multifaceted and crosscutting challenges around the globe, the Security
Council needs to respond to the world’s changing
expectations. It should address the root causes and
multipliers of conflict, including human rights
violations, climate change and cyberthreats, among
other things. Otherwise, it will be unable to act
in a timely manner when required or to regain the
international community’s trust. My delegation would
like to highlight the following points aimed at ensuring
that the Council can play a more meaningful role in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
First, the Council must be more vigilant on issues
related to human rights and the rule of law. Conflicts
are invariably marked by human rights violations, both
as warning signs and significant features of conflicts.
And accountability for human rights violations is
also crucial in post-conflict circumstances in order
to prevent such conflicts from recurring. President
Yoon Suk Yeol of the Republic of Korea has constantly
emphasized the universal values of freedom, human

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

rights and the rule of law as indispensable to sustaining
peace. A lack of respect for the freedoms of others often
manifests in attempts to alter the status quo by force.
We have witnessed many such cases all around the
world and throughout history. As a strong advocate for
freedom and human rights for all in every corner of the
world, the Republic of Korea would like to underscore
that the Security Council should be seized of cases of
human rights violations and abuses across the world,
including the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Secondly, discussions in the Security Council should
be based on credible information and evidence-based
data. As was also highlighted during my President’s
recent visit to the United States, in many parts of the
world today false propaganda and disinformation are
distorting the truth and public opinion, threatening the
very foundations of democracy. The Council should
serve as a key platform where we can hear voices
from the ground establishing the truth and sharing
vital information, enabling bona fide deliberations
conducive to sustaining peace.
That leads me to my third point, which is that
inclusivity must be ensured in peacebuilding efforts.
The Security Council needs to provide women and
young people, and civil society more broadly, with
more and greater opportunities to participate and speak
before the Council. It is important that their views be
heeded in peace processes, as their enhanced voices
will bring in more relevant and future-oriented ideas
for sustaining peace. In that regard, my delegation is
deeply concerned and frustrated by the status of women
in Afghanistan. And we hope the values I have described
will be duly reflected in the Secretary-General’s New
Agenda for Peace.
My delegation would also like to once again
reiterate the importance of the Security Council’s role
in building trust in the international community. If the
international community’s trust in the Council is to be
rebuilt, we believe that the first step is for the Security
Council to effectively and consistently implement its
own decisions, without trying to undermine existing
decisions by allowing self-contradictory vetoes, as in
the case of the non-proliferation issues concerning the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea looks forward
to the continued endeavours of the United Nations

23-126139/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/05/2023

towards futureproofing trust and sustaining peace and
reaffirms its commitment and support in that regard.

the sustaining-peace process with all the needed trust.
In this regard, I wish to underline the following points.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the African Union.

First, on defence and security, strengthening
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration (DDR)
and security sector reform (SSR) mechanisms is
crucial to prevent conflicts and instability. It has to
be noted that the AU has deployed technical teams to
several African countries, at their request, to assist
in the conduct of DDR and SSR processes. These
processes must be undertaken from a prevention
angle to address challenges related to, inter alia,
directly linking command and control within the
security architecture to the objective of building trust
among parties to the conflict, which is a sine qua non
condition for building a stable and solid national army.
The Security Council could consider innovative ways
to provide further support to DDR and SSR processes
in view of addressing the current challenges they are
facing. However, most importantly, the Council should
further prioritize national perceptions of the design of
DDR and SSR processes. Building trust also involves
commitments to placing trust in regional arrangements,
as outlined in Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, to ensure peace and security. Ensuring
sustainable, predictable and flexible financing for AUled peace support operations, by granting access to
United Nations assessed contributions, is therefore a
crucial prerequisite for us.

Ms. Mohammed: Allow me first of all to
congratulate you, Madam President, for taking over the
Council presidency during the month of May, and to thank
all of the briefers for their meaningful presentations.
The global peace and security environment is in
permanent evolution. That requires continued efforts
in terms of adaptation and the retooling of our policies
to better respond to existing and emerging challenges.
Sustaining peace and peacebuilding in Africa has
always been the central quest in the efforts deployed
by the African Union (AU) through the African
Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Governance Architecture. That is also in line with our
aspirations towards the realization of the AU’s Agenda
2063, particularly aspiration 3, entitled “An Africa
of good governance, democracy, respect for human
rights, justice and the rule of law”, and aspiration 4,
entitled “A peaceful and secure Africa”. The broad
concept of security and the wide scope covered by the
processes for sustaining peace show us the inescapable
linkage between all the aspirations of Agenda 2063
and the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, under the
prevention approach.
From a concrete perspective, when it comes mainly
to implementing policies aiming at sustaining peace in
conflict-affected regions or volatile or fragile settings,
it is more a matter of vertical and horizontal interaction
between several concerned actors, starting from the
targeted communities and local and national authorities
to subregional, regional and international partners,
including bilateral and multilateral actors.
To fulfil the commitment for sustainable peace,
the interaction between the different involved and
concerned actors has to be guided by trust in order
to enhance synergy of action and integrated planning
and operations, and to promote genuine partnerships
and complementarity between the relevant involved
structures. The definition of roles and responsibilities
of all actors is also important to guarantee national
ownership, particularly in terms of setting priorities.
Inclusivity, clear normative frameworks and factbased approaches are key principles in the path to gird
10/42

On governance, the AU continues to strengthen the
African Governance Architecture by setting forth firm
and solid legal frameworks to put an end to the era of
unconstitutional changes of government. In Malabo last
year, the AU Heads of State and Government expressed
their determination to further enhance the effectiveness
and sustainability of AU support to member States
in political transition and post-conflict situations,
build durable peace, entrench democratic culture and
governance, including through transitional justice,
and prevent relapse into cycles of violence within the
context of silencing the guns in Africa.
The AU Commission has recently deployed
multidimensional technical teams to some member
States, notably in the fields of constitutionalism and
good governance. Long-term technical teams will also
be deployed for the identification of countries in postconflict reconstruction and development. In the end,
the objective is to re-establish the lost trust relationship
between the citizens and national authorities by
bringing local and national institutions closer to the
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

ordinary citizen. The Security Council could recognize
the efforts of the AU on this important chapter and
call for more support to member States experiencing
difficult situations in terms of State-building and of
strengthening the performance of their key institutions
in compliance with the agreed standards and rules and
their national priorities.
Building trust means also establishing a fair and
just United Nations system in which inclusivity and
representation are the key words. In this context, I refer
mainly to the reform of the Security Council, which is
registering some positive signs. The African Union,
through the AU Committee of Ten on Security Council
reform coordinated by Sierra Leone, is advocating this
well-known position, which will contribute to creating
a trust-based international order.
On early warning, the AU continues to strengthen
its continental and regional early-warning systems to
respond to initial signs of imminent crisis in a timely
manner. In this regard, the AU, together with its regional
economic commissions and regional mechanisms
(RECs/RMs), co-created the Inter-Regional Knowledge
Exchange on Early Warning and Conflict Prevention as
a pan-African initiative, to advance information- and
knowledge-exchange and co-learning on generating
early action to prevent and respond effectively
to conflicts.
Permit me to share with Council members that,
in February 2022, the African Union Assembly of
Heads of State encouraged member States to utilize the
opportunities afforded by the AU Commission and RECs/
RMs to address structural causes of violent conflict
through the implementation of Country Structural
Vulnerability and Resilience Assessments (CSVRAs),
and in this respect, the Commission was directed by the
AU Assembly to establish a monitoring and oversight
committee comprising the AU Commission, RECs/
RMs and the African Peer Review Mechanism in order
to facilitate effective coordination, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation. I am delighted to inform
Council members that the AU Peace and Security
Council will hold a session to review the CSVRAs in
the month of May. The role of the Panel of the Wise
and the AU special envoys in this regard is also critical.
The trust dimension in this matter is more related to
the readiness of AU member States to use the multiple
tools that we have established in order to enhance and
develop further technical tools and human capabilities.

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

It is only by building trust and investing in these
initiatives that we can enhance social cohesion. Indeed,
by promoting inclusion, equality and justice, States and
parties can work together to address their challenges
and build a sustainable future that is peaceful and
prosperous for all.
On the development dimension, economic fragility
together with environmental degradation is providing
fertile ground for political instability, terrorist
threats and mass displacements across the African
continent. Extreme poverty and scarcity of economic
opportunities are increasing the vulnerabilities among
youth and women, making them privileged targets to
recruitment by extremist groups and terrorist groups.
Creating sustainable jobs and decent livelihoods by
designing resilient economies is key in this regard
to fighting poverty and radicalization. In addition,
regional integration is the key, as it is an angle that we
continue to support in order to build and sustain peace.
The African Continental Free Trade Area is a concrete
step forward in boosting intra-Africa trade, creating
jobs and fostering economic diversification.
On emerging threats, the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes is
expanding due to the increasingly wide access to new
technologies. The integration and development that
the African continent is registering is bringing about
a new era of security threats that require cybersecurity
to be strengthened. I take this opportunity to mention
that, in May 2022, the AU Heads of State decided to
deploy greater efforts and resources to strengthening
cybersecurity, including through legislation at the
national level and through ratification of the AU
Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data
Protection. In addition, in April 2022, the AU Peace
and Security Council was encouraged by AU member
States to make full use of existing capacities within the
continent, including AFRIPOL and the Committee of
Intelligence and Security Services in Africa.
I would like to quickly conclude with a very
fundamental point, which I know is very dear to
your heart, Madam President, and to mine as well,
namely, the issue of women, peace and security. The
women, peace and security agenda must be high in all
our engagements, specifically Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), if we wish to indeed look at a future full
of trust and sustaining peace. That could be done in
multiple ways.

23-1261311/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

First, we can improve legitimacy and effectiveness
through inclusion and accountability.
Secondly, we can enhance our standards for justice
and fairness and genuinely aim for effective inclusion
and accountability, taking into account a fundamental
transformation of the ecosystem
Thirdly, we can adopt well-proven solutions to
gender-sensitive macroeconomic actions.
Fourthly, we can promote the increased
representation of women in leadership positions,
which is equally important and has prompted the
establishment, in our case, of the African Women
Leaders Network. This platform of leaders at the helm
of affairs across various sectors is a pillar for peace and
security in Africa.
Allow me, finally, to recognize the role of our young
people. Young women and men in advancing peace and
security is critical for our global peace agenda. The
establishment of the African Youth Ambassadors for
Peace, one of whom was a briefer earlier today, and the
adoption by the AU Peace and Security Council of the
Continental Framework for Youth, Peace and Security,
as well as the Peace and Security Council’s endorsement
of the study on roles and contributions to peace and
security are a testimony of the AU’s commitment for
the promotion of youth as important actors and future
leaders on peace and security.
Building trust is crucial for sustaining peace and
should be a natural declination of a well-coordinated and
coherent efforts. Therefore, the strategic partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations,
as envisioned by the leaders of the two organizations,
as well as the New Agenda for Peace, should be the
path through which we coordinate and gain more
sustainability in peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the potential candidate country
Georgia, as well as Andorra, align themselves with
this statement.
First, I want to congratulate Switzerland on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
12/42

03/05/2023

to thank you, Madam President, for hosting this very
timely debate. I also want to thank the briefers for their
important contributions at the beginning of the debate.
Today is World Press Freedom Day. Let me therefore
underline the powerful link between what we are
discussing today — trust and sustainable peace — and
the protection of freedom of expression, as laid down
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 75 years
ago. We know that peaceful, just, resilient and inclusive
societies are those built on trust, those where people
can express themselves freely and where institutions
serve and are accountable to the people. The European
Union is extremely concerned about the threats to
freedom of the press today, with journalists, media
workers and all those who bring independent quality
information to the public increasingly facing discredit,
threats and attacks, including through disinformation.
The Security Council and the entire United Nations
system must engage more actively in order to protect
journalists and media workers, as well as to prevent
and condemn harassment and, indeed, reprisals against
civil society representatives.
Today I want to focus on the three perspectives that
the Swiss presidency has outlined on building trust for
sustaining peace: first, that we redouble our efforts to
protect the normative frameworks of the United Nations;
secondly, that we enhance our tools for mediation and
dialogue and ensure that they are inclusive and thirdly,
that we base our work on facts and evidence and call
out those who spread disinformation.
The universal norms that we all agreed on here,
at the United Nations, are being attacked on a daily
basis around the world. International human rights
conventions are being systematically violated, including
in Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Syria and in many other crises
around the world. Unfortunately, we have seen that the
Security Council itself has become a stage for spreading
disinformation, not least by Russia in the context of the
Russian war of aggression against Ukraine. We have
also seen civil society briefers being intimidated in the
Council and later punished for exercising their right to
free speech. The Security Council is the primary organ
for protecting international peace and security, and it
has to embody and uphold the Charter of the United
Nations, international humanitarian law and human
rights. That is the responsibility of Council members. In
the same vein, the Secretariat should always present the
facts as it sees them. The United Nations Charter gives
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the Secretary-General the possibility to bring to the
attention of the Council any matter that may threaten
international peace and security. Unfortunately, there
are many such matters.
Turning now to the concrete tools that the United
Nations has at its disposal to promote peacebuilding,
we know that building trust is a crucial component
in all of these. The Secretary-General’s Special
Representatives, Envoys and Mediators can have real
impact in resolving conflict, and the Security Council
should more systematically provide them with its
unanimous backing. Strengthened tools for dialogue,
mediation and good offices should be included in the
New Agenda for Peace as means to prevent conflict.
The EU is a major supporter of conflict prevention
and peacebuilding efforts. We are working around
the world to enhance trust between local populations
and national authorities. In Somalia, for example, we
support communities that have been liberated from
Al-Shabaab and suffer from their punitive actions and
the drought. In the Central African Republic, the EU
Advisory Mission supported the Government in creating
a reliable legal framework to thoroughly restructure the
organization of the police and gendarmerie and meet
the needs of the Central African Republic. Those are
just a few examples.
We promote international peace efforts in Yemen,
Libya and Syria. We also support in-country civil
society actors in their efforts to prevent conflicts,
respond to crises and build peace. Much of our support
is channelled through the United Nations, for example to
the United Nations Standby Team of Senior Mediation
Advisers and the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund.
One concrete example of operational United NationsEU collaboration is Yemen, where the EU — at the
request of the United Nations — is playing a strong
coordinating role of Track II mediation and of support
to the ceasefire. Another example is the EU-United
Nations Development Programme partnership on
Insider Mediation that has enabled building and piloting
critical mediation capacities in 14 countries. The third
cycle of that partnership is presently being launched,
with specific attention to the inclusion of women. This
initiative was mentioned by many here this afternoon,
including the previous speaker.
Indeed, it is crucial that all such instruments are
inclusive in their approach. We know that more genderequal societies are more peaceful. Moreover, women

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

are formidable peacebuilders, and we need to support
their full, equal and meaningful participation in all
peacebuilding processes — not least to build trust in
them. Similarly, we strongly support the accelerated
implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda
and the promotion of young people’s participation
in peacebuilding.
Finally, the Council and, more broadly, the United
Nations, have to make use of the best data and evidence
that we have in order to shape our decisions. The
creation of the multi-partner Complex Risk Analytics
Fund (CRAF’d), a United Nations multilateral
financing instrument aimed at strengthening our shared
capabilities to better anticipate, prevent and respond
to complex risks in fragile and conflict-affected
settings, is advancing the use of data and scientific
knowledge for conflict prevention and resolution. We
are supporting CRAF’d and believe that the analysis
coming out of these new tools should feed into the
Security Council’s work.
It seems obvious that we should always base
ourselves on evidence and facts. However, on some
issues where we have plenty of evidence, such as
the link between climate change and security, some
Security Council members are still denying the
facts. Many of the countries most affected by climate
change have themselves testified to the link between
climate, peace and security in the Council and in
the Peacebuilding Commission. It would be highly
relevant for the Council to have a discussion based on
a report from the Secretary-General providing data and
evidence regarding the link between climate change
and security.
Upholding facts and the truth in this organ is crucial
to maintaining trust in the United Nations system, as
a whole, and to ensuring that the United Nations can
pursue its work of building and sustaining peace. We
look forward to working with the United Nations on
how we can improve our capabilities for conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and sustaining peace within
the framework of the Secretary-General’s New Agenda
for Peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and thank you, Madam, for

23-1261313/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

convening this timely debate. I wish to also thank the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
Over the past few years, especially in the context
of the coronavirus disease pandemic and the ongoing
conflicts, we have witnessed increasing trust deficits
between people and institutions, including the
United Nations. The ability of the Security Council,
in particular, to make, build and keep peace has
constantly been put to the test. The challenges to peace
are further deepened with the emergence of new and
unconventional threats. Against that backdrop, the
need to redouble efforts to build trust could not be
more urgent.
Allow me to share a few thoughts.
First and foremost, the Security Council must
demonstrate unity and decisiveness in effectively
addressing visible threats to international peace
and security and use its existing tools to protect the
most vulnerable.
Almost six years have passed since the Rohingya
minorities were expelled en masse from their ancestral
land in Myanmar. No effective action was taken by the
Security Council to remedy the situation; rather the
Council has remained a mute witness to its continuous
deterioration. Rebuilding trust would require the
reversal of such situations.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations remain one
of the most credible tools of the United Nations for
building trust. The role of peacekeepers in protecting
civilians, particularly through community engagement
and other unarmed measures and their contributions in
building institutions in the host countries, should be
adequately leveraged. Equally important is increasing
investments in the peacebuilding components of the
peacekeeping missions through the allocation of
mandates and resources.
Thirdly, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), with
its unique mandate, plays an important complementary
role in futureproofing sustaining peace. Owing to its
structure and working methods, which are founded
on the principle of national ownership and inclusivity,
the Peacebuilding Commission is best positioned to
contribute to building trust.
As the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
for two terms, Bangladesh has broadened the
prospects of the PBC, including by strengthening its
advisory, bridging and convening roles; expanding its
14/42

03/05/2023

geographical and thematic scope; and providing space
to countries to discuss various non-traditional security
threats, such as climate change. A similar approach
may be taken in addressing other emerging threats,
including those emanating from digital technologies.
Fourthly, the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda must be promoted in broader
peace and security contexts, including in addressing
climate change and disaster risk reduction and in
humanitarian action.
Finally, as we prepare for the summit of the future
in 2024, we need to engage constructively in creating
effective foresight mechanisms based on data and their
scientific analysis to predict future threats and take
preventive measures.
The ongoing consultations for the New Agenda for
Peace, the global digital compact and the declaration
for future generations offer opportunities to exchange
ideas and thoughts for such mechanisms. We must seize
the opportunity to build a better United Nations for our
future generations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate. I thank the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and all the briefers for their presentations.
Trust is a fundamental element in peace and crucial
for multilateralism to be effective and bring results.
The decline in trust in multilateralism can therefore be
detrimental not only to peacebuilding efforts but also
to sustaining global peace. Efforts to promote trustbuilding must therefore be a prominent feature of the
New Agenda for Peace and the multilateral system.
For Indonesia, trust begins at home in our region.
Coming from a region that has transformed deep
mistrust or a trust deficit into strategic trust, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) can
offer useful insights for futureproofing trust. Rather
than being contentiously entangled in entrenched
differences, causing the regional conflicts, hostilities
and trust deficit itself, the ASEAN founding fathers
chose to focus on trust-building through dialogue and
cooperation on common interests, such as economic
development and eliminating poverty.
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The habit of dialogue, cooperation and consensusbuilding has become a prominent feature in ASEAN
trust-building strategy. Numerous regional frameworks
were developed to build confidence and advance
cooperation, contributing to the strengthening the
regional peace architecture. That includes building
norms through the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
in Southeast Asia and the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone.
Recognizing that peacebuilding in South-east
Asia requires support from the wider region and
beyond, ASEAN also extended its habit of dialogue
and cooperation to other countries beyond ASEAN,
including on issues of strategic risk for peace, through
ASEAN mechanisms, such as ASEAN Dialogue
Partner mechanisms, the ASEAN Regional Forum, the
East Asia Summit and the ASEAN Defense Ministers’
Meeting Plus, to name a few.
Delivering on the reform of the Security Council is
essential to building trust in the United Nations peace
and security machinery. Close collaboration between
the Security Council and other multilateral machinery
is also important. The work of the United Nations
development machinery, for instance, can translate
peacebuilding strategies taken by the Security Council
into actions on the ground.
At the same time, to allow all the United Nations
machinery to successfully carry out its work, adequate
support, including predictable and sustainable
financing, is needed. Therefore, we must broaden the
sources of funding, including through partnerships
with the private sector, as well as fostering South-South
and triangular cooperation. Reforming the multilateral
development banks and strengthening their cooperation
with the United Nations will allow for more impactful
programmes on the ground.

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Feruță (Romania) (spoke in French): I
would like to genuinely congratulate you, Madam
President, on assuming this important position on the
Security Council.
(spoke in English)
The concept note (S/2023/283, annex) for this
open debate is straightforward and in line with our
common interest at the United Nations: building trust
to foster sustainable peace against the backdrop of an
environment of deteriorating global peace and security.
It is therefore no surprise that today’s interventions also
hinted at the future New Agenda for Peace.
We welcome the remarks made earlier today by
High Commissioner Volker Türk and the other briefers.
I want to emphatically emphasize the message of the
African Youth Ambassador for Peace for Southern
Africa delivered earlier this morning, and I think that
is indeed a wake-up call for us all on the question of
youth trust in institutions.
Human rights should be at the heart of our actions
towards achieving peace and security. Cooperation
with multi-stakeholders, civil society, media workers,
women, girls and youth is key for building trust. As
a serving member of the Council for Human Rights,
Romania places a great deal of importance on protecting
and promoting human rights.
Romania remains committed to the promotion
of the women and peace and security agenda and
the youth, peace and security agenda. Those are key
areas which we also would like to be reflected in the
New Agenda for Peace. Alongside the United States,
Romania is serving as co-Chair of the Women and
Peace and Security Focal Points Network in 2023. We
look forward to engaging with all Member States on
that topic with a view to advancing the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

Peace is a continuous process. A bottom-up
approach, a habit of dialogue and national ownership
are some important elements for futureproofing trust
and peace. As we work towards the New Agenda for
Peace, it is also important to be guided by all available
experiences. Having a platform for the Security Council
to engage in exchanges of experiences, including with
regional entities, would therefore be useful.

Fostering inclusivity has the benefit of creating
synergies and avoiding a duplication of efforts
and resources. Romania strongly encourages the
enhancement of cooperation among the various
stakeholders in the peacebuilding process, in particular
among regional organizations and national institutions.
Building trust is about creating partnerships that are
mutually reinforcing and that is a vital part of our
multilateral system.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.

Today is World Press Freedom Day, and we should
praise the work of journalists and media workers

23-1261315/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

who contribute to news reports and seek to uncover
fake news so that the public is adequately informed.
Their activities are a stepping stone in building trust.
Similarly, their activities matter in achieving and
sustaining peace, and given that this year we celebrate
75 years of peacekeeping, I do not think it is an
exaggeration to say that peace begins with a free press.
We applaud your efforts, Madam President. This is
the second time this year that the Council is debating
the important issue of peacebuilding, following the
meeting convened by the Japanese presidency in
January (see S/PV.9250). We welcome the continuity
of efforts. Indeed, United Nations peacebuilding
efforts need to identify new ways to respond to
emerging global challenges, such as climate change,
pandemics and food insecurity, including by promoting
and protecting human rights and human security. In
handling those topics, upholding international law
principles and multilateralism is key. Refraining
from actions and incitement to actions that erode the
international architecture of values and democratic
norms is also key in building trust among global actors,
just as accountability is. It is high time we acknowledge
that reinvigorated multilateralism is above all about
cooperation with each other, in good faith, and
compliance with the existing normative framework. Our
Organization is already equipped with the necessary
tools to address various challenges, but we need to step
up our action in ensuring the proper implementation of
the norms and principles that guide our ideals. Romania
will remain committed and actively engaged in efforts
to consolidate our multilateral system, as the only
alternative to ensuring lasting and sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for organizing today’s
important debate.
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and I would like
to add the following points in my national capacity.
We are convinced that strengthening mutual trust
among various different actors within the peacebuilding
architecture is essential for building resilience and
achieving durable peace and stability, especially in
conflict-affected regions and countries. Trust develops
through a process of collective engagement that
helps communities and societies to foster their social
16/42

03/05/2023

institutions and build the resilience and social cohesion
that affected countries need to prevent or recover from
conflict. In that context, inclusivity is key. A wide
spectrum of opinions and actors, in particular those of
women and young people, must be heard to ensure the
long-term sustainability of peacebuilding processes.
We need to continue translating their advice into policy
and action.
As the world is experiencing a growing sense of
insecurity, division and instability, the international
community should further strive for the development
and implementation of the international normative
framework. That is becoming increasingly important,
especially in the light of the rapid pace of technological
developments and emerging security threats. The
growing spread of disinformation and misinformation
has a particularly negative impact on trust among actors.
Predictability and accountability are fundamental
cornerstones of any stable post-conflict order. Therefore,
international and local support for peacebuilding
processes largely depend on whether or not the
responsible actors are able to credibly demonstrate their
respect for the rule of international law. We believe that
the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace is an
opportunity to advance a comprehensive and integrated
approach to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. That
Agenda will provide opportunities to further a shared
understanding and identify ways to support conflict
prevention, peace and security. The energy and food
crisis, support for effective institutions, human security
and the digital gap should be included in the New
Agenda for Peace. It is critical that all relevant actors
take part in further discussions on how to advance and
intensify our collective work to enhance resilience
against complex challenges related to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, we thank the delegation of Switzerland, as President
of the Security Council, for convening today’s debate,
which allows us to link issues of the utmost importance
for rebuilding trust in sustaining peace and the
measures that must be taken to achieve that goal. We
also thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the other briefers for their briefings
earlier today.
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Over the past year, we have experienced a
deep-seated crisis, which is an immediate threat to
international peace and security and consequently to
the multilateral system itself. It is evident that situation
did not emerge from a clear sky — we were already
seeing storm clouds — but the current situation is a
storm of a magnitude that we had not anticipated would
lead to the dangerous extremes we now see. It has
led to a very rapid erosion of the multilateral system
and effectiveness of the international legal order. The
international community, represented by the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, has been
unable to respond adequately to the crisis. At the same
time, the situation has led to a crisis of confidence
among Member States with respect to the functioning
of United Nations organs, which has spread to all the
institutions of the multilateral system. Rebuilding
trust in our Organization and the functioning of the
multilateral system is therefore a matter of urgency.

principle of sovereign equality and to refrain from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
and political independence of any State.

First of all, we must work to uphold and promote
multilateralism in the context of strict compliance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The principles outlined in Article 2 of the
Charter — positive law — set out the main obligations
that must guide the conduct of Member States: the
sovereign equality of all its Members; the fulfilment
in good faith of obligations under the Charter; the
settlement of international disputes by peaceful means;
refraining from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State; and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of State,
a principle that has been applied in the actions taken
by Latin American countries. Member States must
reiterate their commitment to complying with and
enforcing those principles, through their adherence to
the norms of the Charter and their conduct.

Enforcing those norms and principles is in the best
interests of all States, large and small. That means
we must ensure that the principles we agree on are
respected and implemented by all. Only by doing that
can we speak of a true multilateralism. Adherence to
international law serves our collective security and
guarantees the security of our citizens. Many conflicts
can be prevented if States comply with their obligations
under international law, the cardinal principle of which
is the peaceful settlement of disputes. If States fail to
or are unwilling to resolve conflicts by peaceful means,
the Security Council has the primary responsibility to
maintain or restore international peace and security,
as enshrined in the Charter, and that means applying
the means to restore the rule of law. However, if the
Council is unable to act, the United Nations should not
fail to do so, and we have seen it act since February
of 2022 through its implementation of the resolutions
relating to Uniting for Peace.

Over the past year, the majority of the States
Members of the United Nations have shown that they
continue to uphold those principles as legally binding
and as fundamental obligations of international law
that must be adhered to and complied with. Indeed, a
set of General Assembly resolutions that were adopted
last year reaffirm those principles, in particular as they
underscore the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States and call for a halt to violations of international
human rights law by the Governments of Member
States. Through a binding international covenant, the
States Members of the United Nations agreed on the

With regard to the prohibition on the threat or use
of force, the conditions for the legitimate use of force
are clearly set out in Chapter VII of the Charter. In any
other case, the use of force would be a clear departure
from the norms of the Charter. In that regard, we would
like to highlight as particularly relevant the SecretaryGeneral’s New Agenda for Peace. As we have said over
the past year and a half, we have seen challenges within
the international community and to the effectiveness of
multilateralism. That has been the case in particular for
those of us who believe in the rule of law and believe
that we should conduct our international relations in
accordance with international law, and that it should be
the basis of the multilateral system. As we said, conduct
that is at variance with those principles has led to an
erosion of trust in the system.

The international community is facing a myriad
of challenges. Genuine multilateralism, based on the
rule of law — first and foremost the provisions of the
Charter — must be the fundamental basis on which we
must build our relations and face all those challenges
together. As we have said, over the past year we have
felt a clear lack of trust where norms are concerned
among the States Members of the United Nations.
The international law, treaties and norms that we have
established to govern our relations — most importantly
the Charter and its application under the concept of the

23-1261317/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/05/2023

rule of law — constitute the best vehicle for restoring
genuine international trust, which provides a solid
foundation for genuine multilateralism. We must rely
on compliance with the rule of law as a foundation for
trust on which to build our relations. That will bring
about a genuine multilateralism, which is the best
guarantee for ensuring respect for the sovereignty and
equality of all States, large and small, especially the
less powerful, as it is our only shield for the defence of
our rights.

international peace and security, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations. However, in unjustifiably
attacking its neighbour, which has a direct impact on
international peace and security, one of the permanent
Member States of the Council, the Russian Federation,
is far from fulfilling that responsibility. Such unilateral
actions only weaken the rule of law and violate the
most basic norms of international law. Guatemala
reiterates its firm condemnation of the unjustified and
unprovoked aggression against Ukraine.

In that context, progress must be made on reforming
the Security Council through its democratization, first
and foremost by expanding the number of its members,
with a special focus on ensuring the representation of
developing regions, in particular by addressing the just
demands of the African countries, as well as granting
the Latin American and Caribbean countries’ request
to see their presence on the Council doubled. It is also
essential to work on limiting the use of the veto, or
committing to refraining from using it where certain
issues are concerned, for example as laid out in the
framework of the French-Mexican initiative, as well as
enforcing the rule forbidding States from participating
in the context of disputes or situations to which they are
a party. As Member States, all of us are active players in
the reform process, but the five permanent members of
the Council clearly also have a special responsibility in
that regard. We must therefore bolster that process, but
those five countries in particular must play their part.

Guatemala would like to echo the point in the
concept note about how the Council can make creative
use of its toolbox and channels, as well as its global
voice, to ensure that global normative frameworks
remain effective for sustaining peace in the light of
current and emerging threats to peace and security.
We believe that today’s open debate is essential,
considering that despite the adoption of Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262, on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture — resolutions that incidentally created
the agenda item before us today — the challenge of
the lack of a universal understanding of peacebuilding
persists at both the normative and practical levels, and
in the implementation of peacebuilding mandates with
a preventive approach.

The proper functioning of the Security Council and
strict respect for the norms of the Charter, especially
its Article 2, are the indisputable basis for removing
all the doubts and dangers we are currently facing and
ultimately rebuilding confidence in the future of the
multilateral system.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Benard Estrada (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegation of the
Swiss Confederation, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council for the month of May, for convening
today’s open debate.
We thank the briefers for their briefings and
appreciate the concept note (S/2023/283, annex)
provided as a basis for our discussions.
In resolution 2282 (2016), the Council reaffirmed
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
18/42

Guatemala sees a need for greater coherence
in the understanding of fundamental peacebuilding
approaches, tools and principles, given that strategic
tools can be used to uphold the added value of
peacebuilding. In addition, the Security Council can
and should benefit from increased interaction with
non-Council members, as well as other United Nations
organs. We therefore recognize the added value that the
Peacebuilding Commission brings as an advisory body
to the Council. The Commission’s convening power
should be maximized to bring together different groups
and facilitate dialogue in order to promote the nexus of
peace and security, development and human rights.
Lastly, we believe that the Security Council has the
capacity to further strengthen and improve preventive
action on international peace and security. We therefore
believe that the New Agenda for Peace should include
a holistic view of conflict in the form of a continuum
encompassing the entire spectrum of the conflict
cycle, from prevention, immediate intervention and
peacekeeping to the subsequent building and sustaining
of peace and long-term development, in order to ensure
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that the Council implements its mandate in accordance
with the needs and realities of the twenty-first century.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Yoseph (Ethiopia): I would like to congratulate
you, Madam, on assuming the Presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May, and I thank
you for organizing today’s open debate. I would like
to recognize Mr. Ignazio Cassis, Head of the Federal
Department for Foreign Affairs of Switzerland,
who presided over this morning’s open debate (see
S/PV.9315), and I thank all the briefers for their insights.
I have the honour to share with the Council
Ethiopia’s perspective on this important topic, focusing
on the need to restore trust in peacebuilding efforts. The
Code of Conduct for Inter-African Relations, adopted
in Tunis in 1994, states that “every cooperation effort is
doomed to failure in an environment devoid of stability,
trust and security”. Clearly, restoring trust was also
an inspiration for the Charter of the United Nations.
On that basis, I will raise four closely related issues
that we believe are at the centre of creating confidence
among nations and paving the way for building and
sustaining peace.
First, strict adherence to the Charter and the
principles on friendly relations among States is at
the heart of building and strengthening trust in the
multilateral system. The primary objective of the
Charter is creating trust that constitutes a conducive
environment, in which justice and respect for the
obligations of States can be maintained. Therefore, the
primary course of action to attain that objective is for
all States to adhere to all our undertakings under the
Charter and international law. To that end, creating
confidence and respect for the principles of sovereignty,
the sovereign equality of States and the non-interference
in their internal affairs are supremely critical.
Secondly, the principle of national ownership is the
cornerstone of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The
responsibility to protect nationals and uphold national
security is incumbent upon States themselves. In that
regard, as provided under the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, every State has the right to
freely choose and develop its political, social, economic
and cultural systems. On that basis, we must recognize
our cultural and civilizational diversity, which entails

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

our approach to our shared values and goals within the
realm of national policy choices. Furthermore, respect
for national ownership entails embracing indigenous
solutions and the policy choices of States. To that end,
we must ensure that the discretion and prerogatives
related to financing peacebuilding activities do not
compromise that fundamental principle.
Thirdly, the equal participation and representation
of States are a critical element of building trust. Africa’s
representation in the organs of the United Nations,
including in this very Council, is obviously unjust. The
status quo has already undermined the credibility of the
Council and its decisions. Correcting the status quo is
therefore the most critical and urgent measure needed
to generate trust. Furthermore, the United Nations as an
Organization must make constant amends and enhance
its credibility and ability to preside over global affairs
so that it can win the trust of the people of the world.
Adherence to the principle of subsidiarity and granting
regional organizations the necessary space to execute
their mandates and plans is also imperative.
Fourthly, lasting peace and aspirations to create
and develop functioning democracies and the rule
of law demand coherence in the means and methods
we apply in the context of international cooperation.
Political support and the provision of economic and
financial assistance — in particular development
financing and efforts to combat climate change — go
hand in hand. The prevailing practice, whereby we
attempt to build and sustain peace while simultaneously
applying political pressure and coercive measures that
undermine the authority and capability of States, is
self-defeating. Our actions must be coherent with our
targets and must complement one another. To that end,
political organs, development agencies and international
financial institutions must take constructive measures
in support of national priorities and efforts to ensure
peace and development.
In conclusion, Ethiopia believes that the challenges
that surround building trust can be remedied only
through concerted action, cooperation and solidarity.
We can create effective multilateral cooperation with
the United Nations at its core through adherence
to the fundamental norms and principles of
international relations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.

23-1261319/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mr. Abesadze (Georgia): At the outset, let
me express our appreciation to the presidency of
Switzerland for bringing this very important topic to
the forefront of our discussions today.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and I would like to
make some additional comments in my national capacity.
Peace and security, together with human rights
and development, are the main pillars of the work of
the United Nations, and they are tightly intertwined.
Promoting peaceful and inclusive societies lies
at the core of progress in achieving all the other
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development as a whole. We believe
that promoting peace is key to guiding our efforts
towards a sustainable and resilient future, especially
in the light of the continuing international tensions,
wars, cybersecurity threats and the rapid spread of
disinformation, coupled with the unmitigated climate
change that we are witnessing worldwide. At the same
time, we believe that multilateralism and respect for a
rules-based international order must be the foundation
of such efforts. They are key to preventing conflicts,
sustaining international peace and security and
ensuring sustainable development.
Today multilateralism is undergoing its most
challenging time since the founding of the United
Nations, as the result of an attack on its founding
principles by a permanent member of Security Council
itself, which is entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. Russia’s ongoing
war of aggression against Ukraine and its continued
occupation of 20 per cent of my country’s territories
constitute blatant violations of the fundamental norms
and principles of international law and a massive blow
to European security and the entire international order.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has also been
the most recent litmus test of the Council’s inability
to effectively play its role in stopping wars and the
consequent human suffering.
We must find ways to uphold the Charter of the
United Nations, including by addressing the issue of the
abuse of the right of the veto. It is our firm position that
the use of the veto should be restricted when a member
is involved in the conflict under consideration. That is
also enshrined in the Charter, namely, Article 27, which
states that in a series of specific important decisions, a
“party to a dispute shall abstain from voting”.
20/42

03/05/2023

We have had bitter experience in that regard, when
in the aftermath of the Russia’s full-scale military
aggression against Georgia in August 2008, the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia was
brazenly terminated by the veto cast by the Russian
Federation — a permanent member of the Security
Council and a party to the conflict — thereby creating
a total vacuum left by the absence of an international
security presence in the Russian-occupied territories
of Georgia, when it was most needed. Almost 15
years later, Russia is still in breach of its international
obligations and continues to violate the European
Union-mediated ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.
Russia’s illegal occupation of Georgia’s Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali regions continues to have a heavy impact on
the population living there and the territories adjacent
to the occupation line.
Let me once again recall that Russia’s responsibility
for grave human rights violations in the Russianoccupied territories of Georgia has been clearly
attested to in the decisions of the European Court
of Human Rights and of the International Criminal
Court, which confirmed the occupation and effective
control of Georgia’s regions by the Russian Federation
during and after the 2008 August Russian aggression
against Georgia. Moreover, let me also recall the
recent judgment of the European Court of Human
Rights of 7 March 2023, which confirmed that the
Abkhazia region had been under the effective control
of the Russian Federation even before Russia’s August
2008 aggression against Georgia, as well as Russia’s
full responsibility for human rights violations in the
occupied region.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our belief that
sustaining peace can be achieved by Member States’
strong adherence to the principles of the United Nations
Charter and the presence of strong accountability. To
that end, the New Agenda for Peace must rest upon
reinforced commitment to the fundamental principles
of international law and the United Nations Charter and
better protection and realization of human rights.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me warmly
congratulate you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I also want to
thank the briefers for their remarks today.
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

I align my statement with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Today’s discussion could not be more urgent or
timely. Our world is more connected than ever, but
our societies are more polarized and fragmented.
Persistent inequalities, the spread of disinformation
and the perception of Government inaction on critical
issues have all contributed to a widening trust deficit
within and among nations. The Council is no exception.
As the organ with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council’s credibility is undermined when
it fails to take decisive action in the face of pressing
global challenges. Worse still, lives are lost. Sadly, that
is true in many cases, from the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory to Myanmar, to climate change.
Every time the Council fails to act as a result of a
member’s self-interest or to protect others’ behaviour,
the fabric of its legitimacy frays further. That is
epitomized by the Russian Federation’s shameful use of
the veto in connection with its own military aggression
in Ukraine, an act that severely threatens the Council’s
long-term legitimacy.
There is a saying often attributed to the Russian
playwright Anton Chekhov — “You must trust and
believe in people or life becomes impossible”. I
think that axiom particularly apt in the context of
peacebuilding, but it also speaks to the consequences
of declining trust in the very structures that are meant
to uphold peace and security and the rule of law. If we
are to futureproof trust, the Security Council must lead
by example. Demonstrating unity, cooperation and a
steadfast commitment to the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations will send a powerful
message of reassurance and hope to the international
community and help rebuild the trust that is so essential
for peace. But that in itself will not be enough.
In all the situations on its agenda, the Council must
insist on strict adherence to international humanitarian
and human rights law. It must hold parties to account and
challenge impunity. Human rights, as we heard from the
High Commissioner this morning (see S/PV.9315), are
a critical foundation of sustaining peace and must be
recognized as such. Ireland welcomed the participation
of High Commissioner Türk in today’s debate, but his
presence in this Chamber is far too rare an occurrence.
We urge Council members to consider inviting the High
Commissioner to brief them on a more regular basis.

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

In the age of fake news, the Council also has a
responsibility to advance sound, scientifically driven
and evidence-based decision-making. It should deepen
its engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission and
prioritize gender-responsive approaches and conflictsensitive perspectives. It should make use of reliable
data, expert analysis and technological advances that
can enhance transparency, accuracy and inclusiveness
in its deliberations.
Finally, as I just said, we must trust and believe
in people. Having learned from the experience of the
Troubles on the island of Ireland, Ireland understands
the need for an inclusive approach to peacebuilding that
ensures the meaningful participation of women, young
people and minorities in decision-making. Indeed,
it was only by adopting a whole-of-society approach
that peace became possible in Northern Ireland. But
peace is more than just the absence of conflict. It is
a state of positive and constructive engagement in
which people can live in dignity, equality and security.
Sustaining peace requires more than simply stopping
violence. It necessitates addressing the root causes
of conflict, promoting social justice and building
inclusive and accountable institutions. Above all, it
requires rebuilding trust both in our institutions and in
one another.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): It is wonderful to see you,
Madam, in the President’s chair. Let me extend our
congratulations on the first ever Swiss presidency of
the Security Council. We also thank your delegation for
organizing today’s open debate on a very interesting
topic, “Futureproofing trust for sustaining peace”.
The three key issues raised in the presidency’s
concept note for today’s debate (S/2023/283, annex)
are, first, inclusion through the equal and meaningful
participation of all stakeholders; secondly, normative
frameworks that eliminate inequalities and thirdly,
facts that draw on the potential of new technologies to
improve the Council’s effectiveness.
From our delegation’s perspective, if we are to
futureproof or secure the future, we need to draw the
right lessons from history first and foremost. Can the
Security Council in its present form, as a body that
denies permanent representation to the entire continents
of Africa and Latin America and to the world’s largest
democracy, be deemed inclusive? By making five

23-1261321/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

members more equal than others in this very Chamber,
does the Council’s normative framework eliminate
inequality or tend to perpetuate it? Will we be able
to credibly improve the Council’s effectiveness at any
stage, when it is a fact that we do not even have a time
frame for concluding the long-running discussions
on Security Council reform? Can we actually be
futureproofing trust for sustaining peace through the
Council until we arrive at credible answers to those
core questions?
Reforming the Security Council is the fundamental
first step towards futureproofing trust for sustaining
peace. Multilateral institutions must be made more
accountable to their memberships, and they must
be open and welcoming to a diversity of viewpoints,
particularly from the Global South. The Council must
be made more representative of developing countries
if it is to continue to engender trust and confidence in
its ability to provide leadership to the entire world. It
can deliver effective solutions only if it gives a voice to
the voiceless.
The Security Council should also respect the
regional approach adopted by countries involved, while
working in collaboration with regional organizations
to address peacebuilding challenges. We believe that
regional organizations have an important role to play
in tackling global challenges, with the United Nations
at the core of multilateral efforts. A comprehensive
approach focusing on sustainable development,
inclusive economic growth and political processes is
critical to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. India’s
fundamental approach to peacebuilding efforts is
anchored in respect for national ownership and the
development priorities of Member States. We have
always played a constructive and significant role in
the context of peacebuilding through our extensive
development partnerships with countries of the
Global South. We continue to assist countries in postconflict situations through bilateral and multilateral
forums and our extensive network of development
partnership assistance. Our engagement has been
wide-ranging, encompassing key sectors such as
infrastructure, housing, education, health, connectivity
and improving livelihoods.
India remains unwaveringly dedicated to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In keeping with
the theme of our Group of 20 (G-20) presidency, “One
Earth, one family, one future”, India is committed to
22/42

03/05/2023

forging consensus through the G-20 process in the
effort to find solutions to global challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): We thank Switzerland for
convening this timely high-level open debate, which is
a meaningful contribution to the promotion of global
peace and security. To address the question on the
relationship between building trust and peace, my
delegation would like to share the following points.
First, it is our strong belief that dialogue provides a
solid foundation for our multilateral system to achieve
and sustain peace. Trust is the bedrock on which that
foundation is laid. In a world riddled with uncertainties
and strategic complexities, trust plays a critical role
in conflict prevention and resolution. Without mutual
understanding and trust, differences become more
difficult to address and in turn can escalate into
tensions, disputes and even wide-scale violence.
Secondly, in building trust, we need to acknowledge
that it cannot be coerced or manufactured. It rests
on the principles of fairness and equality. All actors
in international relations, especially the major
Powers, have to act in good faith and uphold their
responsibilities while taking into full consideration
the legitimate interests of all parties and stakeholders.
Multilateralism and respect for international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations, should be
the core elements of trust-building. In that regard, the
United Nations generally and the Security Council in
particular should have greater confidence in regional
organizations and work in better harmony with them,
respecting their central role, perspectives and local
knowledge in preventing and resolving conflicts.
Thirdly, as far as post-conflict peacebuilding is
concerned, forging mutual understanding and trust
between United Nations peacekeeping missions
and their host countries is of prime importance.
Peacekeepers must earn the respect and confidence of
local authorities and communities before being able
to effectively contribute to building trust between
political parties and armed groups. Trust is especially
critical in the immediate aftermath of conflicts and the
delicate early stages of peacebuilding so as to avoid the
risks of fragile States spiralling back into violence, and
there is no better way to build trust with and within host
countries than to engage in open dialogue and candid
interactions with all stakeholders while respecting the
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

principles of independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference. That approach needs to
be mainstreamed in the mandates of all United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions.

Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter specifically
establish the principle of acting in good faith and its
existence as a condition for the admission of States to
the Organization.

Fourthly, trust is also an essential element in
developing comprehensive solutions that address
the root causes of conflicts, such as poverty, hunger,
inequality and violence. The international community
must foster greater transparency and inclusion in
our common efforts to fulfil the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Likewise, trust and trustbuilding should be the key components in the New
Agenda for Peace proposed by the Secretary-General.

In our view, the subject of this debate has a
twofold dimension. On the one hand, there is growing
distrust among the Member States, which is reflected
in the debates and decisions we take in the various
intergovernmental bodies. On the other hand, this
mistrust also affects the credibility of the United
Nations in its work to help respond to the challenges
facing today’s societies and global problems for which
we know multilateral solutions are the only solutions.
The Security Council’s non-compliance with the
resolutions it has adopted together with the Council’s
paralysis undermines its legitimacy and effectiveness
in maintaining international peace and security, which
is a cause for concern.

As a nation that has overcome the devastating wars
waged to secure our independence and sovereignty
as well as a difficult post-war reconstruction and
reconciliation, Viet Nam attaches utmost importance
to trust and trust-building in its domestic and foreign
policies so as to maintain national unity and enhance
international integration. That is clearly reflected in
the implementation of Viet Nam’s consistent foreign
policy of diversification and multilateralism in foreign
relations and its commitment to being a trusted partner
of the international community.
It is also evident in our responsible participation in
and contribution to the work of the United Nations, United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and other multilateral
forums, including the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and ASEAN’s related mechanisms,
which are committed to promoting peace, security and
prosperity through confidence-building measures and
preventive diplomacy. In this spirit, we stand ready
to work closely with all States Members of the United
Nations to futureproof trust for sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on Switzerland’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the first time in the history of your country, as well
as for convening today’s open debate. Spain aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
the European Union.
Trust between Member States is the foundation
stone of the United Nations. The conditions for trust
are set out in the Preamble and Chapter I of the United
Nations Charter, and Article 2, paragraph 2, and

As for the work of the United Nations, mistrust
translates into a perception reflected in the most recent
Human Development Report that the United Nations is
an excessively bureaucratic system far removed from
the day-to-day realities of the peoples it is trying to
help. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2022
corroborates this pessimism. It is imperative to rebuild
trust and forge a new multilateral and intra-State social
contract based on the shared values of democracy,
solidarity and human rights as set forth in Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), proposed by Secretary-General
António Guterres.
How can we contribute to this? The precondition
is to ensure the maintenance of peace and security for
all and compliance with the resolutions of this Security
Council. Accordingly, the New Agenda for Peace is
a plan to revitalize multilateral action in a world in
transition and in geostrategic competition, which must
include both reform of the Security Council — to
make it more representative — and a new institutional
relationship between the Security Council and the
General Assembly that ensures the subordination of
specific interests to the common good.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Madam President, Costa Rica welcomes the
convening of today’s open debate and congratulates
you and Switzerland on your historic presidency of the
Security Council.

23-1261323/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In the current geostrategic context of eroding levels
of trust and growing competition, the New Agenda for
Peace offers an opportunity to promote transparency
and foster trust and dialogue as an alternative to arms
acquisitions. It can revive the objective set forth in
Article 26 of the United Nations Charter which calls for
“the
establishment
and
maintenance
of
international peace and security with the least
diversion for armaments of the world’s human and
economic resources”.
The New Agenda for Peace can also revive existing
transparency and confidence-building measures and
promote the development of new ones applicable
to weapons of mass destruction, conventional
weapons, cyberspace and outer space, as well as
emerging technologies. Such measures can build
mutual understanding, lessen misperceptions and
miscalculations, improve clarity of intent and ultimately
reduce the risk of conflict.
In this regard, Costa Rica would like to highlight
three aspects. First, Costa Rica encourages greater use
of existing tools, such as the United Nations Report
on Military Expenditures and the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms, which are key to
promoting transparency and accountability in military
spending and the arms trade. To ensure that these
mechanisms are used successfully, Member States must
demonstrate political will and mutual trust. As to the
Security Council, it is essential that it introduce into its
mandates the tools necessary to better understand the
risks arising from the diversion, illicit trafficking and
proliferation of arms and ammunition and their impact
on security and people’s lives.
Secondly, Costa Rica wishes to emphasize
the importance of collecting credible and verified
data and evidence, in particular through the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
(UNIDIR). UNIDIR’s independent research enables
decision-making and policymaking in disarmament
and peacebuilding, for example, in such areas as the
disruptive impact of artificial intelligence on military
operations and all domains of warfare, as well as
opportunities and challenges.
Finally, the United Nations must lead by example
and implement flexible, context-specific, attentive and
reliable responses to conflict threats. It must act as
one, integrating the various pillars of the Organization
with inclusive, people-centred, balanced and gender24/42

03/05/2023

sensitive approaches so as to build trust with local
populations. This involves including women and
youth in decision-making processes and policies, as
well as engaging with rural communities and civil
society organizations.
While the Security Council intends for Member
States, regional and subregional organizations and
individuals to do more to manage global crises,
the Council must also do more. Keeping the peace
requires a more benevolent, cooperative and, above all,
determined approach to maintain trust, particularly in
this very Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa
congratulates Switzerland for its first-ever assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and we wish
you well, Madam President, during your term in the
Council. We thank you, Madam, for convening today’s
open debate, and we wish to thank all the briefers for
sharing their insights on this topic.
Building trust is one of the commitments made by
our leaders in their declaration on the commemoration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
(General Assembly resolution 75/1). The report of the
Secretary-General, Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
also buttresses the imperative of building trust through
inclusive societies, which is one of the priority targets
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
There are various facets of trust that need to be
considered as we engage in the process of elaborating a
New Agenda for Peace.
First, causes of mistrust are diverse and differ in
each country or regional situation. A one-size-fits-all
diagnosis or solution should be avoided. Efforts aimed
at building, restoring and futureproofing trust should
therefore be guided by empirical evidence, based on the
specificities of each situation.
Secondly, trust, in relation to inter- or intra-State
conflict, remains a key element in any peacebuilding
scenario. As we learned from the sharing of best practices
in the Peacebuilding Commission meetings, trust is
often developed through continuous dialogue; political,
economic and social inclusion; and an acknowledgement
or understanding of our interdependence.
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Thirdly, we agree that normative frameworks and
complementary institutions are important in enhancing
trust within States and between States. National
institutions aimed at rendering services expected by
the population and regional agreements and entities
that foster peace and good-neighbourliness are some of
the confidence-building measures required to harness
trust. However, scrupulous implementation, monitoring
and evaluation are important elements if such measures
are to be effective.
Fourth, trust must also extend to intergovernmental
organizations that many developing countries rely on
to advance their development aspirations, such as the
United Nations and international financial institutions.
Since the United Nations is a beacon of multilateralism,
we agree with the assertion made by the SecretaryGeneral that we need multilateralism that is more
effective in delivering on its promises and, consequently,
is more trusted. In that regard, the Security Council
needs to play its role in ensuring that it is consistent and
effective in dealing with matters of peace and security
so that people in long-standing conflict situations, such
as Palestine and Western Sahara, can trust that the
multilateral system will address their situations in an
even-handed manner, based on international law.
Fifthly, partnerships among various actors on shared
objectives at local, national, regional and international
levels are also vital in promoting trust in leadership
and institutions. We are referring, more specifically, to
the partnerships that involve Governments, the private
sector, civil society and academia working together
to find innovative solutions to existing and emerging
threats to peace.
Lastly, I would like to conclude by underscoring the
need for the international community to act decisively
on the findings of the recently published report of the
Secretary-General, entitled “Progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals: Towards a Rescue Plan
for People and Planet”, which states that the SDGs are
in trouble. Those findings, if not addressed, will have
an adverse impact on efforts aimed at peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, including futureproofing trust.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the floor
to the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Ms. Brandt (the Kingdom of the Netherlands): I
would like to join others in congratulating you, Madam
President, and your country, Switzerland on assuming
its first-ever presidency of the Security Council. I also

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

thank you for organizing this open debate. We would
also like to thank the briefers for their contributions
and, like Ireland, would encourage Security Council
members to more frequently invite the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to meetings.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of the European Union.
I will therefore limit myself to highlighting the
importance of two elements: inclusion and adequate,
sustainable financing.
First, we can all agree that we can only build
trust in peacebuilding processes through inclusive
approaches. That means ensuring the meaningful
participation of all stakeholders — women, youth and
minorities — in all stages of peacebuilding. It also
means inclusive dialogue at all levels, including at the
community-level.
Fortunately, we have some good examples of
how that can be done. For instance, in South-Sudan,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan womenprotection teams play an important role in early
warning and early action through their daily monitoring
activities in local communities and internally displaced
persons camps. That provides the Mission with
critical information on issues that are essential for
peacebuilding — information that would otherwise go
largely unnoticed.
Sadly, we also see examples of the opposite — where
exclusion of important stakeholders in processes
contributed to a relapse into violence. Even when it is
evident that women and young people have a vital role
to play, like in the Sudan in 2019, it should be equally
evident that their voices have to be heard. That has not
been adequately pursued
The Council can and should play its role here by
making sure that Security Council mandates generally
reflect the importance of inclusive approaches — for
instance, by always paying attention to women and peace
and security and youth, peace and security elements,
and by listening more and better. That means not
only inviting women and young representatives to the
Council to share their views and perspectives, but also
following up on their suggestions through concrete
proposals for action. Similarly, we hope that the work
currently under way on the New Agenda for Peace
will recognize the importance of inclusive approaches,

23-1261325/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

including by giving women and young people a chance
to contribute to the consultations.
My second point is that we also have to build trust
when it comes to the support that we provide. That means
that funding should be dependable and sustainable. The
United Nations should be able to rely on adequate and
predictable resources when it comes to fulfilling its
mandate and tasks in the area of peacebuilding.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore supports
moving towards the use of assessed contributions for
the Peacebuilding Fund. Not only would that improve
the predictability of financing, but it would also send
a strong signal that Member States collectively support
the United Nations peacebuilding efforts and that we,
as the States Members of the United Nations, place our
trust in the United Nations system to deliver on this
crucial mandate. Let us all work towards a swift and
positive conclusion of the negotiations on this in the
Fifth Committee.
The world looks to the United Nations and so to
all of us when it comes to maintaining and building
peace. Together, we have to build the trust in people,
institutions and the United Nations that is essential
for our efforts to get there. We are confident that the
debate today will prove to be an important step in
that direction.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): Let me join the previous speakers
in congratulating you, Madam President, and your great
country on your first-ever presidency of the Security
Council. I thank you for convening this pertinent debate
today at a time when the credibility and effectiveness of
the Security Council in maintaining global peace and
security are being called into question.
Today we live in the shadow of nuclear arms and
great Power rivalry, but also in the intensity of the ravages
of climate change and pandemics. Critical enablers
such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
climate action and the digital commons have remained
underused and underachieved. Poor countries and many
of the developing countries are suffering from debt
distress, widening poverty, inequality and inflation.
Trust within and among nations is declining, and the
challenges to peacebuilding and sustaining peace
have multiplied.
26/42

03/05/2023

Seventy-eight years ago, the United Nations was
created from the ashes of the Second World War in
order to establish universal peace over conflicts, trust
over animosity and prosperity over poverty.
Today’s fragility requires us to make greater efforts
to rebuild trust among nations, anchored in the Charter
of the United Nations, multilateralism and international
law. The stakes are too high to let mistrust and suspicion
define the course of international relations.
Peacebuilding requires persistently prioritizing
development so that the root causes of conflicts can
be addressed. Considering the significance of the
humanitarian, development and peace nexus, we must
emphasize the importance of the timely realization
of the Sustainable Development Goals. Given its own
experience as a post-conflict country, Nepal emphasizes
nationally owned peacebuilding efforts based on
constant political dialogue and inclusive political
processes. The voices of all segments of society should
be heard, and their concerns need to be addressed in
order to sustain peace. The meaningful participation
of women, youth and minorities is the cornerstone of
building trust within governance systems. And there is
a need for stronger cooperation between the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission on
the peacebuilding agenda. We emphasize the synergy in
the work of United Nations country teams, international
financial institutions and regional organizations to
marshal adequate resources for peacebuilding needs.
As one of the largest troop- and police-contributing
countries, Nepal has always prioritized peacebuilding
efforts in its peacekeeping operations, as mandated by
Security Council resolutions.
Finally, trust is an essential prerequisite to
maintaining enduring peace in the world. Building
trust within and among nations involves continuous
dialogue and frank exchanges through which they can
build common understanding. Member States must
respect the Charter of the United Nations to foster trust
and secure sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): We congratulate
Switzerland for assuming the Security Council
presidency for the first time in its history and for
convening this timely open debate.
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In the current geopolitics, there is a growing
trust deficit between and among countries, which has
become a challenge to maintaining international peace
and security and collaborative efforts to address current
and emerging threats.
An important undertaking in futureproofing trust
for sustaining peace is the Secretary-General’s call
for a New Agenda for Peace. A people-centred New
Agenda for Peace should promote and enhance the
inclusion of women, youth and civil society within
the ambit of international law in a rules-based order.
That should be central to the programme of work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Our experience in the southern Philippines is a
good example of a people-centred peace process. We
placed a premium on communities achieving their
desired quality of life, which included the pursuit of
sustainable livelihood and political participation within
a peaceful deliberative society. That normalization
process in the Bangsamoro fostered an effective
peace and development road map that is inclusive,
participatory and conflict-, culture- and gendersensitive. That involved a Philippine Government-led
dialogue with all stakeholders, including women, the
youth, faith leaders and civil society. The Philippines
forged that peace initiative in the region in a common
pursuit for a solution to the Bangsamoro question with
honour, justice and dignity for all concerned.
As seen in the Philippine experience, the
people-entered New Agenda for Peace should also have
the following crucial elements. For trust to be built,
all Members States, especially the country and region
concerned, must have a voice in decision-making and
such decision-making process must be made transparent,
while decision-makers are made accountable for their
actions. There must also be greater collaboration
among Member States, civil society organizations and
other stakeholders. That can help build understanding,
identify shared goals and facilitate cooperation.
We also need to actively engage in conflict
prevention and resolution efforts. That can include
supporting negotiations, promoting dialogue and
providing mediation and other forms of assistance to
help prevent or resolve conflicts.
I wish to point out that human rights is a means
to build strategic trust in the context of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. The Philippines believes in the
importance of abiding by human rights commitments,

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

but is of the view that politicizing human rights is
not an effective method to transform human rights
situations and create lasting change on the ground.
Human rights mechanisms and programmes that are
based on constructive dialogue and cooperation, such
as the Philippines-United Nations joint programme
on human rights, are a good model that fosters trust
among Member States, the United Nations and other
stakeholders and establishes lasting partnerships for
democracy, justice and the rule of law.
On the logistical side, the enhancement of capacitybuilding and financing is a necessary ingredient.
We should take advantage of advanced research and
technology in ensuring that the decisions we make are
data driven and based on facts and science. The use of
modern technology should be welcomed. For instance,
on the heels of the pandemic, it is now much easier
to engage Governments in a virtual or hybrid format.
We should further strengthen and make that system
more secure and fit for purpose. At any rate, there is
a need for the Security Council and the Secretariat to
ensure that the perspectives of Governments are fully
heard, as they undertake the triangulation of data with
non-Government sources.
We also recognize financing as a critical
component for peacebuilding. We should bolster
our institutions for peace by infusing the necessary
resources and strengthening participatory processes.
That would allow institutions such as the Peacebuilding
Commission to address key priorities such as supporting
cross-border and regional approaches, facilitating
transitions and fostering inclusion through women and
youth empowerment.
In all the processes related to international peace
and security, including in the area of disarmament,
the Philippines has been a staunch advocate of the
importance of promoting trust among Member States.
We enjoin Member States to stay relentless in finding
ways that will allow trust to flourish, as we allow it to
endure into the future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): We commend
the Swiss presidency and briefers for their timely
reminder of the importance of futureproofing trust
for sustaining peace, not only for fragile but also
relatively secure societies to prevent and protect them
from unprecedented threats through the use of the

23-1261327/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

principles of inclusion, the standardization of norms
and evidence-based data.
Kazakhstan supports joint coordinated efforts
aimed at a comprehensive peacebuilding process.
We share and take very seriously our commitments
in implementing a New Agenda for Peace, with a
particular focus on women and girls.
Let me briefly touch upon the measures my country
has undertaken to promote regional and global peace,
based on the concepts of inclusion and overcoming a
trust deficit in modern multilateralism, as consistently
highlighted by President Tokayev of Kazakhstan.
It established the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia. It hosted the
nineteenth round of the Astana process on Syria and
has hosted regular consultative meetings of the Heads
of Central Asian States to strengthen multilateral and
inter-State partnerships, and the triennial Congress of
Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, which is
integrated with the United Nations concept of a culture
of peace. Other examples are our national development
strategies, which incorporate all 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs); our support to Afghanistan
through increased economic cooperation with the
Central Asian region; the establishment of a United
Nations regional centre for SDGs for Central Asia and
Afghanistan; the mobilization of humanitarian aid and
the transformation of Central Asia into a zone of peace
and security.
Terrorism, crime and corruption are scourges that
destabilize society. Therefore, we launched a joint
action plan to implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia.
With regard to disarmament, a shift towards
greater transparency, verification, total disarmament,
irreversibility and reducing nuclear postures in military
doctrines will enhance nuclear peace and security, as
well as compensation for victims.
We are confident that acceding to and implementing
key legally binding United Nations instruments
in national and regional legislation create trust
and predictability.
Security sector reforms enhance trust, safeguard
human rights, promote respect for the rules of military
engagement and prevent the rise of militias and
unauthorized non-State armies.
28/42

03/05/2023

Finally, evidence-based data is critical for every
challenge the United Nations faces for a realistic
appraisal of projections, early warning, timely action,
information management and sharing — the building
blocks of trust and confidence. Science also counters
misinformation and disinformation aimed at sowing
discontent, fuelling hostilities and disrupting societies.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan stands ready to join
multilateral action to safeguard trust, as an absolute
requisite for building global peace and solidarity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): I would like to congratulate
Switzerland on assuming its maiden presidency. We
have every confidence that Ambassador Baeriswyl will
execute her mandate efficiently.
It is said that peace is a by-product of trust, and
when trust happens we meditate and focus on who
our neighbour is and who we are to that neighbour.
Transposing that ethos to our own environment can
happen only when our foreign policy is structured
to accommodate our neighbour — the other, so to
speak. We are gathered here to evaluate our efforts to
sustain peace while anticipating the future, developing
methods to minimize the effects of shocks and stressors
and futureproofing trust — an amazing expression.
As we confront multiple and intersecting crises, it is
imperative that we renew our commitment to building
trust and strengthening our mechanisms to face those
challenges in the future.
We must accept the position that from the
perspective of inclusion, we need to ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of all stakeholders,
especially women and young people, in peacebuilding
processes. By doing so, we generate trust in those
processes and ensure their long-term sustainability.
Of course, we cannot pause there. We must engage the
wider peacebuilding architecture, including regional
and subregional organizations, more effectively if
we are to build inclusive and sustainable peace. Here
I cannot but recall the words of Archbishop Tutu,
who spoke extensively on the importance of trust
and reconciliation in building sustainable peace. He
said that we need to believe that a peaceful world is
possible — with all the drudgery that we see around
us — and that it is worth working for. We need to
foster trust among individuals and communities, and
between nations. We need to recognize the dignity and
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

value of every human being and promote human rights
and social justice. And we need to work together, in a
spirit of solidarity and cooperation, to create a world
that is safe, just and sustainable for all of us. We need
normative frameworks.
In the context of the relevant Security Council
resolutions regarding normative frameworks, if we are
to futureproof trust we must examine how international
human rights law can enable accountability while
embodying predictability, both of which are essential
components in building trust. The rule of law, a
social contract between Governments and their
peoples, anchored in democracy, human rights and
the elimination of inequalities, is vital to sustaining
peaceful, resilient and trusting societies. The Security
Council must creatively use its toolbox and channels,
as well as its unique global voice, to ensure that global
normative frameworks remain effective in sustaining
peace in the light of current and emerging threats to
peace and security. After all, should not the Security
Council be the sanctum sanctorum, the high altar of
global peace? Should not the futureproofing initiative
then be rooted firmly here — with the necessary
reforms, if need be? The effectiveness of normative
frameworks in building trust and sustaining peace,
however, depends on their implementation and
enforcement. If norms and standards are not upheld
or if there is a perception of selective enforcement or
double standards, that can undermine trust and create
tensions between States and other actors. It is therefore
important to ensure that normative frameworks are
implemented in a fair and consistent manner and that
there is accountability for violations.
It is not difficult to appreciate that there is a strong
interconnection between trust-building and sustaining
peace. Transitional justice processes, such as truth
commissions, can play a role in building trust by
promoting accountability for past human rights abuses,
acknowledging the suffering of victims and facilitating
reconciliation among various groups. The New Agenda
for Peace, as proposed by our Secretary-General, calls
for a more comprehensive approach to peacebuilding,
as former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
also mentioned in 1992, identifying various measures
that could contribute to building peace. The former
Secretary-General emphasized the importance of
trust-building when he said that an agenda for peace
identifies trust as a crucial element in establishing
lasting peace and stability. He said that no key peace

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

can be lasting and no security guaranteed without trust
among all people, regard for their social and economic
conditions and a sustained effort to build peace that
is both inclusive and welcoming. He believed firmly
that one of the basic conditions for peace is social
justice — indeed, that there can be no peace without
social justice.
We must therefore work to build trust from multiple
perspectives of inclusion, normative frameworks and
facts. The Security Council has a vital role to play in
that endeavour, and we call on all Member States to
work together to build a more peaceful and prosperous
world. It was His Holiness Pope John XXIII who
reminded us that the peace of nations consists not in
equality of arms but in mutual trust alone.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Ms. Wegter (Denmark): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark.
We congratulate Switzerland on assuming its first
presidency of the Security Council and thank you,
Mr. President, for convening us today to discuss the
pertinent issue of building trust.
The Nordic countries are well known for the high
level of trust in their societies, and we appreciate the
importance of trust for our societies’ well-being. As
a natural extension, we see trust as a necessity for
effective multilateralism and for building and sustaining
peace within and between States. For today’s meeting,
we have three recommendations for strengthening trust
across the peacebuilding architecture — prioritizing
prevention, promoting partnerships and ensuring the
inclusion of diverse actors and perspectives in our
processes and initiatives.
First, an important key to building trust is
strengthening prevention. The New Agenda for
Peace provides a timely opportunity to increase the
effectiveness of our collective efforts to sustain peace
and rebuild trust in our systems. To that end, we must
strengthen capacities for prevention at all levels by
integrating climate-sensitivity and operationalizing
the close relationship between conflict prevention and
the protection and promotion of human rights, as they
represent both the end goal of more peaceful and just
societies and the means for reaching them.

23-1261329/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Secondly, equal partnerships contribute to building
trust among stakeholders and to sustaining peace,
whether we are talking about regional organizations,
local civil-society organizations, young people
bridging divides within communities or enhancing
the sustainability of peace processes through women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation in all stages
of conflict. To build those inclusive partnerships, we
need adequate, predictable and sustainable financing
for peacebuilding. We also need to support locally led
peace initiatives in particular.
Thirdly, trust can be enhanced across the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture by further
strengthening the Security Council’s engagement with
the Peacebuilding Commission. That cooperation has
improved, but the full potential remains untapped.
The Commission’s convening role, with a focus on
national ownership and peer-to-peer exchanges, can be
leveraged to take into account a broader spectrum of
voices in the work of the Council.
At a time when multiple crises are testing our norms
and institutions, we must work together and build trust
to build and sustain peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of
all, on behalf of my delegation, allow me to sincerely
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption this month of the presidency of the Security
Council for the first time in Switzerland’s history, and
to assure you of our full cooperation.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Cynthia Chigwenya, Youth Ambassador for Peace
for Southern Africa, and Ms. ’Funmi Olonisakin,
Vice-President and Professor of Security, Leadership
and Development at King’s College London, for their
comprehensive briefings and participation in today’s
open debate.
Today’s conflicts give rise to multidimensional and
complex geopolitical and cross-border dynamics that
require a strengthening of multilateralism in order to
better promote international peace and security, while
fostering confidence-building measures and inclusive
approaches in peacebuilding processes and partnerships
between Governments and civil society actors, respect
for human rights and the rule of law, and full respect
30/42

03/05/2023

for the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of
Member States.
In order to build a lasting peace capable of facing
the current and emerging challenges, the United Nations
and, more particularly, the Security Council, should
continue to make use of all means, instruments and
rules placed at its disposal by the Charter of the United
Nations for the prevention of conflicts and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, including — first — through the
promotion of mediation and dialogue as sine qua non
confidence-building measures that can contribute to
conflict prevention and the rebuilding of trust between
stakeholders. In that regard, the use of the good offices
of the Secretary-General remains crucial for promoting
the peaceful resolution of disputes and bringing together
stakeholders to engage in negotiations, mediation and
other peaceful methods to resolve their differences.
Secondly, we must strengthen peacebuilding and
the lasting nature of peace in order to prevent conflicts
from recurring and promote stability and development
in countries or regions that have experienced conflict.
In that context, it is very important to further strengthen
the collaboration between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission so as to ensure more
consistent approaches to building resilient and effective
institutions and to providing inclusive approaches
capable of supporting national peacebuilding initiatives.
Thirdly, we must ensure respect for the principle
of good neighbourliness, the pre-eminence of the
universal values of living together and, especially,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
My country supports the actions undertaken
by the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
United Nations agencies to, first, ensure the equal
representation of women in national, regional and
international institutions; secondly, promote their key
role in conflict prevention and resolution, as well as
in peacebuilding; and thirdly, provide them with the
means to influence decision-making at all levels. In that
respect, on 23 March 2022, the Kingdom of Morocco
officially launched its first national action plan on
women and peace and security, in support of resolution
1325 (2000). We have also put in place gender-sensitive
policies to strengthen the participation, resilience and
leadership of women and young people in all areas and
at all levels.
Morocco also recognizes the key role of young
people in promoting the youth, peace and security
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

agenda within their communities and around the
world, as well as the need for them to contribute to
decision-making processes at the national, regional
and international levels. Young people are not only our
future but also a crucial phase of our present, and their
input contributes significantly to shaping efforts to
prevent conflict and sustain peace.
The Kingdom of Morocco would like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm its full support for the
Secretary-General and fully shares the vision of his
recommendations to address the common challenges
of the twenty-first century, in particular through
the establishment of the New Agenda for Peace.
The Agenda will bring to the fore the full range of
diplomatic avenues available under the Charter to
promote international peace and security, in particular
the provisions of Chapter VI relating to negotiation,
mediation and reconciliation, as well as the emphasis
placed on prevention and peacebuilding. The Agenda
will also enable a sense of urgency in the search for
a better future for all of us, with the aim of reducing
strategic risks, strengthening predictive capacities,
intensifying action against violence, addressing the
root causes of conflict, combating violent extremism,
placing women at the centre of peace efforts and
promoting the meaningful participation of young
people in decision-making.
In conclusion, my country believes that using a range
of confidence-building approaches and instruments
remains the way to build a lasting and sustainable
peace in the face of current and emerging challenges.
Confidence-building is essential to fostering peace and
will lead the States Members of the United Nations to
trust each other and to work together, to cooperate and
to find solutions to common problems together.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Switzerland’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the first time in its history, and I wish your friendly
country every success in presiding over the Council for
the month of May.
I would also like to thank you for convening today’s
open debate on the theme of futureproofing trust for
sustaining peace and for preparing the valuable concept
note (S/2023/283, annex) for this meeting.

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

This important open debate has been convened at
a very critical juncture, as our world today is facing
more intertwined and intersecting risks, challenges
and threats than it has in the past. Despite the ability
of the multilateral international system, the United
Nations and its various organs, led by the Security
Council, to address many risks, challenges and threats
in the past effectively and decisively, we find ourselves
today facing an international system that lacks the
effectiveness it had in the past. It is a system marred
by disruptions, increasingly profound differences and
divisions between Member States, and that sometimes
finds itself incapable of properly addressing and
responding to the political, security, humanitarian,
economic, social, environmental and health challenges
that are facing our world today.
For that reason, it is more important than ever
before for us to re-examine and work to better leverage
the tools at our disposal in order to tackle those
challenges. We must also consider the opportunities
offered by various modern tools, such as technologies
and digitization, as well as work to take collective
action to towards adopting more tangible measures to
reform the multilateral international system, with the
United Nations at its helm, in order to enable it to better
address and face the current and future challenges.
Let me start by referring to the tools currently at
our disposal, which must be better operationalized,
particularly by the Security Council. The Charter
of the United Nations provides a number of tools for
resolving disputes through peaceful means, specifically
Chapter VI of the Charter, which sets out the steps
to resolve any dispute between conflicting parties
through negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement or resort to regional
agencies or arrangements or other peaceful means of
their own choice. The Council is well aware that the cost
of managing a crisis after its outbreak is particularly
high for the international community. For that reason,
the Security Council’s action should not be exclusively
limited to managing the consequences of conflicts. We
should not merely contain the consequences of conflicts.
It is incumbent upon us to explore more effective and
efficient ways to prevent conflicts. In that regard, we
would like to emphasize the importance of regional
and subregional organizations playing a greater role in
conflict prevention and mediation efforts, in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, by strengthening their

23-1261331/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/05/2023

strategic partnerships with the United Nations in order
to implement mediation efforts.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts must
be anchored in trust at all stages of the peacebuilding
process, which is essential for building reconciled,
peaceful and resilient societies, in which dialogue
prevails over violence, justice prevails over injustice,
order prevails over chaos and peaceful coexistence
prevails over intolerance. If we want to proceed on the
basis of trust serving as a pillar that ensures the success
of peacekeeping operations, then we must emphasize
national reconciliation and the effective participation
of all parties, including women and young people,
in the relevant political processes. The meaningful
participation of women in political processes and
peacebuilding leads to positive results. Many reports
and statistics demonstrate that women’s participation
increases the likelihood that peace agreements will
be implemented and sustained. Furthermore, political
efforts should be supported by development efforts
during the post-conflict phase. There is a strong
correlation among peace, security and sustainable
development. There can be no sustainable peace
without development; there can be no development
without sustainable peace.

Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): Ukraine greatly
appreciates the initiative of the Swiss presidency to
hold this important debate, and we thank all briefers for
their presentations.

We support the Secretary-General’s report Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), in which he calls for the
establishment of a New Agenda for Peace. For us, such
an agenda should be integrated and comprehensive in
terms of peace and security. It should help us overcome
conventional challenges such as military conflict and
non-proliferation, as well as emerging challenges such
as climate change and cyberthreats. The initiative
should be rooted in achieving the purposes and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that regard, we believe that preventive diplomacy,
mediation, peacebuilding and sustaining peace should
represent key elements of the New Agenda for Peace.
In conclusion, Kuwait stresses that the
United Nations is the cornerstone of international
multilateralism action, based on the Charter and its
purposes and principles, which govern relations among
States throughout the world. At the same time, we
support efforts to reform the United Nations system
in order to make the Organization more effective,
efficient and better able to address and tackle current
and future challenges.
32/42

Our delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, and
I would like to make the following statement in my
national capacity.
One could hardly question the nexus between
trust and peace or deny the current deficit of trust
and confidence. As rightly pointed out in the concept
note, “[a]t the core, trust is about expectations and
predictability” (S/2023/283, p.2). Given that a fullfledged war — the bloodiest on the European continent
in the past eight decades — started in the middle of a
Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8970), we definitely
have problems with both expectations and predictability.
Therefore, we should address ongoing violations, and
the Charter of the United Nations should be at the core
of our attempts to futureproof trust. In speaking about
the role of the Security Council in shoring up trust, we
should not deny the fact that currently the Council is
not a credible point of reference because it is incapable
of delivering what it was established for — namely, the
maintenance of international peace and security, its
primary responsibility, which Member States conferred
upon it under the Charter.
The irresponsible behaviour of just one country has
totally undermined trust. It is not only in Ukraine that
people believe that the Council is incapable of delivering
on that promise. And that is why we like the title of
today’s open debate, which suggests that trust should be
futureproofed. Ukraine firmly stands for its restoration.
Trust is built on a foundation of fairness and justice. As
soon as a violation takes place, trust is undermined, and
it cannot be restored without addressing and fixing that
injustice. If the circle of impunity is not broken and the
violator is not held accountable, it is not very important
what language we use for our documents and concept
papers and what processes we launch.
We welcome discussions about the future, but there
are no half-solutions to the problem just mentioned
if we want to achieve what we set out to achieve. We
will succeed only if accountability is ensured and the
enforcement toolbox for the violator is sufficient and
adequately applied. When your home is on fire, you do
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

not drive to a Home Depot to buy new wallpaper. First,
you have to extinguish the fire. Meanwhile, an alleged
criminal recently presided over the Council, while the
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
other States is enshrined in its Constitution. It is our
duty to extinguish that fire — the fire of grave violations
of international law and the Charter by the Russian
Federation. The question is whether the world is just
watching or whether it will act, as it acted eight decades
ago, when the Nuremberg Tribunal served as a bulwark
against violations and aggression. We are confident
that the future trials of Russian war criminals will play
the same role for the purpose of trust, peace and the
current and future generations of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): It is my pleasure to begin
by thanking Switzerland for organizing this important
and timely open debate. I would also like to extend our
appreciation to the briefers for providing their valuable
insights to the Security Council.
Jordan emphasizes the central role of the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, in
maintaining international peace and security, in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. We are committed to supporting
and advancing the Organization’s efforts, initiatives
and resolutions aimed at preventing and responding
to threats to peace and security worldwide. Evolving
challenges and threats require a Security Council
that leads and advances international efforts to build
peaceful and resilient societies. The Council can
effectively contribute to sustaining international
peace and security by addressing the root causes of
conflicts, assisting in the cessation of hostilities;
,strengthening conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts, ensuring accountability for crimes, promoting
justice and guaranteeing the full, equal and meaningful
participation of all stakeholders, including women and
young people, throughout the peacebuilding processes.
In that regard, we emphasize the importance of
fully implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250
(2015) and formulating inclusive and people-centred
policies in political processes and peace efforts. In
addition, strengthening partnerships with regional
organizations, civil society groups and other relevant
stakeholders is vital to further support local actors
on the ground and ensure a functional and consistent

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

approach to sustaining peace. Such partnerships should
be part of an integral approach to peacebuilding.
In the light of the current challenges and threats
and in an effort to promote trust and predictability, the
Security Council should work towards the prevention of
conflicts through diplomatic means and early-warning
mechanisms, strengthen peacekeeping operations
through the deployment of well-trained and equipped
peacekeepers and further engage in mediation efforts
in coordination with regional organizations.
In addition, ensuring accountability for crimes and
the promotion of the rule of law are key in building
and sustaining peace. Accordingly, peacebuilding
processes should be aimed at strengthening the judicial
institutions of post-conflict States to ensure respect for
the rule of law and the applicability of internationally
recognized normative and human rights standards.
Moreover, peacebuilding processes must take into
account the differences and particularities of societies
and States that are in post-conflict situations. Minimum
human rights and international normative standards
should be clearly defined. The Security Council and
General Assembly have key roles in that regard.
Based on the foregoing, Jordan considers the
Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace as a starting
point for constructive discussions and dialogue between
the concerned governmental and non-governmental
interlocutors on a holistic and sustainable approach to
peacebuilding, while emphasizing the primary role of
States in that regard.
The upcoming Summit of the Future is an
appropriate forum in which to advance a new direction
to promote peace in a manner that addresses the existing
challenges in accordance with the rules of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. The Summit
provides a unique opportunity to discuss confidenceand trust-building measures, including on empowering
women and youth in peacebuilding efforts, addressing
the root causes of conflicts, upholding human rights and
supporting the development agendas of States situated
in conflict zones by providing capacity-building
programmes and developing national institutions to
ensure justice and achieve sustainable peace.
I thank you again, Sir, for organizing this important
open debate, given the pressing global need for the
Security Council to fully utilize its prominent position
to make meaningful contributions to sustaining peace
and to prevent the recurrence of conflict and instability.

23-1261333/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate Switzerland on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. Myanmar thanks Switzerland for
organizing this important open debate. I also thank the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the other briefers for their insightful briefings this
morning (see S/PV.9315).
Sustainable peace is the foundation for human
progress and the development of every society. To
achieve and sustain peace is one of the primary
responsibilities of every Government. Trust among
people and communities and their Government within
a society is fostered and maintained through the
institutions of the rule of law, justice and democracy.
Violent conflicts break out in many situations owing
to the collapse or destruction of the rule of law, which
is usually preceded by systematic and widespread
violations of human rights, abuse of power, exclusion
and persistent impunity. Fostering public trust and
restoring confidence in justice and security institutions
is a prerequisite for achieving eventual national
reconciliation and sustainable peace.
However, that can hardly be achieved without
addressing the issues of accountability and impunity. The
predictability and consistency of the Council’s response
to the perpetration of atrocity crimes can significantly
contribute to the success of peacebuilding processes at
the national level. The Council, in its resolutions, has
emphasized the importance of addressing accountability
and ending impunity for atrocity crimes, including war
crimes and sexual violence. In the past, the Council
has addressed accountability for those responsible
for serious international crimes and contributed to
the long-term impact of national reconciliation on the
ground. On the other hand, in situations in which no
adequate action is taken by the international community
and the Security Council, the perpetrators of serious
international crimes are emboldened and, subsequently,
their impunity thrives. As a result, peace can hardly be
built or sustained.
In that connection, I wish to take the continued
experience of my country, Myanmar, as an example.
It has been over 27 months since the illegal military
coup of February 2021. During that time, in response to
the illegal junta’s blatant disregard for human lives and
humanity, as well as their brutality against the people,
34/42

03/05/2023

the Council has issued seven press statements and one
presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/5) and adopted a
historic resolution (resolution 2669 (2022)), the first
ever on Myanmar, expressing its repeated concern
regarding, and condemnation of, the violence against
the civilian population and calling for the release
of the detained elected leaders and for the swift and
full implementation of the five-point consensus of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
However, every single call made by the Security
Council has been disrespected and ignored by the
military junta. Instead, the junta has lawlessly killed
more than 3,400 people and committed 64 massacres
of civilians during that period. The latest large-scale
massacre was a heinous targeted aerial attack on a
civilian gathering in the village of Pazigyi on 11 April,
in which nearly 200 civilians, including women and
children as young as a six-month-old baby, were killed.
That clearly constitutes a crime against humanity
and a war crime. In total disregard for the Council’s
demand for an immediate end to all forms of violence
in resolution 2669 (2022), the junta’s widespread and
coordinated attacks against the people of Myanmar
continue unabated, with much more cruelty. I sincerely
recall the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group’s code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
We all talk, conveniently and time and again, of
preventive measures and the importance of early
warning. With regard to the military’s atrocities in
Myanmar, we do have a lot of early-warning signs. The
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy on Myanmar, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Myanmar and the Independent Investigative
Mechanism for Myanmar widely mentioned the
military’s atrocities in the country. Here, the question
must be raised: how does the Security Council take
action effectively on such early warnings provided by
the United Nations system? What can the people of
Myanmar expect from the Security Council to save
their lives?
We understand that there may be different
views within the Council on approaches towards
the resolution of a particular conflict. However, the
Council should be unequivocal in denouncing the
deliberate killing of civilians, taking action to hold the
perpetrators accountable and preventing further loss of
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

people’s lives. The military’s repeated aerial bombings
on civilians in an indiscriminate and disproportionate
manner have made it clear that the junta cannot be
expected to stop attacking the civilian population while
its inhumane actions have received no response from
the international community.
In conclusion, it is high time for the Security
Council to ensure that international humanitarian
law is respected and to effectively respond to the
indiscriminate killings of civilians by the military
junta. I urge the Council to adopt, in accordance with
the will and aspirations of Myanmar’s people, concrete
follow-up measures to resolution 2669 (2022) and
give peacemaking a chance by ending the military’s
impunity. It will significantly contribute not only to the
resolution of the current crisis, but also to a successful
peacebuilding process in post-conflict Myanmar.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Hitti (Lebanon) (spoke in French): My
delegation is honoured to participate in this historic
meeting for your country, Switzerland, which is
presiding over the Security Council for the first time.
We congratulate you, Mr. President, and wish you
every success.
Just over a century ago, in 1902, Élie Ducommun
and Charles Albert Gobat, both Swiss citizens,
received the Nobel Peace Prize. We can therefore
only welcome your decision, Sir, to hold a debate on
confidence-building in the service of peace and a
lasting peace at a time when, it is true, people’s trust in
international institutions and in their Governments is
eroding day by day, to be replaced by a mistrust that is
growing day by day.
Building trust means setting an example. That is
why the Security Council must be consistent and fair in
its treatment of all violations of international law and
in the implementation of all the resolutions it adopts.
Strengthening trust also implies that the Council
must be reformed so that it is more representative and
inclusive. That will also require real acts of solidarity,
beyond mere trends, with States that are facing
significant challenges alone. In that connection, I cite
the crisis of displaced persons in my region.
We must admit that too often and for too long, the
logic of palliative care has prevailed in the treatment
of crises and conflicts. This method is insufficient

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

to achieve real solutions. So what can the Council
do to tackle the root causes of crises that undermine
international peace and security?
As mentioned in your concept note (S/2023/283,
annex), Mr. President, an inclusive approach is needed.
In that regard, the enlightening presentations this
morning by three briefers — from the United Nations,
youth and academia — only confirmed the importance
of mobilizing a variety of actors to build peace. Local
actors, young people, women and civil society are vital
forces that also have a role to play in all stages of the
peace process and in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and crises. We must steadfastly invest in this
human capital, which is what makes Lebanon strong.
The Council and the entire United Nations system can
promote their role and consult them more.
In addition, the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission should be able to meet and
exchange views more regularly.
Furthermore, ambitious national plans, developed
through inclusive processes, often cannot be
implemented due to lack of resources. The United
Nations must support those national efforts by
mobilizing adequate financial resources. That is
particularly true of the Peacebuilding Fund, for which
predictable and sustainable funding must be ensured.
The Council and Member States can also build on
the latest recommendations of the High-Level Advisory
Board on Effective Multilateralism, in particular those
related to restoring confidence in multilateralism
through inclusiveness and accountability. All of this can
help support the Secretary-General’s efforts, including
his proposal for a New Agenda for Peace.
All over the world, as we see every day, the social
contract between the people and those who are supposed
to respond to their expectations seems to be broken.
Lebanon is certainly not exempt. One certainty that
emerges is that the bond of trust cannot be established
or restored without guaranteeing the rule of law, with
robust national institutions and respect for human
rights. The rule of law is the foundation of stability,
development and lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malawi.
Mrs. Chimbiri Molande (Malawi): Malawi
congratulates you, Mr. President, and your country,

23-1261335/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Switzerland, for this historic presidency, and we wish
you a successful presidency.
The Republic of Malawi is honoured to be part of
this meeting as a sign of its commitment to international
peace and security. As a Member State, we believe in an
international rules-based order. This open debate could
not have come at a better time, and it is comforting that
this meeting will consider futureproofing peacekeeping
initiatives. The fact that this open debate will also feed
into the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace
serves as an opportunity for all of us to incubate ideas
for more reliable, predictable and sustainable peace
processes in an increasingly complex world.
The Republic of Malawi agrees that there is a need
for transparency and reliability in peace efforts. That
is why we believe that observance of international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
other legal instruments that other multilateral actors
and the United Nations develop, is a must at all times.
In furtherance of these international instruments,
we call for harmony, equality and inclusion. We should
desist from creating circumstances that lead to other
States acquiring a dominant role, with others being
subjected to a subordinate-partner status. We should
all note that the key to sustainable peace is the smooth
and efficient functioning of the Security Council
leveraging its high and influential voice in upholding
an international rules-based order. The voices of all
other regions should be part of the Council’s voice,
hence the need for Security Council reform.
Malawi is a peace-loving nation, and we are fully
aware of the dangers that climate change poses to our
people and neighbouring countries. As a State recently
devastated by a horrible Cyclone, communal harmony
and peace are at stake, with thousands of people
displaced. Just like migrants, internally displaced
populations create the need for transparent peace and
development processes.
The world is advancing in technology, which is
jeopardizing peace and security. As a result, the world
is increasingly facing threats of cyberinsecurity and the
use of lethal nuclear weapons. Our position is that we
need to harness the peaceful use of new technologies
while simultaneously keeping our eye on the threats
they pose. The United Nations should put in place
accountability mechanisms for those threats.
36/42

03/05/2023

We also need to develop the resilience of our
people, fully cognizant of the fact that climate induced
and human-made disasters will continue to create
existential threats. That is why trust, participation,
mutual respect and shared values and norms should
be the cornerstones of the United Nations in order to
deliver the nexus of humanity, peace and development.
As the States Members of the United Nations and
representatives of our people, it is critical that we
leverage our existing multilateral and United Nations
capabilities in preventing and resolving conflicts
worldwide, now and in future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by welcoming the presidency of
His Excellency Mr. Ignazio Cassis, Federal Councillor
and Head of the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs
of Switzerland. I congratulate the Swiss delegation for
presiding over the Security Council this month. We
thank you for convening this important open debate on
futureproofing trust for sustaining peace, in particular
as the world witnesses multiple intersecting crises that
threaten international peace and security today. I would
be remiss if I did not thank Mr. Volker Türk, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the
other briefers for their valuable presentations.
The continued armed conflict in different parts of
the world, as well as the new growing risks, such as
climate change and the malicious use of information
and communications technologies, the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
and the lack of stability, all establish the essential need
for multilateral action and cooperation to put an end
to wars and settle conflicts by peaceful means. We
must also counter terrorism and extremism and address
any political, economic and social issues that may fuel
conflicts, disputes and hatred.
The Kingdom of Bahrain believes that the main
pillar for resolving regional and international conflicts
is compliance with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, as stipulated therein, the most
important of which are respect for the sovereignty of
States and international law; non-interference in the
internal affairs of States; and the reinforcement of the
pillars of maintaining international peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights. We must
also agree on more effective mechanisms to prevent
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

future conflicts and to settle disputes before they
escalate to violence. Therefore, the Kingdom of Bahrain
has continued to reiterate the key role of promoting the
values of tolerance, mutual respect and dialogue in the
prevention of conflicts, the maintenance of security
and the building of cooperation and trust among States.
The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, as the primary organ in charge of the
maintenance of international peace and security,
is a critical element for the promotion of peaceful
coexistence, dialogue among cultures and civilizations,
human solidarity and stability and the protection of
human rights, and the coordination of humanitarian
assistance operations, development efforts and
climate action. Accordingly, the complexities and
fluctuations engulfing current and emerging conflicts
in the world require renewed efforts and effective
responses by the Security Council and through the
adoption of transparent, constructive and cooperative
approaches among States, while bearing in mind the
primary role of regional organizations and actors in
addressing important issues and ensuring that conflicts
are de-escalated and resolved through dialogue and
diplomatic means.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain shares the
international community’s concerns and its interests in
the Secretary-General’s proposals to be put forward in
the New Agenda for Peace. We reiterate our support for
international partnership in promoting peace, dialogue
and peaceful coexistence; protecting and promoting
human rights and sustainable development efforts for
the benefit of humankind; and redoubling our joint
efforts by addressing and overcoming together all
challenges in the promotion of peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mr. Sekeris (Greece): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate Switzerland on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and for organizing
this timely debate.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
delivered earlier by the European Union and would like
to add the following in my national capacity.
Futureproofing trust for sustaining peace is a
very important topic that begs to be considered in a
comprehensive and thorough manner. Trust and Peace
go, after all, hand in hand, as we know all too well from

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

our collective efforts to achieve peace, stability and
prosperity the world over. In view of the elaboration
of the New Agenda for Peace, which will shape new
responses and strengthen the prevention of old and new
threats to international peace and security, trust should
be placed at the core of that project. My country, which
has welcomed since the very beginning the SecretaryGeneral’s ambitious report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) as a major step towards further enhancing
the effectiveness of the United Nations and highlighted
as a priority the New Agenda for Peace, will spare no
effort to that end.
In that respect, in today’s debate I would like
to elaborate on three dimensions: the normative
frameworks, inclusivity and trust through credible
facts. With regard to normative frameworks, trust is
about predictability and the international community
has a great normative tool — international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. We should place our
efforts on upholding the fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, including the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as the obligation of all
Member States to refrain from the threat or use of force
against other Members.
Indeed, in our efforts to build trust, it is essential to
go back to the basics and reinvigorate the membership’s
commitment to those core principles, especially in
an era of continual attacks on the foundations of our
multilateral system, of which we are all aware, including
through the misinterpretation of international law.
A particular aspect of normative frameworks, and
indeed a case in point, concerns maritime security.
Safe seas and oceans are fundamental for blue growth,
energy security, supply operations and the achievement
of sustainable development. Illegal activities at sea,
such as piracy, terrorist acts, arms trafficking and
human trafficking, constitute major maritime security
threats. Their interconnection requires an integrated
approach, including through the implementation of the
law of the sea and the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, as the sole legal and institutional
framework governing the world’s oceans and seas.
Turning to inclusivity, it is essential to support and
enhance United Nations efforts to place women and
girls at the centre of security policy, building on the
framework of the women and peace and security agenda.
The equal representation of women in decision-making,
including in peace processes, remains a decisive

23-1261337/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

factor in our ability to make progress in our collective
efforts to achieve inclusive and sustainable peace
and development. Preventing and addressing sexual
violence in conflict, ensuring accountability for the
perpetrators and relief and recovery for survivors, and
enhancing the participation and leadership of women as
agents of change in conflict resolution, peacebuilding
and mediation efforts are essential in building durable
trust through bolstering inclusivity.
Last but certainly not least, today we are celebrating
the thirtieth anniversary of World Press Freedom Day.
The role of the freedom of journalists in establishing
credible facts to guide us in our collective efforts for
peace and prosperity cannot be exaggerated. A free
press exposes the truth. It plays an essential role in
identifying and promoting accountability for human
rights violations and abuses and holds those in positions
of authority to account. Journalists and media workers
play a crucial role in the flow of information, opinions
and ideas and are indispensable to building inclusive
and tolerant societies, promoting at the same time
understanding and cooperation. Yet, we are witnessing
today an alarming increase in disinformation, polarizing
discourse and fierce attacks on factual reporting, both
online and offline, leading ultimately to the erosion of
trust and paving the way for more confusion, which is
the number one fuel for crisis.
Greece, as co-Chair, along with France and
Lithuania, of the Group of Friends for the Protection
of Journalists, comprising 27 Member States, stands
firm in its unwavering dedication to the principles of a
free, independent and pluralistic press and to ensuring
the safety and protection of journalists and media
workers worldwide.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Gusman (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the delegation of Switzerland on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
thank it for convening this important open debate.
As the United Nations membership has engaged
in informal discussions on the Secretary-General’s
proposal for a New Agenda for Peace, we look forward
to the outcomes as an opportunity to address all forms
and domains of threats and reflect on the collective
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations
and multilateralism.
38/42

03/05/2023

I would like to briefly focus on some thematic
areas of concern which, in our view, need to be taken
into account in identifying possible contributions to the
process and the ways and means of enhancing national
and multilateral action.
Selectivity, double standards and the resulting
persistent incompliance with international obligations,
along with the inadequacy of international security
mechanisms, have been and continue to be among the
major obstacles to addressing current and emerging
threats and promoting trust, predictability and
peacebuilding more effectively.
As this open debate, among its objectives, provides
an opportunity to examine the role of international
normative frameworks, it is essential, first and
foremost, to reject misinterpretations, underline that
there is no conflict among the commonly agreed norms
and principles and reaffirm the duty to implement
international obligations in good faith.
The purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations are universally binding and must be
applied consistently, not selectively. The foundation
stone across all efforts is and must remain the State.
Respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity
is crucial to achieving any progress in preventing
conflicts; restoring and maintaining peace; building
bonds of peaceful, mutual trust among nations;
enhancing respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms; protecting human security and promoting
sustainable economic and social development.
Furthermore, accountability is an important
preventive tool and an essential constituent on the path
to the adoption of a longer-term approach that looks
towards shaping a more peaceful, just and inclusive
future. Justice is a fundamental building block of
peacebuilding, sustainable peace and a peaceful
international order.
It is also critical that the United Nations continue
mobilizing the world against racism and confronting
hate speech, hatred of all kinds, misinformation,
disinformation and incitement to division, violence
and extremism.
Intercultural and interreligious dialogue at the
national and international levels is one of the important
avenues within the broader objectives of peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and reconciliation. In that connection,
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

we recognize the important role played by the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations.
Strengthened global solidarity, multilateralism and
common efforts, grounded in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, are the most effective
ways to achieve the goals of peace, inclusive sustainable
development and human rights for all.
Providing support to States affected by conflict and
engaged in post-conflict peacebuilding, reconstruction,
rehabilitation and reintegration is, and must remain,
a critical commitment of the entire United Nations
system. Such support and solidarity is critical to my
country — Azerbaijan — and to many States around
the world that are overcoming the consequences
of devastating wars, aggression, occupation and
ethnic cleansing.
In conclusion, we believe that there is a need for
closer strategic and operational partnership among
the United Nations, Governments and other key
stakeholders, while complying with national sovereignty
and taking into account priorities and policies of States.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cambodia.
Mrs. Eat (Cambodia): First, allow me to
congratulate Switzerland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month May. I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today’s debate on the
important topic of futureproofing trust for sustaining
peace. I highly appreciate the comments and views of
all the briefers and speakers who took the floor before
me, all of which I found relatively valid.
Upholding the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations is absolutely fundamental to
maintaining universal peace and security and fostering
human development, and all Members of this body have
time and again reaffirmed commitment to them. Yet
we continue to see wars and armed conflicts breaking
out within and between Member States. It is apparent
that there are many differences among United Nations
Members in the interpretation of the principles that
support peace and peaceful coexistence. It is also
apparent, from the current fragility of world peace, that
there is a huge deficit of trust in all dimensions and an
eroding spirit of international solidarity.
Nevertheless, the fact that we have all gathered here
to discuss the root causes of eroding trust and on the best
approach to rebuild and consolidate it reflects our faith

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

in multilateralism and collective efforts to maintain and
build a world where all nations, large and small, can
enjoy peace, security and socioeconomic development.
For small States like Cambodia, multilateralism and the
principle of mutual respect is our best defence.
The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, has an important role in ensuring member
nations’ trust in multilateralism and that principles,
rules and norms be upheld as committed to and applied
equitably for all. It is also crucial that the concerns of
each and every nation be fairly taken into consideration
and that peaceful means and diplomacy should remain
supreme in resolving disputes and addressing concerns.
The state of peace, security and development in my
country, Cambodia, now and in earlier times within our
living memory, stands as an example of what trust and a
severe depletion of trust, nationally and internationally,
can do to a nation and its ability to contribute to regional
and global peace and development.
Finally, may I join others in voicing support for the
Secretary-General’s proposal on the New Agenda for
Peace. We should work for and through an inclusive
process to build convergence and bridge division in our
approaches to peace, security and development in order
to build a peaceful and sustainable world for future
generations of humankind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As new
forms of conflict demand innovative responses, States
that manage to end a conflict often fail to maintain the
peace they have achieved over time. Many conflicts take
place in countries that were already at war, while the
relapse rate has increased every decade since the 1960s.
Empirical analysis of eight decades of international
crises shows that peacekeeping efforts often succeed
in the short term and fail in the quest for peace in the
long term.
Since the Security Council and the General
Assembly adopted historic and identical resolutions on
sustainable peace in April 2016, Member States have
begun to reflect on what that concept means. Argentina
has supported the development of the concept of
sustainable peace as understood to mean a continuous
process that involves the peacebuilding system not
only in the post-conflict stage, but also before and
during conflicts. That is also based on a comprehensive

23-1261339/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

approach that must take into account the need to combat
the root causes of conflicts by means of, among others,
strengthening the rule of law, promoting sustained
economic growth and eradicating poverty, while
promoting social development, democracy and respect
for human rights.
Conflict prevention is the first step in the peace
architecture. As an integral part of preventive
diplomacy, the international community should focus
on institutional and capacity-building in States where
situations of potential or imminent conflict exist. That
step is also key to safeguarding successful transitions
from conflict to lasting peace. Strengthening the
resilience of States, building legitimate, accountable
and effective institutions, and consolidating the rule of
law are long-term efforts that require national leadership
and responsibility and sustained international support.
The Security Council has a fundamental role to
play in supporting preventive diplomacy efforts. In
recent years, the Council has increased its engagement
and flexibility to address emerging threats before they
escalate and come onto the Council’s formal agenda.
Through its actions, the Council can send important
signals that help discourage violence and open up a
channel of dialogue between the conflicting parties,
which will facilitate, for example, the work of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoys when it
comes to good offices.
Many ceasefire and peace agreements are initially
unsuccessful. When insufficient attention is paid to
the needs of societies emerging from conflict, the
consequences are serious for all concerned. That is
why peacebuilding aims not only to resolve conflicts,
but also to build societies, institutions, policies and
relations that are more capable of sustaining peace and
justice over time.
Inclusion is another crucial aspect of sustainable
peace. Conflict prevention and resolution and
peacebuilding processes and efforts must involve all
sectors of society. Women must play an active role across
the spectrum of conflict prevention and resolution and
post-conflict peacebuilding. There is evidence that
women’s empowerment and gender equality are linked
with peace and stability in societies. In particular,
when women influence decisions in their communities,
crises are more likely to be resolved without resorting
to violence.
40/42

03/05/2023

Broad consultations and participatory mechanisms
that do not exclude any group or segment of society
serve to consolidate the legitimacy of the State and
foster trust among all its citizens. Contrariwise, a lack of
inclusion threatens peace and reconciliation processes
and the stability of the State itself. The participation of
all citizens in building peace helps to achieve inclusive
agreements and lasting peace and stability.
Ultimately, the success of a transition from conflict
to peace requires that justice and accountability be
taken seriously. Justice is an essential component
of reconciliation. A failure by Governments to
ensure justice and end impunity could lead to
sabotaging peacebuilding efforts and, ultimately, to
reigniting conflicts.
Faced with new global challenges, we must ask
ourselves what the correct United Nations structures
and mandates for conflict resolution with sustainable
peace are. The transition from war to peace is not a
technical exercise, but a highly political process in
which different principles, priorities and approaches
must be brought together. In that regard, there is a
crucial need for coordination among the main organs of
the United Nations, while avoiding working in separate
silos and seeking to achieve systemic coherence in
peacebuilding strategies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Tickner (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you and the members of the Security Council,
Madam President, for convening this meeting.
Colombia welcomes this debate, which is very timely
in the light of the “total peace” project being developed
by the Government of Gustavo Petro Urrego. I take this
opportunity to express my appreciation for the Security
Council’s support and acknowledgment of the advances
achieved by my country towards the goal of achieving a
stable and lasting peace.
I reiterate Colombia’s willingness to make our
national experience available to the United Nations as
a reference for those other cases where it is necessary
to encourage and create the conditions for a transition
from an armed conflict to overcoming violence. Along
those lines, I would like to briefly share some ideas from
the Colombian perspective regarding the link between
peacebuilding and inclusion, within the framework of
more effective action by the Security Council.
23-12613

03/05/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

First, inclusion constitutes the cross-cutting axis of
the indissoluble link between development and peace.
Listening to the voices of society as a whole is essential
to guarantee the sustainability of both development
and peace. That means that national policies cannot
be imposed from capitals, but must be built from the
regions. Aware of that need to weave the social, political
and economic fabric, the Government Colombia
believes that social participation not only legitimizes
initiatives aimed at strengthening the rule of law, but
that it also guarantees its sustainability over time. The
voice of women, youth, LGBTQI+ persons, Indigenous
peoples and Afro-descendant populations is essential
in any effort undertaken by the United Nations.
Secondly, building strong and effective institutions
also requires designing inclusive mechanisms.
Consequently, one of the central messages of President
Petro Urrego and Vice-President Francia Márquez has
been “change with women.” In pursuit of that ambition,
Colombia is in the process of preparing its first national
plan of action for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, as
an overarching document that has been conceived
by involving not only State institutions but also civil
society, academia and women themselves throughout
the country.
Thirdly, as the Colombian case clearly proves, it is
essential to have the political, technical and financial
support of the international community as well as
that of regional banks in order to advance on the path
towards peace through multilateral instruments that
make possible the viability of projects to that end and
that contribute to sustainable development. During our
tenure in the Peacebuilding Commission, which ended
in December, we worked under such a collaborative
approach, while emphasizing that the support of the
international community is an indispensable tool.
The Commission’s advisory function to the
Security Council must be constant and seek to
integrate, as an integral part of the recommendations
and actions defined within the framework of the socalled configurations, the lessons learned from positive
cases of transitions towards peace. For that reason,
and in conclusion, Colombia supports and actively
participates in the five-year review process of the
peacebuilding architecture, to take place in 2025,
under a holistic approach that ensures more efficient
and timely decision-making by the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund. In that way,

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

peacebuilding could be strengthened as a platform in
which national experiences converge on issues such
as transitional justice, disarmament, reintegration
and demobilization, all of which are the basis for
overcoming conflict situations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Hakobyan (Armenia): We join others in
congratulating Switzerland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council. We thank you, Madam
President, for organizing today’s important debate.
We also thank Mr. Volker Türk, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the other
briefers for their valuable contributions.
The mounting challenges to international peace and
security are indeed troubling and call for strengthened
international cooperation. The Security Council should
be able to perform its responsibilities enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and take all measures on
behalf of the wider membership of the Organization to
maintain peace and security around the world.
To futureproof peace, new impetus should be given
to the prevention agenda, peacebuilding and trustand confidence-building. Efforts should be made to
ensure broader participation by women and youth, to
counter all forms of violence and discrimination and to
strengthen international oversight capacities.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms must
be placed at the centre of the international efforts,
with special attention on the protection of civilians in
vulnerable situations, and particularly those affected
by conflicts.
Upholding the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security is essential for the
realization of the rights to truth, justice, reparation and
guarantees of non-recurrence of breaches of trust and
international peace. Often it is the lack of accountability
for wrongful acts that breeds more violence and sows
discord. The United Nations and its principal organs,
particularly the Security Council and the International
Court of Justice, has a central role in promoting justice
and accountability and upholding faith in the rule of
law among nations.
To build trust, prior agreements and international
commitments should be implemented in good faith and
in full. The well-established record of non-compliance
by Azerbaijan with international treaties, agreements

23-1261341/42

S/PV.9315 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and arms control regimes and its consistent refusal to
implement confidence- and security-building measures
throughout the years have demonstrated a clear intention
of instigating further hostilities in our region, notably
exemplified by its large-scale aggression against
Nagorno-Karabakh in 2020. Regrettably, the lack of
adequate reaction from international structures allowed
Azerbaijan to further pursue its aggressive policies.
It has been almost five months since Azerbaijan
put the Lachin corridor, the only lifeline connecting
Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia and the outside
world, under an effective blockade. Moreover, on
23 April Azerbaijan installed a checkpoint in the
corridor, violating the trilateral statement on a
ceasefire of 9 November 2020, as well as disregarding
the provisional measures indicated by the International
Court of Justice, according to which Azerbaijan shall
take all measures at its disposal to ensure the unimpeded
movement of persons, vehicles and cargo along the
Lachin corridor in both directions. Azerbaijan’s
continued violations of international law and prior
commitments and its warmongering and aggressive
behaviour should not be tolerated by the Council or by
the international community at large.
To achieve sustainable peace, it is equally important
to ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to
conflict zones by the United Nations, in conformity
with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence, as well as the safe, voluntary and

42/42

03/05/2023

dignified return of the displaced population and the
preservation of cultural and religious heritage.
We believe that the New Agenda for Peace provides
a timely opportunity to address those and other
multifaceted contemporary challenges and to reinforce
the prevention toolbox of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Azerbaijan has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Gusman (Azerbaijan): We will not be replying
to insinuations by the representative of Armenia.
Azerbaijan is firm in its determination to
rehabilitate, reconstruct and reintegrate its conflictaffected territories, ensure a safe and dignified return
of refugees and internally displaced persons, advance
the normalization agenda for the sake of peace, stability
and well-being for all peoples in our region and prevent
and eliminate, by all legitimate means, any threat to
the safety and well-being of its people and the State’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Proceeding from that position, Azerbaijan
constructively engages in the talks currently being held
in Washington, D.C. In that context, we categorically
reject all attempts by the representatives of Armenia to
impose false narratives and animosity.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

23-12613
