S/PRST/2001/7*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 March 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4290th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 March 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Letter dated 4
March 2001 from the Permanent Representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2001/191)”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the participation of the Foreign
Minister of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in its meeting on 7
March 2001 and carefully listened to him.
“The Security Council strongly condemns recent violence by ethnic
Albanian armed extremists in the north of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, in particular the killing of three soldiers of the armed forces of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in the area of Tanusevci. The Council
regrets that the violence continues and calls for an immediate end to it.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at those events, which
constitute a threat to the stability and security not only of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia but also of the entire region. It calls on all political
leaders in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Kosovo, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, who are in a position to do so to isolate the forces
behind the violent incidents and to shoulder their responsibility for peace and
stability in the region.
“The Security Council underlines the responsibility of the Government of
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for the rule of law in its territory.
It supports actions by the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to address the violence with an appropriate level of restraint and to
preserve the political stability of the country and foster harmony between all
ethnic components of the population.
“The Security Council recalls the need to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. In this
context it emphasizes that the border demarcation agreement, signed in Skopje
on 23 February 2001, and ratified by the Parliament of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia on 1 March 2001, must be respected by all.
* Reissued for technical reasons.

01-27744*S (E)

120301

S/PRST/2001/7

“The Security Council welcomes the steps taken by the international
security presence (KFOR) to control the border between Kosovo, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in
accordance with the military-technical agreement signed in Kumanovo on 9
June 1999. It welcomes the ongoing dialogue between the Government of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and KFOR on practical steps to
address the immediate security situation and to prevent crossing of the border
by extremists as well as possible violations of resolution 1160 (1998) of 31
March 1998. It welcomes the efforts of all relevant international organizations
in cooperation with the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to promote stability and to create conditions for a return of the
inhabitants to their homes.
“The Security Council will continue to follow the developments on the
ground closely, and requests to be briefed regularly on the outcome of the
efforts referred to above.”

2
