Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

council, with a view to devising satisfactory procedures
for the election of representatives to the council;
6. Recommends that the Administering- Authorities,
in consultation with the representativl':; of the peoples
concerned, extend the functions and powers of the joint
council to enable it to consider all aspects of the Ewe
and Togoland unification problem ancl to make recommendations thereon :
7. Recommends, in view of the urgency of this
problem, that the Trusteeship Council devote more intensive attention to all aspects of it affecting the two
Trust Territories;
8. Recommends further that the Trusteeship Council, at its tenth session, arrange for the dispatch to the
Trust Territories concerned of a special mission, or
alternatively, for its next periodic visiting mission to
these two Trust Territories to de·vote sufficient time to
the problem to study it thorougl. 1.". including the functioning of the proposed joint co111 ·ii, and to submit to
the Trusteeship Council a deta ilt,, report thereon, including specific recommendatiun~; 11 · :eh shall take full
account of the real wishes and 11,;,·, ,'.',1s of the peoples
concerned;
9. Requests the Trusteeship Council to instruct the
mission so dispatched to submit its report to the Council for consideration at its eleventh session;
10. Requests the Trusteeship Council to submit to
the General Assembly at its seventh regular session a
special report covering all aspects of the problem.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
556 (VI). Dissemination of information on the
United Nations and on the International
Trusteeship System in Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is essentia1 that the peoples of
Trust Territories should receive adequate information
concerning the p11rposes and operation of the United
Nations and of the International Trusteeship System
in particular,
Noting that the Trusteeship Council has instructed 13
the visiting missions to investigate on the spot the best
means of disseminating such information,
1. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
of Trust Territories take all appropriate steps to disseminate information on the United Nations, and on
the International Trusteeship System in particular,
among the population and in the schools, and report to
the Secretary-General details of such steps;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council include in its annual reports to the General Assembly all
particulars supplied on the subject, together with its
remarks.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
557 (VI). Educational advancement
Territories

in

Trust

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the speedy educational advancement
of the inhabitants of Trust Territories is essential for
11

See Trusteeship Council resolution 311 (VIII).

57

the attainment of the objectives of the International•
Trusteeship System,
Recognizing that the United Nations has a ~pec_ial
responsibility towards the inhahitanb of the Terntones
under the International Trusteeship System,
Desirous of giving all possible assistance to the edt!cational advancement of the illhabitants of these Terntories,
Recalling that, by resolution 110 (V) of 19 J_uly
1949, the Trusteeship Council urged that all possible
steps be taken to make available to qualified s_tudents
from Trust Territories fellowships, scholarships and
internships which have been or may be establi~hed by
the United Nations or by its specialized agencies, and
recalling that by the same resolution the Council invited the Administering Authorities to give full publicity with rega_rd to all fell?wshi_ps, schola1~ships and
internships available to the mhab1tants of 1 rust Territories,
1 Invites Member States of the United Nations to
make available, to qualified students from Trust Territories fellowships, scholarships and internships, and to
notify the Trusteeship Council concerning the avai_lability of such fellowships, scholarships and internsh1ps
in public as well as private institutions;
2. Invites the Trusteeship Council to request the
Secretary-General, having in mind the procedures of
the Expanded Programme of Tech~ical Assista1;c~ and
the machinery of the Technical Assistance Admm1stration, to make such arrangements as may be necessary
to ensure the efficient administration of all offers of
scholarships, fellowships and internships for inhabitants
of Trust Territories that may be made;
3. Requests further that the Trusteeship Counc!l
invite the Administering Authorities concerned to avail
themselves of such scholarships, fellowships and internships in accordance with procedure to be devised ~nd
give full publicity with regard to such fe!lowsh1ps,
scholarships and internships in their respective Trust
Territories;
4. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to give all appropriate
assistance in the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report with
regard· to these matters to the General Assembly at its
next regular session.
361st plenary mreting,
18 January 1952.
558 (VI). Attainment by the Trust Territories
of the obj~tive of self-government or independence

The General Assembly,
Considering that in the case of only one Trust Territory, namely Somaliland under Italian administration,
the Trusteeship Ag-reement provides, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 289A (IV) of 21
November 1949, for a specific period of ten years at
the end of which the Trust Territory shall be an independent sovereign State,
Considering that under Article 76 b of the Charter
one of the basic objectives of the International Trustee-
