V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting that studies and projections of long-~e~m
trends and their implications for development pohc1es
will be considered by the Committec for Dcvelopment
Planning at its fourteenth session,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of t~e
Secretary-General on long-term trends in the econom1c
development of the various regions of the world_ and
their mutual relationship and studies of the regional
commissions annexed thereto, 21 prepared in accordance
with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution
3508 (XXX);
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2090 (LXIII), in particular paragraph 4 thereof,
which contains the rccommcndation to start, on thc
basis of the regional studies under ~ay, prepa~ations
for the elahoration of an over-all soc10-econom1c perspective of the development of the world economy up
to the year 2000, with special cmphasis _on the ye_ars
up to 1990 and on the problems of dcvelopmg countnes;
3. Reafjirms the necessity to take into account, as
appropriate, regional and global long-term prospects
for economic and social development during thc preparatory process for, and in the elaboration of, the
new international development strategy;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through
the Economic and Social Council, the progress report
referred to in Council resolution 2090 (LXIII);
5. Decides to consider the status of the examination of long-term economic trends at its thirty-fourth
session as a separate agenda ítem;
6. Invites all States, as well as the concerned organizations, organs and bodies within the United Nations system, to reply to requests for information which
may be made in the course of the implementation of
the present resolution.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/92.

Assistance to the Comoros

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 42 of 1 December 1976
relating to assistance to the Comoros, in which it requested thc Secretary-General to mobilize financia!,
technical and economic assistancc from the international
community, particularly from the developed countries
and the appropriatc organizations within the United
Nations system, with a view to meeting the short-tcrm
and long-term development nceds of this ncwly independcnt country,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 15 6 of 21 December
1976, in which it recommended spccific action by the
developed countries in favour of devcloping island
countries,
Having regard to thc particularly exceptional circumstances in which the Comoros acceded to independence
on 6 July 1975,
Taking note of the island character of this developing country and of the serious economic situation with
which it had to <leal immediately after its accession to
independence,
21 E/5937 and Corr.1, E/5937/Add.l and Corr.1 and 2,
E/5937 / Add.2-4 and Add.4/Corr. l.

79

Having regard to Economic and Social Council dec~sion 25 2 (LXIII) of 29 July I 977, in which the ~ouncil
took note, ínter alia, of the vicw of the Comm1ttce for
Dcvelopment P!anning 22 conccrning the inclusion of
thc Comoros in the Iist of thc least dcveloped countries, 2 :1
H aving regare! to thc vcry substantial sacrificc_s made
by thc Government a_nd peoplc o~ t~e C?mº:ºs m rcorganizing and improvmg the adm1111strat10n m both the
social and economic ficlds,
Noting the statement of the rcprcsentativc of the
Secrctary-Gcneral, which emphasized the urgency of
providing increased assistancc adapted to the real needs
of thc young rcpublic of thc Comoros, 24
Having studicd the report of the Secretary-General25
transmitting the report of the United Nations Mission
to the Comoros which revicws the extremely critica!
economic situation in the Comoros and contains, intcr
alia, a list and the cost of urgent projects formulated
by the Government of the Comoros that requirc intcrnational assistancc,
1. Endorses the assessment and recommendations
of thc United Nations Mission to thc Comoros; 2 n
2. Draws the atte11tion of the intcrnational community to the critical budgctary situation confronting the
Comoros;
3. Ca/ls thc attention of the international community to the Iist of urgcnt projects submitted by thc Government of thc Comoros for financing, 27 as described
in thc report transmitted by the Secretary-General;
4. Urges Mcmber States and regional and intergovernmental organizations to respond generously and
to continuc to provide the Comoros with the cconomic,
financia! and material assistance necessary to meet the
cost of the projects and other measures referred to in
the report of thc Mission;
5. Urges the specialized agencies and othcr organizations of the United Nations system-in particular
the Unitcd Nations Development Programme, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Developmcnt,
the Intcrnational Monctary Fund, the Food and Agriculturc Organization of the United Nations, the Internation:d Fund for Agricultura! Devclopment, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
Unitcd Nations Children's Fund and the Unitcd Nations
Educational, Scicntific and Cultural Organization-to
grant incrcased assistancc to the Comoros and to coopcratc with the Secretary-General in organizing an
cficctivc intcrnational programme of assistance to that
country;
6. Decides to include the Comoros in thc list of
the léast developed countries;
7. Exprcsses its deep satisfaction regarding thc
measures taken by the Secrctary-General to organize
an cffective programmc of international assistance to
the Comoros;
8. Notes with appreciation the assistance already
providcd or pledged to the Comoros by Member States,
22 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5939 and Corr.1 ),
para. 83.
2 3 See resolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
24 O/]icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Second Committee, 41st meeting, paras. 9-12.
25 A/32/208 and Add.1 and 2.
205ee A/32/208/Add.1 and 2.
:!7 A/32/208/Add.l, annex I.

General Assembly-Thirty-seeond Session

80

regional and intergovernmental organizations and the
organizations of thc United Nations system;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b)
To ensure that adequate financia! and budgetary arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of resources and to co-ordinate the international
programme of assistance to the Comoros;
(e) To arrange for a revicw of the economic situation in the Comoros in time for thc matter to be considcred by the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth session;
( d) To keep the situation in the Comoros under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financia!
institutions, and to report on the question to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
1O1 st plenary meeting
13 Deccmber 1977

32/93.

Assistance to Djihouti

The General Assembly,
Having warmly welcomed the admission of the Republic of Djibouti to the United Nations, 28
Taking note of the statement made by the President
of the Republic of Djibouti in the General Assembly 29
on the economic difficulties confronting his country,
A ware of the fact that Djibouti has to tackle certain
specific tasks deriving from its reccnt accession to independencc,
Aware also of the need for the improvement and
enlargement of the social and economic infrastructure
of Djibouti,
Deeply concerned at the situation prevailing in the
country, aggravated by drought and other factors seriously affecting its economic and social life,
Recalling also the recent surveys carried out by the
United Nations with a vicw to assessing Djibouti's
short-term and long-term needs,
Further recalling its rcsolution 3421 (XXX) of 8
December 1975 on the implcmentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independencc to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies and other organizations within thc
United Nations systcm to extend-assistancc to the newly
independent and emerging States,
Recalling recommendation 99 (IV) of 31 May 1976
adopted by the United Nations Confcrencc on Tradc
and Development at its fourth session, 30 held at Nairobi
from 5 to 31 May 1976,
Noting that Djibouti is not included in the list of thc
28 Resolution 32/1.
29

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 3rd meeting, paras. 122-194.
30
See Proceedings of tlze United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publicatíon, Sales No. E.76.IT.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

least developed countries 81 or in the list of the most
seriously affected countries, 32
1. Strongly appeals to Member States and to the
international institutions concerned-in particular thc
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme-to give effective and
sustained assistance to the Government of Djibouti so
as to enable it to deal successfully with the critica!
situation arising from the drought and the economic
difficulties which that country is experiencing;
2. Requests the Sccretary-General to mobilize financia!, technical and economic assistancc from the
international community, particularly from the developed countries and compctent agencies of the United
Nations, in arder to mect the short-term and long-term
development necds of this newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning to treat as a priority matter at its fourteenth session
and to give favourable consideration to the inclusion
of Djibouti in thc list of the least developed countries
and to submit its conclusions to the Economic and
Social Council at its sixty-fifth session;
4. Invites in the meantime Member Statcs, particularly the developed countries, and United Nations
agencies to grant Djibouti, in view of its difficult cconomic situation, the same favourable treatmcnt as is
cnjoyed by the least dcvcloped among the developing
countries;

5. Strongly recommends that Djibouti should be
included in thc list of the most seriously affected countries;
6. Rcquests the Secretary-General to keep the question under revicw and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implemcntation of
t he present rcsolution.
1O1st plenary meeting
13 Deccmber 1977
32/94.

Assistancc to Ton~a

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the International Development Stratcgy for the Second Unitcd Nations Developmcnt Decade, and 2768 (XXVI) of 18 November 1971 on
the identification of thc Icast developed among the
dcveloping countries,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1726 (LIII) of 28 July 1972, in which the
Council, ínter afia, requcsted the Committce for Devclopment Planning to undertake an examination of
thc latest available statistical information on the relevant
cconomic, social and other variables in respect of the
dcvcloping countries, with a vicw to making recomrncndations to thc Council on any modification that
might appear necessary in the list of thc lcast developcd countries on the basis of the critcria uscd in
drawing up the list,
Bearing in mi11d its resolution 3487 (XXX) of 12
Deccmber 1975 by which certain countries were added
to the list of thl' least developed countries,
:n See n:solutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
2
:: Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Su¡,plemrnt No. 2 J (A/3 l /21), annex IV.
