A /67/PV.75

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

75th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 1 May 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Momen
(Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/67/693/Add.11)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/67/693/Add.11, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/67/693/Add.10, Zimbabwe has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the United Nations
Charter. May I take it that the General Assembly takes
due note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I now draw the attention
of the General Assembly to draft resolution A/67/L.62,
circulated under agenda item 103, “Crime prevention
and criminal justice”. Members will recall that the
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
103 at its 60th plenary meeting, on 20 December 2012.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft

resolution, it will be necessary to reopen consideration
of agenda item 103. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to reopen agenda item 103?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will further
recall that at its 2nd plenary meeting on 21 September
2012, the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda
item 103 to the Third Committee. In order to enable the
General Assembly to take action expeditiously on the
document, may I also take it that the Assembly wishes
to consider agenda item 103 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 103 (continued)
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Draft resolution (A/67/L.62)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on the draft resolution contained in
document A/67/L.62.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that paragraph 9 of the draft resolution issued
on the Official Document System contains editorial
changes. I have been informed by the Secretariat that
those editorial changes will be reversed and that the
language in paragraph 9 of document A/67/L.62 will
be the same as in the original document submitted by
the President. The language in paragraph 9 should read
as follows:

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-31980 (E)

*1331980*

A/67/PV.75

“Requests the President of the General Assembly
to draw up a list of representatives of other relevant
non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, the private sector and the media
active in combating trafficking in persons, taking
into account the principle of transparency and the
principle of equitable geographical representation,
to submit the proposed list to Member States for
their consideration on a non-objection basis and
to bring the list to the attention of the General
Assembly”.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.62, entitled “Modalities, format and
organization of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/67/L.62?
Draft A/67/L.62 resolution was adopted (resolution
67/260).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): The high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons will be an opportunity to assess the
national, regional and international efforts to combat
the despicable phenomenon of trafficking in persons.
As a party to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, Israel attaches great
importance to the fight against trafficking in persons
and therefore joined the consensus on resolution
67/260. However, my delegation would like to register
its discontent over the wording of paragraph 9 on
the participation of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) .
Israel appreciates the tremendous effort and
leadership of the facilitators, Ambassador Martin Sajdik
of Austria and Ambassador Antonio Pedro Monteiro
Lima of Cape Verde. However, we were dismayed by the
manner in which some delegations insisted on limiting
NGO participation at the 13 May high-level meeting.
While those delegations declared for the record during
the negotiations that they recognized the important work

2

being done by NGOs, they still insisted on restrictive
language with regard to civil society participation.
We were deeply concerned that the participation of
civil society and other important stakeholders would
be considered on a non-objection basis, contravening
basic principles of due process, fairness, transparency
and accountability. As we emphasized throughout the
negotiation process, the final decision on civil society
participation rests with the General Assembly as a
whole and not with any one State. Blocking NGOs
without giving any justification and without allowing
the Assembly to make that decision, as has been done
several times, is simply not acceptable.
Israel strongly believes that the high-level meeting
should be a platform for all relevant stakeholders to
express their views and exchange best practices. NGOs
operate on the ground in every corner of the globe, and
are crucial players in the fight against trafficking in
persons in the developed and developing worlds alike.
I would like to end by quoting the Secretary-General,
who said as long ago as 2009:
“Our times demand a new definition
of leadership — global leadership. They
demand a new constellation of international
cooperation — Governments, civil society and the
private sector, working together for a collective
global good.”
It is time that the General Assembly embraced the
Secretary-General’s vision.
Ms. Belskaya (Belarus): Belarus welcomes
the consensus adoption today of resolution 67/260
on the modalities of the high-level meeting on the
appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons. I would like to
thank the facilitators, Mr. Martin Sajdik, Permanent
Representative of Austria, and Mr. Antonio Pedro
Monteiro Lima, Permanent Representative of Cape
Verde, for facilitating the process. I would also like to
thank the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
New York for its substantive support.
Three years ago, the collective commitment to fight
the modern form of slavery known as human trafficking
led United Nations Member States to adopt the Global
Plan of Action, aimed at enforcing and strengthening
cooperation at every level to prevent and combat human
trafficking and to promote and protect the human rights
and social development of victims. Unfortunately, the
informals on the resolution demonstrated a disturbing

13-31980

A/67/PV.75

trend when some delegations, in trying to eliminate the
non-objection procedure from the draft resolution and
thereby undermine the principle of sovereign equality,
a cornerstone of the Charter of the United Nations,
created a dangerous basis for interference in the
national sovereignty of Member States. We believe that
such an approach is unacceptable, and in this particular
case could breed misunderstanding in international
cooperation on combating trafficking in persons.
We should keep in mind that, as key players in
the fight against modern slavery, Member States
take centre stage. At the same time, the process of
combating trafficking is based on the crucial premise
that the coordinated participation of all partners,
including civil society, is key. Thanks to our facilitators
and those delegations whose commitment to fighting
trafficking led to certain compromises, the consultative
process ultimately resulted in a balanced resolution
providing ample opportunity for participation in the
high-level meeting by all stakeholders, including
non-governmental organizations involved in fighting
trafficking in persons.
The concern of Belarus during the process of
informals and today, less than two weeks before the
event, is that the procrastination in the negotiations
could have a negative impact on preparations for
the high-level meeting, as the first event on human
trafficking at such a level and of such a scope ever to be
organized at the United Nations. Belarus believes that
if countries of origin, transit or destination of victims of
trafficking decide to take part in the meeting at a high
political level, they will send to voters a much-needed
and timely signal that their national Governments do
not just talk but have the necessary will and resolve
to work together to put an end to this horrible crime.
In that regard, Belarus would like to appeal to all
delegations to do their best to work with their capitals
to persuade high-level decision-makers to attend this
event by convincing them of the supreme moral urgency
of a cause that will bring us together.
Mr. Dempsey (Canada): Canada would like to
express its appreciation for the hard work done by
the representatives of Austria and Cape Verde on the
important resolution 67/260, and we look forward to
participating in the upcoming high-level meeting. We
emphasize that the Canadian Government is firmly
committed to the global fight against human trafficking
and is stepping up its efforts to address this heinous
crime in Canada and abroad.

We are, however, disappointed that the General
Assembly has been slowly moving away from its past
practice regarding the participation of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in United Nations events. This
trend, evidenced by the emergence of non-objection
language on NGO participation, appears to be a shift
away from ensuring a transparent and open selection
process for the participation of NGOs without Economic
and Social Council consultative status. While Canada
agrees that Member States should be consulted in the
selection process for NGOs without such consultative
status, we also believe that NGOs should participate in
United Nations events on the basis of their relevance to
the subject matter under consideration. But allowing any
one State to block the participation of an organization for
reasons unrelated to that organization’s relevance, and
potentially against the will of the General Assembly, is
not in accordance with the principles of accountability
or transparency.
Canada will continue to work with all Member
States to advance the principles of clarity and
transparency in United Nations processes and events,
and we urge others to adhere to the same principles for
future events.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
We would like to offer our thanks and deep appreciation
to the facilitators, Ambassador Monteiro Lima of Cape
Verde and Ambassador Sajdik of Austria, and their teams
for their tireless efforts to facilitate the discussions of
resolution 67/260, and for their outstanding work in
conducting the consultation process in a very open and
transparent manner.
The high-level meeting will provide a forum for
appraising, in the context of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, the
progress achieved in the implementation of the relevant
legal instruments, as well as for exchanging experiences
and best practices in the prevention and prosecution of
human trafficking and the protection and assistance
of victims. We regret the fact that the resolution does
not identify more clearly the protocol for preventing,
suppressing and punishing trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. It is the most important relevant
instrument, and we should not disregard the importance
that the Global Plan of Action itself attaches to the

13-319803

A/67/PV.75

promotion, universality and implementation of the
Convention.
At the outset, we expressed our preference for
avoiding this modalities resolution and the lengthy
discussions that ensued. We would have liked to focus
our energies on preparing for the event, which shall take
place in the coming days. We were deeply disappointed
by the reluctance shown by some Member States to
ensure the full participation of representatives of civil
society at the meeting, and to provide transparency in
the way that relevant, non-accredited non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) would be allowed to participate.
We firmly believe that maintaining a strong and open
dialogue with relevant civil society groups should be
a key element, especially in the area of trafficking,
where the work and action of civil society can make a
significant difference to the victims.
For that reason, throughout the consultations on
the resolution we consistently promoted, as we have in
other instances, the idea that the process of admission of
NGOs to participate in the meeting should be completely
transparent and allow for the full involvement of the
General Assembly. In that regard, the Assembly should
not deviate from the spirit of and procedures laid out in
guiding resolution 1996/31 of the Economic and Social
Council, which provides for full transparency at all
stages of the accreditation process.
It is our interpretation of paragraph 9 of resolution
67/260 that Member States will receive full information
and that, based on this, the General Assembly will be
able to make a final decision on the presence of civil
society representatives or specific NGOs.
We hope that a more constructive approach will be
shown by all Member States in future discussions on
civil society participation at the United Nations. We will
remain strongly committed to ensuring an improved,
more open and transparent process for the selection
of NGOs participating in specific United Nations
meetings. We look forward to a successful and fully
inclusive discussion during the high-level meeting.
Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the adoption of resolution 67/260 on the
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons.
These days, global human trafficking is rampant.
China attaches great importance to combating
4

trafficking in persons. As this year marks the tenth
anniversary of the entry into force of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
China supports the holding of a high-level meeting of
the General Assembly to evaluate the implementation
of the Global Plan of Action so as to bolster the joint
efforts of the international community to combat
trafficking in persons. China is convinced that, with
the efforts of all the parties concerned, the high-level
meeting will be crowned with success.
The adoption of resolution 67/270, which is a
routine procedural resolution, should have been a
routine matter. However, the consultations leading
up to it were fraught with unimaginable difficulties,
complications and setbacks. Why was that? The
sole reason is that certain parties disregarded the
regulations and institutional arrangements established
with regard to the participation of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly, repeatedly challenged the principle
regarding NGOs without consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council participating in the
high-level meeting of the Assembly, and repeatedly
attempted to politicize the issue of such participation
by NGOs. Such practices are totally unacceptable to the
majority of Member States, including China.
China has consistently supported NGO participation
in and contributions to the work of the United Nations
in accordance with United Nations rules of procedure.
However, China must point out that the United Nations
is an intergovernmental Organization comprised of
sovereign States. The principle of the non-objection
procedure is meant to safeguard the intergovernmental
nature of the United Nations and the sacred sovereign
right of Member States to consider and decide on the
participation of NGOs in the work of the United Nations,
and to preserve the established rules of procedure of
the United Nations. The notion that that principle would
prevent NGOs from participating in the activities of the
United Nations is based on an erroneous interpretation
and deliberate distortion of that principle. It is,
moreover, an affront to Member States and a challenge
to their sovereignty. China resolutely rejects that notion.
On that basis, the Chinese delegation would like to
sincerely thank all Member States, including the Group
of African States, that demonstrated their support for the
principle of the non-objection procedure, and for their
adherence to that principle and their outspoken defence
of the sovereignty of Member States and the established

13-31980

A/67/PV.75

principles of the United Nations. China admires them
all for their perseverance and their courage.

above such debates, which clearly affect the ability of
the United Nations to work towards its objectives.

To conclude, China would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly and his Office for the leading
role they played throughout process. China would also
like to thank the representatives of Cape Verde and
Austria for the tremendous amount of consultative
work they undertook. China would further like to thank
Belarus for introducing this important resolution. The
Chinese delegation hopes that the high-level meeting
will meet with success and pledges its willingness to
actively participate in the work of the meeting.

Finally, we would like to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Austria and Cape Verde for their
work to find a lasting solution during the negotiations
on this resolution. We also thank the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime for its work in this area and
its preparations for the high-level meeting.

Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): The Mexican delegation believes in the great
importance of resolution 67/270 on preparations for the
high-level meeting to follow up and appraise the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, to be held on 13 and 14 May. We hope that,
despite the limited amount of time remaining, we will
be able to organize a meeting that will help us to make
progress towards achieving the goals of the Global
Plan and promote an exchange of information and good
practices to address the issue of trafficking in persons.
As we have said before, one of the fundamental
issues in organizing high-level meetings of the General
Assembly is the participation of civil society and
non-governmental organizations. With respect to the
issue before us, civil society organizations have played
a very relevant role in preventing the trafficking of
persons, providing care to victims and furthering the
work of the United Nations to combat this scourge.
Once again, the delegation of Mexico reiterates its
commitment to the broadest possible participation of
civil society representatives, who are key players in our
deliberations. Therefore, we regret that paragraph 9 of
the resolution just adopted seeks to limit the participation
of such organizations, submitting them exclusively to
the process of non-objection by Member States without
also considering the crucial principle of due process. We
believe that the principle of transparency should guide
all of our actions and that its mention in paragraph 9
means that the General Assembly will be informed of
the list of all civil society organizations that wish to
participate in the high-level meeting.
We hope that in the future we will be able to
follow a coherent practice based on the principles of
due process and transparency in order to finally rise

Ms. Mballa Eyenga (Cameroon): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
African States, following the adoption of resolution
67/270 on the modalities, format and organization of
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons.
The African Group would like to express its
gratitude to the two facilitators of the resolution on
the modalities, format and organization of the highlevel meeting, Ambassador Martin Sajdik, Permanent
Representative of Austria, and Ambassador Antonio
Pedro Monteiro Lima, Permanent Representative
of Cape Verde, as well as their dedicated teams, for
their efforts to come up with a text acceptable to all
delegations and groups. The Group would like to thank
them for their facilitation, which helped to bridge the
different positions expressed during the difficult and
sensitive negotiations. They succeeded in bringing the
Member States and different groups together in the end,
and we thank them for that.
The African Group’s position on the selection of
non-governmental organizations to participate in the
work of the United Nations is well known. The African
Group would like to state that while the resolution
adopted today is not perfect, in the spirit of compromise
it is acceptable to the Group.
The African Group has always committed itself
to fostering cooperation among States Members of the
United Nations. The Group believes, in that regard,
that what is important is to give an opportunity
to all stakeholders to engage in discussions on the
achievements, gaps and challenges in the implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons and on the contributions, efforts
and best practices in the fight against trafficking in
persons.
The Group would like to recall that it has been
a long road filled with obstacles, challenges and

13-319805

A/67/PV.75

stumbling blocks, as well as significant achievements,
since our African leaders worked with determination
from Sharm el-Sheikh — where they adopted a
decision during the African Union summit, in June and
July 2008, to work together towards the adoption of the
Global Plan of Action, which was also supported by the
Non-Aligned Movement a year later — to New York,
where the General Assembly adopted the Global Plan
of Action (resolution 64/293) in July 2010.
The African Group would like at this stage to
express and reiterate its disappointment concerning
the date of the meeting scheduled for 13 to 14 May.
That date coincides with the annual African Union
summit scheduled to take place in Addis Ababa, and
we are concerned that the timing may not allow the
desired high-level participation of African delegations.
Nevertheless, the African Group is committed to
participating in the high-level meeting.
The Group remains committed to the fight against
organized crime, particularly trafficking in persons and
all other issues linked to it, such as ending victimization,
prosecuting perpetrators, preventing and protecting all
people from falling into the hands of organized crime
gangs, compensating victims and supporting national
efforts and relevant organizations in their work towards
that end.
The African Group would like to reiterate its
support to the universally approved mechanism for
coordinating all our efforts — national, regional
and international — on behalf of the Global Plan
of Action against trafficking, which acts not only as
a coordinating mechanism for all States Members of
the United Nations, but also as a strategic framework
within which the international community can work
coherently towards preventing and fighting trafficking
in persons, as well as for the relevant existing
international instruments, including, the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
The Global Plan of Action is not an exclusive
instrument to Member States and the United Nations
system. It belongs to all and should be fully and
effectively implemented by all actors — international
organizations; civil society, including non-governmental
organizations; and the private sector — that have a great
role to play in the fight against trafficking in persons.
The African Group is committed to working with all
6

stakeholders in fighting the scourge of trafficking in
persons, and will be more than proud to cooperate
and collaborate with all of them to ensure a successful
outcome for the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
Mrs. Robl (United States of America): We
would first like to add our thanks to our colleagues
Ambassador Martin Sajdik of Austria and Ambassador
Antonio Pedro Monteiro Lima of Cape Verde for their
facilitation of discussions of the modalities of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. The United States Government
will participate actively in that special meeting of the
General Assembly, which will evaluate progress to date
on meeting the goals outlined in the 2010 Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
In the spirit of strengthened partnerships,
coordination and cooperation among all relevant
stakeholders, throughout the negotiations on resolution
67/260 we underscored the important role that
non-governmental and civil society organizations
(NGOs), including those that do not have consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, should
play through their participation in the high-level
meeting. NGOs, civil society organizations, academic
institutions and private sector organizations worldwide
play a crucial role in combatting trafficking in persons,
and that role is emphasized in the Global Plan of Action.
It is often the non-governmental organizations
without consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council that stand on the front lines and
provide needed services for trafficked victims. Their
experience and expertise are essential to the success of
the high-level meeting and future events. The process
of admission for civil society organizations, including
non-governmental organizations, to participate in the
high-level meeting must be completely transparent. We
appreciate the consensus that was forged in that regard.
We also understand paragraph 9 to enable the
General Assembly to give consideration to any possible
objections made by Member States. We underscore that
non-governmental organizations must not be denied
access to United Nations forums for political reasons.
The high-level meeting will have a far greater value if
all relevant concerned civil society voices are heard
without objection.

13-31980

A/67/PV.75

Each special session, high-level meeting or
conference is a little different, so as we gain experience
with various formulas, we expect to refine and develop
our modalities, language and implementation to
provide better for appropriate civil society access and
participation in United Nations work. The United States
looks forward to continued cooperation to make the
high-level meeting a forward-looking and productive
one.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am making an
explanation of position after the adoption of resolution
67/260 on behalf of Liechtenstein, Norway and my own
country, Switzerland.
Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland would
like to commend the facilitators, Ambassador Antonio
Pedro Monteiro Lima and Ambassador Martin Sajdik,
for their unwavering efforts in providing guidance in
the consultations on the resolution and in leading the
resolution to a consensus adoption. We welcome the
purpose of the resolution and reaffirm our commitment
to the fight against trafficking in persons. The highlevel meeting, to be held on 13 May 2013, will
present an important opportunity to take stock of the
state of implementation of Member States’ political
commitments and legal obligations in the fight against
trafficking in persons.
However, with regard to inclusive stakeholder
participation in the high-level meeting itself,
Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland are concerned
about the reluctance to fully apply the principles
of transparency and due process in allowing the
participation
of
interested
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) without consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council and the wider
civil society. In our view, the activities of civil
society, in particular of representatives of victims,
grassroots organizations and small non-governmental
organizations, in the fight against trafficking in persons
are key, and their contributions to the discussions of
the General Assembly therefore most valuable. For that
reason, it is important to grant them an appropriate
role in the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
Throughout the consultation process on the
modalities resolution, we advocated for a transparent
and open process to allow for the participation of
interested NGOs and civil society — a process that
accords a role not only to individual Member States

but to the General Assembly as a whole when the list
proposed by the President of the General Assembly is
being consulted and decided upon. We deeply regret
that it was not possible to build on a procedure adopted
by the General Assembly earlier this year that would
have allowed for greater transparency and due process.
Let me put on record that Liechtenstein, Norway and
Switzerland understand the meaning of the language
in paragraph 9 of resolution 67/260, which we have
just adopted, as follows. After consultations among
Member States on the proposed NGOs and civil society
stakeholders, the General Assembly will have the
possibility to consider the list of relevant stakeholders
and possible objections made by Member States. We
understand that the General Assembly is the legitimate
body to take a final decision on the participation of
relevant stakeholders in the high-level meeting.
Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland will
continue to support the important role we attach
to NGOs and wider civil society in general on this
particular subject. We will therefore continue to engage
in dialogue with Member States to develop appropriate
standards in that regard.
Ms. Hewanpola (Australia): I would like to thank
the Ambassadors of Austria and Cape Verde for their
dedicated efforts to bring about consensus among
delegations on the modalities for the upcoming highlevel meeting on trafficking in persons. It has not been
an easy task.
This issue is one to which Australia attaches great
importance, and we look forward to participating
actively in the high-level meeting and to furthering the
global fight to end this horrific practice. With respect,
however, to the model provided in resolution 67/260
for the participation of civil society organizations, we
would like to register our concern that this formulation
places unnecessary restrictions on the ability of
non-governmental organizations without consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council to
participate in the meeting.
On an issue such as trafficking in persons, which
is often an invisible crime, and where victims are kept
far from sight, it is the work of grassroots civil society
organizations that is most effective in helping victims
of trafficking, and in turn breaking the trade. In that
context, we consider the participation of civil society
in the high-level meeting to be particularly critical to
informing our global efforts.

13-319807

A/67/PV.75

Australia strongly values the participation of civil
society organizations in all of our deliberations at the
United Nations. We consider it particularly valuable in
the context of our efforts to promote and protect the
human rights of all persons. Civil society organizations
enrich our understanding of the issues and, as a
consequence, the decisions we take, our actions and our
achievements. An open model to ensure civil society
participation based on the principles of transparency
must be upheld.
We look forward to continuing our efforts to
support and strengthen the participation of civil society
organizations in United Nations forums going forward.
Ms. Murillo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica expresses its gratitude to the facilitators,
the Ambassadors of Austria and Cape Verde, and
their teams for their hard work in search of consensus.
We also thank all delegations that participated in the
negotiations for their flexibility, which allowed us to
attain today’s result.
For my country, combating trafficking in persons
is a matter of priority, as reflected in our 2013
legislation on this issue. We therefore view it as an
urgent priority to finalize the organizational details

8

for the high-level meeting. We would have preferred
to see more specific language on the transparency
that should characterize the accreditation process for
non-governmental organizations without consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council. All
States, non-governmental organizations and the public
in general must have equal access to information
with regard to which organizations are interested in
participating, whether there are objections to their
participation, and on what basis, as well as with regard
to the final list of participating organizations.
We firmly believe that transparency will only
benefit our work and give us the chance to hear the
diverse voices of the organizations working in this field
on the ground. We hope to have a successful meeting
that will allow us to strengthen the strategies and
partnerships for preventing trafficking in persons and
protecting the human rights of its victims.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote. The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 103.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

13-31980
