United Nations

S/PV.3499

Security Council

Provisional

Fiftieth Year

3499th Meeting
Wednesday, 8 February 1995, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Merafhe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Botswana)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sersale di Cerisano
Mr. He Yafei
Mr. Kovanda
Mr. Mérimée
Mr. Graf zu Rantzau
Mr. Martínez Blanco
Mr. Wisnumurti
Mr. Ferrarin
Mr. Gambari
Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Bakuramutsa
Mr. Plumbly
Mr. Gnehm

Agenda
The situation in Angola
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) (S/1995/97
and Add.1)

95-85125 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
Verification Mission (UNAVEM
S/1995/97 and Addendum 1.

II),

documents

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II)
(S/1995/97 and Add.1)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Brazil, Guinea-Bissau, India, Kenya,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, the Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Senegal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zaire, Zambia
and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Moura
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. Valle (Brazil), Mr. Toure
(Guinea-Bissau), Mr. Sreenivasan (India), Mr.
Muthaura (Kenya), Mr. Qhobela (Lesotho), Mr.
Bwanali (Malawi), Mr. Afonso (Mozambique), Mr.
Gurirab (Namibia), Mr. Biegman (Netherlands), Mr.
Biørn Lian (Norway), Mr. Catarino (Portugal), Mr.
Cissé (Senegal), Mr. Nzo (South Africa), Mr. YañezBarnuevo (Spain), Mr. Osvald (Sweden), Mr. Fayala
(Tunisia), Mr Mwakawago (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. Lukabu Khabouji N'zaji (Zaire), Mr.
Mushota (Zambia) and Mr. Mumbengegwi (Zimbabwe)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola

2

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1995/117, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1994/1441 and S/1994/1451, letters dated 9 and
28 December 1994, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, concerning the
Lusaka Protocol;
S/1995/51, letter dated 17 January 1995 from the Chargé
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; and
S/1995/94, letter dated 30 January 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
the text of a message dated 24 January 1995 from the
President of the Republic of Angola addressed to the
Secretary-General.
The first speaker is the Minister for External
Relations of Angola, His Excellency Mr. Venâncio de
Moura. On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome him
and invite him to make his statement.
Mr. de Moura (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text furnished by the delegation): I begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on behalf of the Government of
the Republic of Angola and on my own behalf, on your
assumption for February of the presidency of this
important United Nations body, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
international security.
Let me also congratulate His Excellency Ambassador
Emilio Cárdenas, the outgoing President, on the way in
which he conducted the work of the Council last month.
Our warm congratulations go also to the newly
elected members of the Security Council, to which I wish
the best of success in their work in solving the numerous
problems that the international community is facing.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The presence in this Chamber of a ministerial
delegation from the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
composed of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of several
African countries, heartens us and further shows us that
African countries, whether independently or through their
continental organization the OAU, are deeply committed to
the search for solutions to the extremely serious problems
afflicting the African continent. We hail the presence of the
Foreign Ministers here today and thank them for their
gesture of solidarity with the Government and the people of
Angola, who aspire to peace and understanding.
Of late, Angola has been discussed extensively in this
important United Nations body because of the devastating
war that has lasted for several years, with respect to the
resolution of which the Security Council continues to make
an invaluable contribution.
At the last meeting of the Council devoted to the
situation in Angola, we described to members the efforts
that the Angolan Government and the international
community are making towards a negotiated solution of the
post-election crisis in Angola. Today, the situation in
Angola has evolved in a positive way, and there are
prospects for a lasting peace for the Angolan people. Over
two months have elapsed since the formal signing of the
Lusaka Protocol. Notwithstanding the understandably slow
pace of the process due to its complexity, we can state our
certainty that the implementation of the phases provided for
in the Lusaka Protocol is, from our point of view,
irreversible. This leads us to believe that, this time, peace
has come to stay.
Therefore, it is a pleasure for me to announce before
this forum that the current military situation on the ground
in Angola is calm. The cease-fire that entered into force on
22 November 1994 is being observed without any major
incidents. The minor incidents that have occurred are not
unusual in a sensitive process such as ours and, therefore,
are far from posing a threat to the success of the peace
process and cannot be used as a pretext for hindering or
delaying the completion of the steps set forth in the Lusaka
Protocol. The Joint Commission created under the Lusaka
Protocol is operating normally under the guidance of its
tireless Chairman, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, who has
made every effort to promote the full implementation of the
provisions of the Protocol.
As members know, the invitation addressed by His
Excellency President Jose Eduardo dos Santos to the leader
of Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA),

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
Mr. Jonas Savimbi, for a meeting within Angolan territory
and the acceptance of that invitation constitute another
positive step towards the creation of a climate of
confidence for the Angolan people and the international
community, which will help strengthen peace and national
reconciliation.
I stress that, with the letter the President sent to
Mr. Savimbi and Mr. Savimbi's recent response in which
he gave his agreement to the meeting — with proper
preparation — and took due account of his responsibility
for the meeting's taking place, the meeting could well
take place shortly.
The meetings of the military chiefs of staff of the
Government and of UNITA, held at Chipipa, Huambo
province, and at Waku-Kungo, Kuanza-Sul province,
constituted another important step towards building trust
between the two military forces, which in the near future
will form a single army under the command of a single
commander-in-chief. A practical result of these meetings
was the acceleration of the disengagement of Government
and UNITA forces in the areas in which they were in
direct contact, thus avoiding the risk of confrontation and
allowing the establishment of verification, monitoring and
control machinery, including a three-way communications
system, the beginnings of free movement of people and
goods, and the cessation of hostile propaganda between
the Government and UNITA.
The report of the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, on the evolution of the peace process in
Angola since the adoption of resolution 966 (1994)
clearly illustrates the situation as I have described it.
Taking into account the positive developments in the
process, which to some extent allay the concerns of the
Council as expressed in its resolution 966 (1994), my
Government considers that the conditions have been
created for the speedy constitution of a UNAVEM III
with a specific mandate as set forth in the Lusaka
Protocol, including technical, material and human
resources sufficient for it to carry out its mandate. The
creation and rapid deployment of UNAVEM III would be
one of the best ways to avoid the mistakes that were
made at the time of the implementation of the Bicesse
accords, thus avoiding the derailment of the process.
We are aware of the high costs involved in the
deployment of UNAVEM III, but, quoting His Excellency
President José Eduardo dos Santos,

3

Security Council
Fiftieth year
“these costs will be but a fraction of the cost of a war
and dealing with its victims”.
In this context, my Government wishes to emphasize
the need for the quick deployment of UNAVEM III,
because it alone — as we all know — will bear
responsibility for the quartering, disarming and selection of
UNITA troops that are to be integrated into the unified
national army of Angola and for the demobilization of the
excess military personnel that will be reintegrated into
civilian life after receiving vocational training.
My Government wishes to reaffirm that the Lusaka
Protocol signals the beginning of a decisive step towards
the definitive solution to the Angolan internal conflict, by
establishing a unique opportunity for eliminating completely
the threat of renewed war. At the same time, it has paved
the way for the normal functioning of the democratic
institutions that emerged from the multi-party elections,
which both the United Nations and the international
community declared to be free and fair.
The Lusaka Protocol thus creates prospects for the
exercise of democracy in Angola, a democracy free of
armed parties and one in which the will of the people,
expressed at the ballot box, will be respected. Under such
conditions, the Government of the Republic of Angola will
be in a position to concentrate all its efforts on the social
and economic development and well-being of all the
Angolan people. In order for us to fulfil this aspiration, it
is important that the international community should
continue to play its role in the consolidation of peace and
stability in Angola and discourage all those who plan to act
in a manner contrary to the spirit and the letter of the
Lusaka Protocol.
The Angolan Government believes that this meeting of
the Security Council, with the creation of UNAVEM III,
will open up a new phase, because it will spare the people
of Angola, who yearn for peace, more frustration. As to the
responsibilities of the Government, I wish to reiterate our
determination to make every effort to facilitate the tasks of
UNAVEM III by ensuring safety and providing the
necessary facilities for its work.
Though such an amount is unprecedented in the annals
of the Council's peace-keeping activities, my Government
estimates that the costs of the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol may be as much as $1.26 billion. As we have
previously stated, both here and at the bilateral level with
some of those present here today, that amount would cover
the following expenses: installation of UNAVEM III in

4

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
Angola; installation and temporary cantonment of UNITA
military personnel and their families; reconstruction of the
main airfields, railways, ports, roads, bridges, streets and
other infrastructure that will be used by the United
Nations troops — here I wish to state that, according to
studies carried out by my Government through its relevant
Ministries, there are at this time 109 destroyed bridges, a
number not equalled even in the colonial war;
resettlement of displaced persons, of whom there are
approximately 3.5 million in the country, victims of the
war; demobilization of excess military personnel, both of
UNITA and of the Government; social reintegration of
demobilized personnel, including technical vocational
training before reintegration into productive society;
re-establishment of the State administration in areas
previously under the control of UNITA forces, which,
under the provisions of Security Council resolution 864
(1993), will have to pull out of those areas; reconstruction
of the various kinds of infrastructure destroyed during the
war; and Government administration and communications.
Towards the amount I have referred to, and in order
to address the various points I have indicated, the
Government will immediately contribute approximately
$64.7 million in cash. This amount would be allotted as
follows: $15.5 million outlaid from the Government
budget for a residential compound; parking facilities;
harbour space for vessels; harbour and airport
warehouses,
including offices; and fuel and fuel
derivatives. This would include a 30 per cent discount on
international prices for incoming goods, exemption from
customs-clearance formalities, the granting of parcels of
land and so on. The disbursement of these amounts by the
Angolan Government will be facilitated if UNITA
completely disengages itself from the mining areas it
occupies in the province of Lunda, where it is illegally
mining diamonds.
Although there is a general climate of peace as far
as military activity is concerned and there is already free
movement of people and goods, the social and
humanitarian situation is still a matter of concern. The
consequences of the war are clearly evident. Other tasks
that we must carry out include reintegration of the excess
UNITA troops to be demobilized, various forms of
assistance to the millions of displaced persons and
refugees who are returning to their places of origin,
reconstruction of basic infrastructure and clearance of
land-mines.
Since this is a far-reaching humanitarian operation
that will include people from UNITA and other political

Security Council
Fiftieth year
parties within the framework of a true national
reconciliation, the international community is urged to play
an important role as part of this operation and not impose
conditions of various kinds. Peace is within our grasp; it is
close. Let us not focus on absurd or contradictory demands
different from positions already taken by the Assembly or
Council.
The mobilization of financial and humanitarian aid is
therefore a sine qua non for us to overcome the challenges
that we face under the present circumstances. In this
context, therefore, I launch an appeal to the international
community and to all governmental and non-governmental
organizations, asking them to continue, even more
vigorously, to lend their support, in all possible forms, to
the Angolan Government, which truly wants a lasting peace
for all Angolans so that conditions may be created for
beneficial cooperation with all Member States with which
the Government of Angola maintains relations.
I also wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Government and the people of Angola, to express our
gratitude for the generous humanitarian assistance that we
have so far received from various Governments, at the
bilateral and multilateral levels, specialized agencies in the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations.
Our special thanks go to those who have been directly
involved in the distribution of humanitarian aid to the
needy, very often at the risk of their own lives.
Before concluding, I reiterate the deep appreciation of
my Government to my colleagues the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs who, representing, firstly, the Organization of
African Unity and, secondly, their respective Governments,
travelled to New York to express their solidarity with the
people of Angola at this time when it is striving for a welldeserved and lasting peace. I assure Their Excellencies that
we will do honour to this gesture of solidarity by promising
to do everything in our power to fulfil the commitments we
entered into at Lusaka. I should like to reiterate once again
the deep gratitude of the Government of the Republic of
Angola for the tireless efforts they have made on behalf of
peace and national reconciliation in Angola. I extend our
gratitude also to all those countries that have already
indicated their willingness to contribute men, matériel and
other support to UNAVEM III. We hope that the adoption
at this meeting of the resolution establishing UNAVEM III
will be a step towards the definitive establishment of lasting
peace in Angola.

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
(spoke in French)
Lastly, we should like to express our concern with
regard to some paragraphs — specifically, paragraphs 6,
8 and 12 — in the draft resolution that is soon to be put
to the Council for adoption. Indeed, this concern was the
reason for our late arrival today. At the appropriate
moment, we shall put forward specific proposals to
improve the text. These will reflect a number of concerns
that we had already submitted for the consideration of the
President of our Republic, who called us this morning to
convey his concern in respect of the paragraphs I
mentioned just now.
The President: I thank the Minister of External
Relations of Angola for his kind words addressed to me.
I should like to inform members that I have received
a letter dated 8 February 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations. The
letter reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that during the
meeting of the Security Council devoted to
consideration of the situation in Angola, the Council
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to His Excellency Dr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, Secretary General of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU).”
This letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1995/123.
If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His
Excellency Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The next speaker is the Minister of External Affairs
of Malawi, His Excellency Mr. E. C. I. Bwanali. I
welcome His Excellency and invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Bwanali (Malawi): Allow me, Sir, to start by
congratulating your country on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February. My
delegation is particularly pleased to see you in the Chair,
and we are confident that the deliberations of the Council
will be ably and effectively guided and that fruitful results
will be achieved. We wish the representative of your

5

Security Council
Fiftieth year
country well as he carries out the many tasks that will
come before him during his tenure.
My delegation also wishes to congratulate his
predecessor in office for a marvellous job done during the
month of January.
I have the honour to speak before the Security Council
as leader of a delegation of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) Council of Ministers, made up of Foreign
Ministers from Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South
Africa and Zambia and representatives of Senegal and
Guinea-Bissau. In doing so, I should like to declare our full
support for the position of the Angolan Government, as so
clearly set out by its Foreign Minister, Mr. Venâncio de
Moura, on the subject now being considered by the
Council. However, each of the Ministers in my delegation
will be free to address the Security Council individually on
the issue under discussion. I wish also to acknowledge the
presence in our delegation of the representative of the
current Chairman of the OAU, the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Tunisia, who is also a member of our delegation.
We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General to the Council, which provides a very
clear, comprehensive and detailed account of the
developments that have taken place since the initialling of
the Lusaka Protocol on 31 October 1994. We are
particularly encouraged by the Secretary-General's
assessment and conclusions indicating that, despite some
infringements, the cease-fire provided for in the peace
agreement signed on 20 November 1994 is generally being
observed by all parties and that significant progress has
been achieved in the implementation of the Angolan peace
processes.
We concur with the Secretary-General's assessment.
However, it is the view of the OAU Council of Ministers
that these achievements need buttressing if the fragile peace
process in Angola is to be sustained. It is in this context
that my delegation has been mandated to come and convey
to the Security Council Africa's grave concern that, unless
urgent and appropriate measures are taken by the
international community, particularly the United Nations, to
sustain the current momentum, the entire peace process in
Angola could be seriously threatened.
There is an English saying, “once bitten, twice shy”.
And in the case of Angola, this saying, vis-à-vis
international involvement, would seem à propos. Indeed,
we can still recall how, nearly four years ago, when
everything seemed to be going well and peace appeared to

6

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
be holding, suddenly the guns came alive and, in a flash,
Angola slid back into a war even more vicious than that
previously experienced.
We can thus appreciate the concerns of those who
urge caution against any increased international
involvement until peace has been firmly established in
Angola. However, we are convinced that the situation is
different this time around and that the Angolan people are
tired of war.
It is now 80 days exactly since the Lusaka Protocol
was signed and 78 since the cease-fire came into effect.
In that period, the Angolan people have demonstrated
their earnest desire for peace, as confirmed by the
generally agreed assessment that, despite minor
infractions, the cease-fire is holding. Meanwhile, the two
parties — the Government of Angola and UNITA —
have continued their efforts to implement the other
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. For example, the military
commanders have met several times in the context of the
Joint Commission and, as the Foreign Minister of Angola
informed us today, the UNITA leader, Mr. Jonas Savimbi,
has now unconditionally agreed to meet the President of
Angola, Mr. José Eduardo dos Santos.
There is therefore a need for a clear demonstration
of firm international support and solidarity for the people
of Angola as they seek to build and consolidate the peace
based on the Lusaka Protocol. It is for this reason that my
delegation has come to urge the Council to facilitate the
speedy establishment and deployment of the enlarged
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III), one of the mechanisms provided for in
the Lusaka Protocol. In this connection, we are
encouraged by the apparent consensus amongst members
of the Security Council on the need for the speedy
establishment and deployment of UNAVEM III.
We have taken careful note of the concerns
expressed in the light of past experiences, especially in
respect of UNAVEM I, that we must “do it right this
time”. In this context, reference has been made to
paragraph 32 of the Secretary-General's report. Whilst we
concur fully with the need to do it right this time, it is
our view that the speedy deployment of the mechanisms
provided for in the Lusaka Protocol would serve as a
confidence-builder and encourage the parties concerned to
move forwards even further in implementing the
“Acordos de Paz”. It would also help to secure the
prevailing cease-fire, without which the fragile peace
process in Angola could collapse, with dire consequences.

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3499th meeting
8 February 1995

It is our conviction, therefore, that the speedy establishment
of UNAVEM III is the best way to ensure that, this time
around, we can “do it right”.

Despite discouraging set-backs in the past, the United
Nations has kept up its patient and persistent engagement
in Angola.

Before concluding, I wish to take this opportunity to
express my delegation's appreciation and gratitude for the
sympathetic understanding and cooperation we have
received from all those with whom we have had the chance
to hold consultations on the matter before this meeting. We
especially appreciate the understanding with which our
particular concerns in respect of the enabling draft
resolution — which the Council will be considering later
today — were received. We believe that this cooperation
has facilitated the presentation to the Council of an enabling
draft resolution which, whilst possessing some difficult
elements here and there, generally takes account of the
concerns of all the parties. It has been our concern that the
enabling resolution should not have so many
conditionalities that it becomes itself an impediment to the
advancement of the peace process. We believe that the draft
resolution before the Council today can be adopted by
consensus and we hope that it will be so adopted.

In Angola peace appears to be on the horizon. The
people of Angola seek peace. The cease-fire is generally
holding. There are prospects of a face-to-face meeting
between the President of Angola and Mr. Savimbi.

Members of the Council are called upon to take this
historic decision, one with enormous implications for the
future of political developments in Angola. We believe that
time and circumstances have presented the international
community with a rare opportunity to help bring about
permanent peace in Angola. It is in this respect that the
OAU Council of Ministers decided to send a delegation to
New York.
If this opportunity is allowed to slip away, posterity
will judge us very harshly. We owe it to the present and
future generations of Angolans to do right by them. It is
now all in the hands of the Council.
The President: I thank the Minister of External
Affairs of Malawi for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Sreenivasan (India): We are pleased to see you,
Sir, presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. It
is fitting and proper that it is under Botswana's presidency
that the Security Council will be approving the
establishment of the enlarged United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). This decision will
reflect the international community's continued concern for
and commitment to peace and reconciliation in Angola.

At this critical time, when we are on the threshold
of peace, it is important that the United Nations should
give a decisive and early push towards a final settlement.
This is the time to give a clear and unequivocal message
to those elements that might still have some doubts or
reservations about the future.
In his report, the Secretary-General has proposed the
phased deployment of troops and other personnel. There
should be adequate flexibility provided in this regard to
ensure that the progressive achievement of the tasks of
UNAVEM III is not delayed. We would also urge the
Security Council to keep the termination date of the
mission sufficiently flexible to ensure the fulfilment of the
objectives of the mission.
We wish to use this opportunity to appeal to His
Excellency Mr. Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi for
an early meeting between them. It is our fervent hope that
they will fulfil the expectations of the international
community and the Angolan people and display the
necessary political will to bring about political
reconciliation and trust at all levels to ensure the
establishment of a lasting peace and an end to all
bloodshed in Angola.
India has participated in the United Nations
peace-keeping operations in Angola ever since their
beginning in 1989. In the present phase we have already
deployed 16 military observers. Twenty civilian observers
will be joining them shortly. We have committed an
infantry battalion and an engineering support company for
UNAVEM III. All these units will come fully equipped,
and are ready for deployment. This is a reflection of our
earnest desire to help the international community to
restore peace and normality in a country with which India
has the friendliest of relations.
Besides this contribution of troops, India has an
ongoing bilateral programme of economic and technical
cooperation with Angola.

7

Security Council
Fiftieth year
India's contribution to UNAVEM III in Angola is part
of the long-term, consistent and principled support that my
country has extended to the cause of peace and security on
the African continent. India has been at the forefront of
United Nations peace-keeping operations, starting with
Congo and including Namibia, Mozambique, Somalia,
Liberia and Rwanda. India has always been in the forefront
of championing African causes of freedom, justice and
economic and social development.
The underlying cause of the recent conflict in Angola
and in other parts of Africa has to be attributed primarily
to the cold war. Fortunately, the cold war is over now.
Durable peace must now be established so that the
underlying problem of inadequate development can be
tackled as a top priority. This is also the surest way of
ensuring the establishment of sustained peace and prosperity
in Angola and elsewhere.
The President: I thank the representative of India for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): Allow me first, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council for the month of February
and to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Cárdenas, for
the excellent work he accomplished. I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to the ministerial delegation of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), under the leadership
of the Foreign Minister of Malawi, and to the Foreign
Minister of Angola; we listened to their interventions with
the closest attention.
In 1994 the grave humanitarian situation caused
Angola, together with Rwanda, to be the largest recipient of
Norwegian humanitarian aid. Angola's road to peace has
been long and arduous. After numerous set-backs in the
negotiations, Norway welcomed with satisfaction the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 and
the entry into force of the cease-fire. A significant step had
been taken towards the restoration of lasting peace in
Angola. We congratulate the people of Angola and join
them in their wish to see an end to the human suffering and
the tragic toll that the protracted war has inflicted. The
Lusaka Protocol means that a decisive step has been taken
towards the final resolution of the internal conflict in that
war-torn country.

8

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
In this connection, my delegation commends most
sincerely the excellent work accomplished by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maître
Blondin Beye. Norway believes that a critical factor for
the eventual success of the peace process in Angola is the
creation of conditions that will make the implementation
of the provisions of the Protocol possible. The
establishment of the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), as suggested in the
report of the Secretary-General, will have a key function
in assisting the Government of Angola and UNITA in
coping with the remaining obstacles and thus in achieving
the all-important goal of national reconciliation and the
restoration of a durable peace in Angola.
Since the operation started, Norway has participated
in UNAVEM with military observers, and I can announce
today that my Government has determined that we should
maintain our contribution within the framework of
UNAVEM III at about the same level. We are pleased
that the Security Council in its draft resolution has
decided on a mandate period of one year, as suggested in
the report. Implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is
already behind the time set in the report, and a shorter
period than one year would seem unrealistic to us.
However, much remains to be done within the
framework of the Peace Accords and the relevant Security
Council resolutions in order to give full effect to the
peace settlement. We note with appreciation the
Secretary-General's observations regarding the respect for
the cease-fire shown by the Government and UNITA,
their commitment to ensuring the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and their commitment to the
Lusaka process and to national reconciliation. We feel
that further concrete confidence-building measures will be
imperative for a successful peace process, and therefore
urge the parties to the Protocol to continue to commit
themselves fully and faithfully to implementing its
provisions and to respect and maintain the cease-fire
throughout the country.
As my Foreign Minister stated in his address to the
General Assembly at its forty-ninth session, Norway
stands ready to support regional processes to encourage
closer cooperation between African nations. In general,
regional organizations should take on more responsibility
for peace-keeping in the future. The presence today of the
ministerial delegation of the OAU sends a positive signal
that we note with great appreciation. It follows from what
I have said that we would welcome a substantial regional
effort in UNAVEM III.

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3499th meeting
8 February 1995

In a country like Angola, humanitarian action can
serve as a dynamic force for peace. It can help create
momentum towards restoring security and promoting
reconciliation. The number of non-military tasks planned
for UNAVEM III is indeed significant. We support the
priorities set for the United Nations humanitarian
programme: relief assistance, mine clearance,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants,
repatriation of refugees and resettlement of internally
displaced persons.

the decisions that are being taken today. But this
solidarity can only support the efforts of the Government
of Angola and UNITA, whose will to implement the
peace accords and to engage in genuine reconciliation will
remain decisive.

The operation will be costly. I would like to
emphasize the fundamental importance of a sound financial
basis for UNAVEM III. It is incumbent on all Member
countries to fully meet their responsibilities in this respect.

The President: I thank the representative of Norway
for the kind words he addressed to me.

In a comprehensive peace-keeping operation like
UNAVEM III, the issue of the coordination of the various
elements and activities, be they of a military or a
non-military character, is crucial. We welcome the plan to
establish integrated teams to coordinate day-to-day
functions and to ensure the most efficient use of available
resources. As far as possible, longer term development
assistance to Angola should also be designed and managed
with a particular view to reinforcing the peace process.
As a country passing through a crucial stage in the
process of building democracy, Angola needs the support
and encouragement of the international community. Norway
has played its part in trying to repair the severe damage to
Angola's economic and social fabric. In 1994, Norway
contributed $6.8 million in humanitarian assistance to
Angola. Of these funds, more than $1.3 million was spent
on mine clearance. Mine-clearance programmes in Angola
will be high on our priority list in 1995 also. To date,
$700,000 has been earmarked for a central mine-clearance
school in Luanda. In 1994, most of the Norwegian
humanitarian assistance was channelled through
international and national organizations such as the World
Food Programme, the Red Cross, Norwegian People's Aid,
the United Nations Children's Fund and Church Action for
Angola, as well as through the United Nations Department
of Humanitarian Affairs.
In addition, $2.2 million was given to Angola as longterm development assistance in 1994. We will continue our
long-term support for the people of Angola; the same level
of assistance is foreseen for 1995.
There is now a real chance that the Angolan peace
process will be crowned with success. The international
community is showing full solidarity with Angola through

Let me therefore conclude by expressing the hope
that Angola will continue the successful trend of Namibia,
South Africa and Mozambique in establishing a peaceful
and democratic society.

The next speaker is the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Zambia, His Excellency the Honourable Mr. Remmy
K.K. Mushota. I welcome Mr. Mushota and invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Mushota (Zambia): On behalf of my delegation
and of other delegations from the southern African region,
let me extend to you, Sir, our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. It is particularly gratifying to see
you, a son of southern Africa, presiding over the
Council's deliberations on Angola. We wish you well.
My delegation is most grateful to you, Sir, and to
the other members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to participate in this important meeting, which
has been convened to consider the establishment of a
third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III).
Since I am addressing this body following the
historic signing on 20 November 1994 of the Lusaka
Protocol on Angola, allow me to convey my
Government's gratitude to the Secretary-General, to the
Security Council and to the United Nations as a whole for
all the efforts that culminated in the signing of the
Angolan peace agreement.
In the same vein, permit me to congratulate
Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Angola, who presided over the
Lusaka talks with patience, total commitment and
steadfastness. Our commendations go also to the troika of
official observers from Portugal, the Russian Federation
and the United States of America for their tireless efforts
in ensuring that the Lusaka talks succeeded.

9

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Above all, I wish to pay a deserved tribute to the
Government of the Republic of Angola and to UNITA for
the mature and statesmanlike manner in which they
conducted themselves during the Lusaka talks and for their
determination to reach a peace agreement.
The Lusaka Protocol was a product of painstaking
efforts by the principal parties to the Angolan conflict and
by a concerned international community. Indeed, it testifies
to the total commitment of the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular to the peace process
in Angola.
Since the signing of the Lusaka Protocol, there have
been some positive developments, particularly in the
military and political areas. For example, the meetings of
Chiefs of Staff — on 10 January 1995 at the village of
Chipipa in Huambo Province and on 2 and 3 February 1995
in Waku-Kungo — were an important development towards
the implementation of the peace agreement.
In the humanitarian area too there has been
appreciable improvement. We note with appreciation the
launching by the United Nations of a $213-million interagency appeal fund for Angola to cover humanitarian
activities for 1995.
Equally important has been the series of meetings of
the Joint Commission. The arrival in December last year of
a significant number of the expected 500 observers was a
welcome move on the part of the United Nations, the more
so as it took place within one month of the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol.
The people of Angola, like all the rest of us in the
southern African subregion, are acutely aware that the onus
of establishing lasting peace in that country rests first and
foremost upon the people of Angola themselves, for peace
cannot be imposed from outside Angola. Nevertheless, the
international community has a responsibility to assist the
people of Angola in achieving that lasting peace. As is well
known, peace is indivisible and a key to development
efforts. It is for this reason that the United Nations has
invested heavily in the peace process in that country, for
which those of us from that part of the world are most
grateful to the world body. The Lusaka Protocol is living
testimony to the commitment of the international
community.
In a number of its resolutions, the Security Council is
on record as having committed itself to the implementation
of the peace agreement on Angola. The time has come

10

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
therefore to establish UNAVEM III in order to give effect
to that commitment by this body. Indeed, the credibility
of the United Nations and, in particular, that of the
Security Council is at stake. Therefore, nothing should
therefore be allowed to stand in the way of or, indeed,
frustrate the immediate implementation of the agreement,
as stipulated in the Lusaka Protocol.
The Angolan situation should not be treated any
differently from other peace-keeping operations in which
the United Nations has been involved. Yes, peace is an
expensive commodity to achieve or maintain. In view of
its crucial importance, though, it is my delegation's
contention that no price is too high to pay for peace. My
Government is convinced that the United Nations will live
up to its expectations in this regard.
Angola is a country that is potentially rich in natural
resources. Unfortunately, the long, fratricidal war has
taken a heavy toll on its ability to exploit those resources
to the full. The country will come out of its quagmire
only if peace is guaranteed.
An era of peace and tranquillity has dawned in
southern Africa. A new South Africa has been born, to
the joy and jubilation of all the people of the subregion.
Mozambique has emerged from a costly civil war into
full-fledged democracy. Let me take this opportunity to
congratulate the people of Mozambique, under the able
leadership of His Excellency President Chissano, for their
momentous achievement. There cannot, therefore, be any
credible reason why Angola should be an exception to
this new era of peace and stability in our subregion. The
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is in our view
critical in that it will have the effect of healing a wound
in our subregion that would otherwise fester and promote
reconciliation amongst the people of Angola.
Southern Africa is poised for a period of sustained
development with the establishment of peace in Angola.
Peace for Angola means peace for all of us in the
subregion and, indeed, the African continent as a whole.
It is for this reason that we are looking forward to
assistance from the international community in general
and the Security Council in particular for the people of
Angola in regaining lasting peace through the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol on Angola without
any equivocation or procrastination. My Government is
confident that the Council will rise to the occasion by
delivering the goods to the Angolan people and

Security Council
Fiftieth year
humankind as a whole through the immediate deployment
of peace-keeping forces in Angola.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Catarino (Portugal): Mr. President, may I take
this opportunity to welcome your presence here today and
congratulate you on the manner in which Ambassador
Legwaila has been very ably steering the work of the
Council this month. A word of appreciation is also in order
for the excellent work of Ambassador Cárdenas as
President during the month of January, when important
steps were taken towards improving the transparency of the
Council and its links with the rest of the States Members of
the United Nations. For this he has our sincere thanks.
I would like to salute the Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) delegation, whose presence here
today attests to the importance that organization attaches to
bringing peace to Angola and supporting the work of the
United Nations towards that end.
To His Excellency the Minister of External Relations
of Angola, Mr. Venâncio de Moura, I would like to extend
a very cordial welcome.
Our role in the Angolan peace process is well known
to everyone, and as one of the observer countries, Portugal
played an active part in bringing the Lusaka Protocol into
the light of day. It is the successful end of that very long
and arduous process of negotiations that brings us here
today, as the Security Council authorizes the launching of
a new, enlarged United Nations peace-keeping operation in
Angola.
The success of the Lusaka negotiations is the result of
a number of factors, not least of which is how serious the
Angolan Government and UNITA were about bringing the
fighting in Angola to an end. But the unswerving
persistence, dynamic skills and sheer wisdom of Maître
Alioune Blondin Beye, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, was also — undoubtedly — a key
element in that success. Always supported by the three
observer countries, Maître Beye was able to transform dim
hope into feasible reality. On behalf of my Government,
our most sincere congratulations and appreciation go out to
him.

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
Another very important factor contributing to the
success of the Lusaka process was the work of the
neighbouring States in demonstrating, through their
solidarity with the Angolan people, that peace was
possible and that it was an objective worth striving for.
The very important contribution of the Government and
the people of Zambia in hosting the negotiations can
never be overestimated.
The Government of Portugal supports the draft
resolution of the Security Council authorizing the
establishment of the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). The negotiations are
over. It is now time to act. The tasks before UNAVEM
III, in the context of the “Acordos de Paz”, the Lusaka
Protocol and other relevant Security Council resolutions,
have been clearly set out by the Council. Let UNAVEM
III not fail because the international community did not
give it the capacity to fulfil these tasks.
While we understand the rationale behind a phased
deployment of UNAVEM III, we also believe that the
flexibility to deploy additional forces must be retained
and must not be allowed to be held hostage to delays
resulting from disagreements on whether one or another
of the conditions has or has not been met.
The Angolan Government and UNITA must
demonstrate that they understand what the United Nations
and the international community are doing towards
bringing peace to their country. They must show the
necessary will to cooperate in order to bring about a
successful implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and the
completion of the peace process. It is up to them to bring
peace to Angola.
But we must proceed with caution in establishing
conditions to be met before UNAVEM III can move on
to its next phase. By giving the parties the opportunity to
challenge whether those conditions have been fulfilled, we
are not only allowing for delays in the deployment of
additional personnel but also threatening to derail the
peace process itself.
Above all, UNAVEM III needs to be given a clear
mandate and the necessary means to achieve it. In
keeping with its constant support for the peace process in
Angola, Portugal stands ready to participate fully in that
peace-keeping operation. We will be ready to send
support units as well as military and civilian police
observers, and to participate in the force's command

11

Security Council
Fiftieth year
structure. We appeal to the international community to
support UNAVEM III in any way it can.
We have all travelled a long way to see peace come
to Angola, but none more so than the people of that
country, who deserve a chance to live a life different from
one ravaged by war. The Security Council has taken a very
important step towards peace in Angola. Let it be a firm
and decisive one.
The President: I thank the representative of Portugal
for his kind words addressed to me and to my countryman
Ambassador Legwaila.
The next speaker is the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Lesotho, His Excellency Mr. Molapo Qhobela. I welcome
His Excellency and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and make his statement.
Mr. Qhobela (Lesotho): At the outset, let me
congratulate Botswana most warmly upon its assumption of
the presidency of the United Nations Security Council for
the month of February. Given his well-known and tested
leadership qualities and his diplomatic skills and rich
experience, we have full confidence that your country's
Ambassador will guide the work of the Council to a
successful conclusion during his tenure of office. He can
therefore count on my delegation's full support and
cooperation in the discharge of his onerous international
functions.
Last month's President, His Excellency Mr. Cárdenas,
Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United
Nations, discharged his duties and responsibilities with
diligence, and therefore deserves commendation.
The Kingdom of Lesotho subscribes fully to the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Malawi on behalf of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). However, we wish
to offer a few observations and views of our own.
It is an honour for me, on behalf of the Government
and people of Lesotho, to take this opportunity to address
this body on an issue that remains of great concern to us in
the southern African subregion and the African continent at
large. It is of concern to us not only because it threatens the
very foundations of democracy but because it again touches
on the fundamental principle of the right of humanity to
life.

12

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
When the Government of Angola and UNITA signed
the Bicesse Agreement on 31 May 1991 in Portugal, the
whole world, particularly Africa, commended the event,
which — it was thought — could bring to the Angolan
people the peace, national reconciliation and democracy
they had long desired. The Angolan people, in turn,
demonstrated their acceptance of the objectives of that
Agreement by participating enthusiastically and in an
orderly manner in the legislative and presidential elections
of 29 and 30 September 1992, considered free and fair by
the international community. Unfortunately, the refusal by
UNITA to accept the electoral verdict and the
simultaneous launching of armed actions by UNITA
marked yet another cruel chapter in the history of that
country.
We welcomed the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994. This was the product of lengthy
negotiations, which culminated in the agreement for a
cease-fire in Angola. We welcome this move, and wish to
express our hope that it will usher in a new era of peace,
national reconciliation and reconstruction in Angola, and
also contribute to the necessary climate for development
in the entire southern African subregion.
My delegation wishes to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General in
Angola, Mr. Beye, for the patient and skilful manner in
which he discharged his mandate. We also wish to
commend President Chiluba of the Republic of Zambia
for the role he played in facilitating, and by being host to
the negotiations that led to, the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol.
Our task here today as emissaries of the OAU
Council of Ministers is to highlight the need for the
United Nations to support and consolidate the peace
process in Angola by prompt deployment of the third
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) to ensure the implementation of the peace process and
to act as a deterrent against any possible violations of the
cease-fire that might result in a degeneration in the
present situation.
Already, some African States, like Zambia and
Zimbabwe, have declared their preparedness to participate
significantly in the peace-keeping effort by contributing
troops under UNAVEM III. We are informed that the
Republic of South Africa has offered to assist in the
clearing of land-mines under the umbrella of the United
Nations. It is in this regard that we would appeal for

Security Council
Fiftieth year
these countries to be provided with the required logistical
support through UNAVEM III.
We wish at this stage to underscore the commitment
of the Angolan Government to reaching a peaceful and
negotiated settlement and to complying with the letter and
spirit of the Lusaka Protocol. Not only did the Lusaka
Protocol mark the beginning of a critical stage towards the
final resolution of the internal conflict in Angola, it also
reaffirmed the conviction of the Angolan Government that
there was no military solution to the post-electoral crisis in
that country. In this regard, the Kingdom of Lesotho hails
the Angolan Parliament for having passed a law granting
amnesty for crimes committed against the State's internal
security establishments, and other offences related thereto
committed in the context of the post-electoral military
conflict.
The humanitarian situation in Angola is desperate. A
large part of Angola has been sapped of its vitality and
bears the deep scars of years of war. Southern Africa, and
Africa in general, would appeal to the international
community to assist Angola with humanitarian aid and
technical and financial support in order to ensure that the
demobilized soldiers, displaced persons and refugees are
socially reintegrated and that the programme of national
reconstruction is implemented.
At this juncture, I should like to refer to the draft
resolution. It is our considered opinion that time is of the
essence in UNAVEM III's being implemented. It would
indeed be a pity if we missed the boat and had to prolong
the suffering of the Angolan people. We are further of the
opinion that many conditions set in the draft resolution tie
the hands of the Secretary-General in effectively and
efficiently implementing the mandate of UNAVEM III.
In concluding my few remarks, I wish to reaffirm the
solidarity of Lesotho and Africa with the people of Angola
as they forge ahead to enter the next millennium as a
citadel of peace and democratic stability. We hope that this
body will in its wisdom find it necessary to react speedily
to Africa's plea so that the brotherly people of Angola can
enjoy peace and prosperity in the years ahead.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Lesotho for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Spain. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me first to convey the satisfaction of the
Spanish delegation at seeing you, Sir, preside over the
Security Council for the month of February. We are
aware of the symbolism of the Council's being presided
over at this meeting by an African country, a neighbour
of Angola. I am certain that your proven diplomatic
qualities will ensure the success and wise conduct of the
Council's work.
We also wish to congratulate Ambassador Cárdenas,
and the Argentine delegation as a whole, for the very
competent and effective manner in which he led the
Council in January.
Spain, which during its recent membership of the
Security Council worked with other members to make a
positive contribution to the Angolan peace process, wishes
on this occasion to join the other States Members of the
United Nations in welcoming the establishment of a new
peace-keeping operation, expanding the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) to become
UNAVEM III. This marks a new phase of the United
Nations presence in Angola, one which we hope will be
the final stage of a long peace process. This decisive
stage has been reached on the basis of the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 between the
Government of Angola and UNITA, which was
accomplished with the assistance of the United Nations
through the efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye, the observer States and
States of the region.
My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, Mr. Venâncio de Moura, whose
presence underscores the firm political will of his
Government to comply with the commitments undertaken
in the “Acordos de Paz” and the Lusaka Protocol and to
ensure that these commitments are strengthened through
a significant United Nations presence in the country
throughout the period of implementation.
The decision of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity to send a ministerial
delegation to New York to attend this debate
demonstrates the keen interest of the African continent in
ensuring that the national reconciliation efforts of the
Angolan parties are accompanied by a firm commitment
by the international community. We are pleased to note
the significant attendance by Foreign Ministers and the
depth of today's debate, which demonstrate great support

13

Security Council
Fiftieth year
for the establishment of UNAVEM III and its rapid
deployment.
Spain, which has close ties of friendship and
cooperation with Angola, joins in the expression of good
wishes and active support, and is confident that the draft
resolution before the Council will be adopted unanimously.
We wish to emphasize the importance of the rapid
deployment of UNAVEM III in order to consolidate the
progress achieved in the peace process and to implement
the Lusaka Protocol. We understand that the provisions of
the draft resolution relating to the effective deployment of
the components of UNAVEM III are intended to ensure
that this will occur in the best possible conditions and with
the firm support and cooperation of the parties. We trust
that the Secretary-General will soon be able to inform the
Council that these requirements have been met.
We are all aware that the decision which the Security
Council intends to adopt today marks the beginning of the
final stage of the peace process in Angola, which may yet
encounter certain difficulties. We are convinced that the
commitment of the parties and the support of the
international community will make it possible to overcome
any obstacles, which we hope will prove to be minor, as
reconciliation allows any lingering suspicions or mistrust to
be set aside. A meeting between the President of Angola
and the President of UNITA would represent a very
important step in the right direction.
The series of important gestures made by both the
Government and UNITA to date — among which we stress
the smooth establishment of the Joint Commission in
Luanda, the two meetings held by the Chiefs of Staff of the
Angolan Armed Forces and UNITA, and the agreements
reached between them — are encouraging signs which
should help us to appreciate the will of the parties to fulfil
their respective commitments to the cause of peace, so
widely desired.
As the Spanish poet Antonio Machado said: “In
walking, we have no path before us; it is in walking that
the trail is blazed”. We believe that the parties resumed
their journey along that path by signing the Lusaka
Protocol. The international community is at their side and
encourages them through the draft resolution which the
Council is about to adopt.
It is Spain's earnest hope that the people of Angola,
who have endured the devastating consequences of a bloody
civil war, will be able to begin to build on the foundations

14

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
of reconciliation and reconstruction of the country, with
the assistance of the international community and the
United Nations. Angola is thus already participating in the
mainstream of democratization and progress which
pervades all of southern Africa and leads it towards a
better future.
The President: I thank the representative of Spain
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
Netherlands. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): First, Sir, I should like
to offer you my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council.
The presence in our midst of many illustrious
visitors — the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, as well as no fewer than 11 Foreign
Ministers of African States — is a reflection of the fact
that this is a momentous occasion. More than two years
after the first United Nations attempt to bring peace to
Angola failed, the guns are largely silent and we find
ourselves on the eve of a new, large-scale peacekeeping
operation. After 34 years of suffering, of the gruesome
ordeal of the struggle for independence, followed by
relentless civil strife, there is hope again for the Angolan
people.
My country has a long-standing relationship with
Angola in the field of development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance, and we have therefore witnessed
with particular interest the long and difficult road both
parties have walked to finally arrive at the Lusaka
Protocol. We were extremely pleased when, on
20 November last year, the Protocol was finally signed.
We commend the role that the Secretary-General, the
three observer States, Zambia, as host country of the
negotiations, and several other African States have played
in this respect. Most of all we pay tribute to the special
representative of the Secretary-General, Maître Beye,
who, apart from being a professional optimist, seems to
have endless patience and perseverance.
Of even greater importance is the fact that the ceasefire, concluded shortly after the signing of the Protocol,
is holding, since agreements and cease-fires have been
concluded before in Angola, but did not last. The draft
resolution before us bears witness to the fact that the
international community has learned from previous

Security Council
Fiftieth year
experience and is not naive any more about stated good
intentions by warring parties; it contains numerous
conditions for the deployment and continuation of activities
of the various components of a third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), which are all linked
to the need for the parties to show good faith and the
necessary political will by effectively implementing the
commitments which they themselves have undertaken. The
Netherlands Government therefore urges the parties not to
allow any further delays, but scrupulously to comply with
the time-table envisaged in the Lusaka Protocol. On the
other hand, in order to avoid a dangerous vacuum, the
timely deployment of the peace-keeping forces — once the
conditions listed in the Secretary-General's report are
met — cannot be overemphasized.
In order to facilitate the peace process, an early
meeting between President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi is,
in our view, crucial, and we call upon both leaders to make
every effort to realize such a meeting at their earliest
convenience.
It goes without saying that my Government
wholeheartedly supports the decision the Security Council
is about to take to establish UNAVEM III. Netherlands
military and police observers have served in UNAVEM II,
even during the fiercest hostilities, and will continue to
serve in UNAVEM III. We fully share the importance
attached in the draft resolution to the speedy establishment
of a comprehensive mine-clearance programme in Angola.
Among all the activities UNAVEM III is expected to carry
out, mine-clearance is of the utmost importance, as the
continuous presence of mines could greatly hamper the
implementation of other elements of the “Acordos de Paz”
and the Lusaka Protocol.
In 1994 my country contributed 10 million
Netherlands guilders — roughly $6 million — for
humanitarian assistance to the people of Angola. We
express the sincere hope that, through the efforts of both
the Angolan parties and UNAVEM III, our future assistance
and cooperation will not have to be limited to emergency
and humanitarian aid only, but our humanitarian assistance
to Angola will be continued in 1995.
Let me finally express the hope that on the road to
peace and national reconciliation all sides will be guided by
statesmanship, wisdom and above all generosity towards
their former adversaries. UNAVEM III will be there to
help, but it is ultimately for the Angolans themselves to
realize our common dream of a unified, peaceful,
democratic and prosperous Angola, where good governance,

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
multi-party democracy, power-sharing and respect for
human rights prevail. Let peace not become elusive once
more. The Angolan people deserve better — and much
better — than that.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Netherlands for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister of State for African
Affairs of Tunisia, His Excellency Mr. Sadok Fayala,
whom I welcome. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr Fayala (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
It is a great pleasure for me to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the current month. We wish you every success in the
performance of your noble duties. I also congratulate your
predecessor, the Ambassador of the Argentine Republic,
on his excellent work last month.
I wish to tell you first, Mr. President, of the great
interest that President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
takes in a final settlement of the conflict in Angola, and
of the OAU's determination to spare no effort, in
collaboration with the Security Council, to maintain and
consolidate peace in Angola and in Africa as a whole.
I should also like to take the opportunity provided
by my participation in this debate to congratulate the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Angola, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, the countries
making up the troika of observers — the United States of
America, the Russian Federation and Portugal — and the
countries of southern Africa, particularly Zambia, for the
commendable efforts they have all made to promote a
settlement of the Angolan conflict.
The signing of the Lusaka Protocol and the
declaration of a cease-fire between the two parties were
crucial stages on the way to achieving a lasting peace in
Angola. The United Nations can rightly be regarded as
the architect of the peace process now going on in that
country. It sponsored the process from start to finish and
did everything necessary to ensure its success. What has
been achieved so far by the efforts of the United Nations,
the OAU, the members of the troika and all the countries
of the region guarantees that the Lusaka Protocol will
continue to be implemented on a solid foundation.

15

Security Council
Fiftieth year
Furthermore, the setting up of a Joint Commission to
supervise the implementation of the peace accords will
ensure that any difficulties will be overcome that may stand
in the way of a final settlement of the Angolan conflict. In
this context, the prompt deployment of the new United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) would
certainly speed up the implementation of the Protocol, in
response to the expectations of the Security Council and the
international community as a whole. Likewise, the
supervision and verification of the disengagement of forces,
the monitoring and observance of the cease-fire, and the
verification of the withdrawal, quartering and
demobilization of troops are tasks that only the United
Nations can perform and which are vital if the peace
process is to be propelled forwards.
The Angolan people expect the Security Council to
continue to provide assistance until peace is restored in
their country, which, for 19 years now, has been ravaged by
a fratricidal war that has caused enormous losses and great
suffering. The Government of Angola and the leaders of
UNITA, both during and after the signing of the Lusaka
agreement, have made their willingness to further the peace
process clear. Further cause for satisfaction is the fact that
the cease-fire has been respected and that the parties have
committed themselves to ensuring the safety of United
Nations personnel. These are sufficient conditions for the
rapid deployment of UNAVEM III.
Moreover, the readiness of the President of the
Republic of Angola and the Head of UNITA to meet in the
near future and the offer by the Angolan Government to
provide logistic support to the UNAVEM forces provide
additional assurances that the United Nations operation will
be launched under very favourable circumstances.
The consolidation of peace in Angola is a priority
matter that requires cooperation from us all. The
reconstruction of the country, the repatriation of refugees,
the return of displaced persons, the de-mining operations
and the reintegration into civilian life of demobilized troops
are major challenges that call out for more assistance from
the international community.
We welcome the Secretary-General's arrangements for
the humanitarian relief programme that the United Nations,
in cooperation with the specialized agencies, intends to
implement at the present stage of the peace process. The
role of UNAVEM III is crucial in this context as it will
enable relief to be delivered to the needy and will
strengthen coordination between the various humanitarian
activities.

16

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
The Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), at its sixty-first regular session in
Addis Ababa — from 23 to 27 January 1995 —
reaffirmed its total support for the peace process under
way in Angola on the basis of the “Acordos de Paz” and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. In order
to ensure the success of this process, the Council of the
OAU dispatched the African ministerial delegation that is
present here today, to ask the Security Council to
authorize the establishment of UNAVEM III and the rapid
deployment of troops.
The presence of the ministerial delegation also
provides an opportunity to reaffirm the OAU's desire to
continue and to strengthen its cooperation with the United
Nations, particularly in the area of preventive diplomacy,
through the OAU's central mechanism for the prevention,
management and settlement of conflicts in Africa. This
cooperation has proved very useful in a number of
situations, and the case of Angola once again provides us
today with an opportunity to observe a successful peacekeeping operation conducted by the United Nations with
the participation of the African countries.
We hope that the Security Council will adopt a
resolution commensurate with the expectations of the
Angolan people, that will be equal to the task of
consolidating peace throughout southern Africa — and
throughout Africa as a whole — so that Africa can
embark irreversibly on the process of development.
The President: I thank the Minister of State for
African Affairs of Tunisia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): Mr. President, as my delegation
warmly welcomes your presence here today, I
congratulate Ambassador Legwaila on his assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We are fully confident that under his wise and
skilled leadership the work of the Security Council will
be conducted in a highly effective way. He can count on
the full support and cooperation of the Brazilian
delegation. I also wish to take this opportunity to thank
his predecessor, Ambassador Emilio Cárdenas, and his
very competent staff for the manner in which they
conducted the business of the Council during the month
of January. I again express appreciation for the important

Security Council
Fiftieth year
steps taken with regard to transparency, a trend that, we are
pleased to see, has also become a concern of the current
presidency.
Again, we are pleased to extend our warmest welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Venâncio de Moura, Minister of
External Relations of Angola. We would like to thank him
for the comprehensive statement he has just made. His
insights into the situation in his country and his analysis of
the next steps to be taken in the political, military,
humanitarian and economic fields are an indication of the
magnitude of the tasks to be accomplished in the pursuit of
lasting peace and stability in Angola. As in previous
statements he has made at the Security Council over the
last few years, his words stand for his Government's
unequivocal commitment to working with the international
community for the attainment of the objectives of peace
and national reconciliation in his country.

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
III — aimed at assisting Angolans in restoring peace and
achieving national reconciliation on the basis of the
Bicesse Accords and the recently signed Lusaka Protocol.
This is a decisive step by the international community in
the quest for lasting peace and stability in Angola.
The deployment of 7,000 military personnel — in
addition to the 610 military and police observers — with
an initial mandate of 18 months is a decision that
constitutes a critical turning point in the Angolan peace
process. The objectives and mandate of UNAVEM III are
neither easy nor simple. They will involve activities in the
political, military, police, humanitarian and electoral
fields. It is worth mentioning that this is the first new
peace-keeping operation the United Nations has set up in
Africa since the successful conclusion of the peace
process in Mozambique and the peaceful transition in
South Africa.

I also wish to express my Government's recognition of
President José Eduardo dos Santos' unfailing and constant
adherence to the cause of peace. His leadership and
political wisdom have been vital in the process that has led
to the signing of the Bicesse Accords and the Lusaka
Protocol.

Under the Lusaka Protocol, the United Nations
troops are called upon to perform a series of vital tasks.
These range from monitoring and verification activities to
controlling quartering areas, ensuring that armed elements
remain separate during the demobilization process, and
collecting weapons.

Allow me also to express the great honour we feel at
participating in this important session in the presence of the
ministerial delegation from the Organization of African
Unity led by His Excellency the Honourable Mr. E. C. I.
Bwanali, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malawi.

At this point in the peace process, not a moment
should be lost in the deployment of UNAVEM III's
infantry units. In his report, the Secretary-General quite
rightly stated — and the Council in its wisdom has
concurred with him — that United Nations infantry units
should be deployed promptly in Angola. A step in the
right direction was authorizing the immediate dispatch of
the planning and support elements needed to prepare that
deployment and the subsequent deployment of additional
elements for the establishment of operational quartering
areas for UNITA forces. This reflects the international
community's clear support for the peace process and
makes a concrete contribution to creating the necessary
circumstances under which the infantry units will be
better able to discharge their mandate.

The presence of so many dignitaries from African
countries signifies Africa's firm support for and solidarity
with the Government and people of Angola at a time when
a major decision is to be taken at this Council on the next
stages of the protracted Angolan peace process. The
decision taken at the recent meeting of the OAU Council of
Ministers in Addis Ababa clearly reflects that organization's
resolve to participate actively in matters pertaining to peace
and stability in Africa.
These are indeed momentous times for the history of
Angola. Through the various phases of the prolonged
Angolan conflict we have managed to arrive at the
threshold of its final solution. After many years of conflict,
Angolans can finally expect to experience living in peace,
cherishing the moment that their country will be free of
war, fear and insecurity.
We very much welcome the decision to be taken today
to establish a new peace-keeping mission — UNAVEM

The momentum reached with the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol, followed by the positive initiatives
leading to the creation of a basis for mutual understanding
and trust, must be fully maintained. Fortunately, the
international community is doing its part with the
establishment of a sizeable peace-keeping operation and
by granting it the flexibility it needs to achieve results
within a reasonable time without imposing undue
preconditions or an overburdened timetable for results.

17

Security Council
Fiftieth year
To accomplish the complex task before it, the
Organization can profit and learn from the experience
acquired in the recently and successfully concluded
operation in Mozambique. That operation clearly shows
that, to be effective, peace-keeping operations must be
adequately staffed and equipped and that unnecessary
delays in their deployment should be avoided at all costs.
Brazil has always supported a peaceful solution to the
conflict in Angola. Our ties with that sister country have
deep historical and cultural roots. In accordance with this
position, the Brazilian Government is ready to accept an
invitation to become a major contributor to the Angolan
peace process at this crucial juncture. At this moment, we
are in a position to take the necessary internal measures to
send a full infantry battalion, an engineering company and
two medical units to Angola without delay.
These are times for hope and optimism. Peace in
Angola will constitute yet another major achievement
within the process that began in South Africa and that has
just been completed in Mozambique — a process we expect
to be extended to other countries in the continent. Now it
is the time to begin the task of reconstructing the country
so that the immense potential with which Angola has been
endowed can be used to further the cause of the
development and welfare of its brave people.
The President: I thank the representative of Brazil for
the kind words he addressed to my countryman,
Ambassador Legwaila.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Namibia, His Excellency Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab. I welcome
Mr. Gurirab and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
Development Community, Botswana is well placed to
bring its accumulated wisdom and diplomatic excellence
to bear upon the deliberations of the Council. We in
Namibia have strong sentiments towards you personally,
towards your Ambassador to the United Nations, and
towards your great country, whose history and destiny are
so closely tied up with Namibia's own fortunes and fate.
You can always count on my support and on the
cooperation of my delegation.
I wish also to congratulate your predecessor, His
Excellency Ambassador Cárdenas of Argentina, on having
successfully presided over the Council in January.
My thanks go also to the indefatigable and
imaginative Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros BoutrosGhali, for his hard work, and especially for his excellent
report (S/1995/97 and Add.1), which provides useful
information on the situation in Angola and details for the
deployment of a third United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III). In the same vein, I would like
to commend my brother and colleague, Maître Alioune
Blondin Beye, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for the patience, perseverance and diplomatic
skill he displayed during the protracted negotiations that
culminated in the Lusaka Protocol.
The signing of the Lusaka Protocol was a significant
victory and a breakthrough for us all, especially for the
Angolan people, who have for so long been yearning for
peace and normalcy in their lives.

Mr. Gurirab (Namibia): Let me at the outset, albeit
belatedly, extend my best wishes to one and all for a
splendid new year and share with you my own dream for
a world completely at peace, with prosperity for all. This
ought to be our common yearning: that 1995, the United
Nations Year for Tolerance, will usher in a change for the
better in old habits and in the ways we have been doing
things up till now.

President Chiluba of Zambia was a sage adviser and
a lightning-rod behind the scenes, encouraging, cajoling
and inspiring the negotiators — and not least the observer
delegations too — to turn set-backs and frustrations in the
negotiations into challenges and opportunities on the basis
of the step-by-step consensus-building that eventually
produced the expected result. The Government and the
people of Zambia wholeheartedly gave President Chiluba
the support he needed to carry on with this noble task.
We salute President Chiluba for his critical role, and we
express gratitude to his people for their generosity and
their commitment to helping their Angolan neighbours to
end the human tragedy in their country.

Allow me, Sir, to congratulate your country on its
assumption the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, a month when, by happy coincidence, the question
of Angola is being discussed. You, Sir, will no doubt be
playing a crucial role in helping find a lasting solution to
the Angolan conflict. As the leader of the Southern African

As Angola's neighbour, Namibia has a strong, direct
interest in finding a lasting solution to the conflict in that
sister country. In our continued search for peace in
Angola, the President of the Republic of Namibia, His
Excellency Mr. Sam Nujoma, accompanied by me and
other senior Government Ministers, visited Angola on

18

Security Council
Fiftieth year
3 February 1995 for discussions with His Excellency
President José Eduardo dos Santos and his Ministers. We
left Angola fortified in the knowledge that the Angolan
Government is interested in a lasting peace in that country.
Namibia is seriously considering making a meaningful
contribution to the peace process in Angola, including the
implementation of UNAVEM III.
We have made repeated offers for similar
consultations with the leadership of UNITA and have
invited Mr. Jonas Savimbi to come to Namibia for
discussions. Neither we nor others in the region have been
successful so far in this regard. I wish to take this
opportunity to renew our invitation to Mr. Savimbi to visit
Namibia and to find a way to turn a new page and be able
to interact with other African leaders, in the interest of
peace, stability and regional cooperation.
Africa has repeatedly expressed appreciation to the
members of the Security Council and other United Nations
Member States, in particular the troika — Portugal, the
Russian Federation and the United States of America — for
the pivotal role they have played in the Angolan conflict.
That conflict has been long and difficult, but the United
Nations did not abandon its mission or leave the Angolan
people to their own fate. As the Council embarks on the
larger mission of the deployment of UNAVEM III, it is the
view of the Government of Namibia that the SecretaryGeneral should be allowed sufficient latitude and flexibility
to be able to carry out the mandate entrusted to him
effectively.
What this means is that the United Nations and, in
particular, the Security Council should adopt uniform
standards and approaches in situations of conflict and
peacemaking that involve the Organization. International
peace-keeping and regional conflict management and
resolution are laudable undertakings that require effective
coordination and generous funding by the entire
international community.
The Organization of African Unity (OAU) Council of
Ministers, at its sixty-first session, held in Addis Ababa,
decided, inter alia, to send a high-powered delegation of
several African Foreign Ministers, together with Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, our able and dedicated Secretary-General, to
take part in this important debate. We are here to join
hands with the members of the Council and the SecretaryGeneral to speed up the deployment of UNAVEM III in
Angola so that there is no delay. Its deployment will serve
both as an effective deterrent to likely violations of the
cease-fire and as a concrete confidence-building measure in

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
the eyes of the Angolan people themselves. The Angolan
Government and UNITA have made a commitment to
peace and reconciliation, starting with the cease-fire
which, while so far satisfactory, still remains susceptible
to threats or actual violations, whether deliberate or
accidental.
We can now clearly see the light at the end of the
tunnel. It is high time cooperation and brotherhood
replaced blood-letting and enmity in Angola.
Namibia welcomes the ongoing meetings between
the Chiefs of Staff of the Angolan Armed Forces and
UNITA as positive steps. Such high-level meetings will
strengthen the cease-fire before and after the deployment
of UNAVEM III and will help create the necessary
confidence-building measures. In this context, the face-toface meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi, which we hope will take place soon, will usher
in a new phase in Angola and further strengthen the
transition from war to peace.
The draft resolution before the Council seeks
specifically to authorize the creation and early deployment
of UNAVEM III in Angola in accordance with the
Lusaka Protocol, and this is what the OAU Ministerial
delegation has come here to support. In this context, I
wish to place on record my commendation to the
chairman of the OAU ministerial delegation, the Foreign
Minister of Malawi, my colleague and brother the
Honourable Mr. Bwanali, for his sterling leadership of
this mission, and also to say to my other colleagues that
our working together to serve Africa in this case is an
example that our continent should emulate in other
conflict situations in Africa. It goes without saying that
Namibia also shares the concerns and preoccupations
which the Foreign Minister of Angola, my good friend
and colleague Mr. Venâncio de Moura, expressed in his
important statement. It is my sincere hope and expectation
that the collective wisdom of the Council will help
overcome those concerns.
On 15 July 1993, I addressed the Council on the
issue of Angola. I implored the international community
to consider providing massive assistance for the
reconstruction of Angola. In his current report, the
Secretary-General states that Angola is reported to be the
most land-mine-infested country in the world. It is
estimated that in Angola there are between 9 and 15
million land-mines and pieces of unexploded ordnance
that have been broadcast throughout the country over the
three decades of conflict.

19

Security Council
Fiftieth year
I also pointed out then that the successive reports of
the Secretary-General had revealed massive destruction of
cities, economic infrastructure, public utilities, hospitals and
schools. What was true in 1993 is even truer after two more
years of war.
I wish once again to appeal to the international
community for generous assistance for the reconstruction of
Angola. Non-governmental organizations will have an
important role to play in providing humanitarian assistance
to the Angolan people. In 1993 I made an appeal for a
pledging conference for the reconstruction of Angola to be
considered. I reiterate that appeal today. In this regard, I
welcome the initiative of the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, which has already
issued an appeal for the clearing of land-mines — a
necessary condition for the resettlement of the displaced
population and for normalization of their lives.
Lastly, successful reconstruction of Angola will be the
surest and most secure way of guaranteeing peace and
reconciliation in Angola, as well as accelerating the
Southern African Development Community's objectives of
regional integration, trade, reconstruction and development.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Namibia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa, His Excellency Mr. Alfred Nzo, whom I
welcome. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Nzo (South Africa): It is indeed an honour for me
to participate in these proceedings today as South Africa's
representative on a delegation of the Organization of
African Unity. Since an African issue is being considered
today, it is particularly appropriate that the Security
Council's work is being guided this month by a fellow
African Member State, the Republic of Botswana.
I wish at the outset to associate myself with the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of Malawi on
behalf of the ministerial delegation of the Organization of
African Unity. It needs to be emphasized that a peaceful
settlement of the Angolan civil conflict is not only essential
for the people of Angola themselves, but also of major
importance to political stability and economic development
in southern Africa as a whole.
For these reasons, the South African Government
welcomed the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on

20

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
20 November 1994 by the Angolan Government and
UNITA. The South African Government has also
subsequently noted with satisfaction the first steps that
have been taken in the implementation of the accord. We
are pleased to note that the cease-fire is generally
respected. The United Nations Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye,
has played a pivotal role in this process and deserves
great credit for his dedication and perseverance. States in
the region played an important role in the process —
particularly Zambia, which hosted protracted negotiations.
I also wish to refer to the substantial role that has been
played by the observer States — the troika of Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America.
Yet it is the Angolan Government and UNITA that
deserve our particular congratulations on reaching an
agreement to end the civil conflict. We must accept that
the durability of the peace process in Angola is largely
dependent on the political will of the Angolan people
themselves. In this respect, we are encouraged by the
prospects of a meeting between President dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi. This meeting will no doubt further enhance
the peace process.
The South African Government is of the opinion that
the people of Angola need not only the encouragement
but also the concrete support of the region and the
international community at this decisive stage of their
history. In this regard, a crucial aspect in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is the role of the
United Nations in Angola. The South African Government
believes that an effective United Nations presence is
needed on the ground, together with a realistic and
adequate mandate. It is therefore essential that such a
United Nations force be established and deployed without
delay.
Members of the Council are aware that our presence
here today follows from the meeting of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity in Addis
Ababa from 23 to 27 January. The Council of Ministers
requested that the Security Council should decide today
to establish the third United Nations Verification Mission
in Angola (UNAVEM III) as well as on an early
deployment of its forces. As a member of the delegation
of the Organization of African Unity here today, I wish
to emphasize my Government's support for this position.
The Angolan peace process has entered a crucial phase;
it urgently needs to be consolidated and strengthened.
Only an expanded United Nations force with a broadened
mandate will be able to bring the necessary support to

Security Council
Fiftieth year
bear on a process which remains fragile. The South African
Government therefore agrees with the recommendations
contained in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on UNAVEM II, especially the recommendation that a new
United Nations operation, with the mandate and strength
described in the report, should immediately take over from
UNAVEM II. We are therefore pleased that these
recommendations are embodied in the draft resolution to be
adopted today.
Let me conclude by saying that such an expanded
United Nations presence will be able to count on the
practical support of the South African Government, which
in principle remains prepared to play a role when called
upon to do so.
The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
I begin, Sir, by expressing the warm congratulations of the
Algerian delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. Your professional and human
qualities guarantee the success of the Council's work at a
time when the international community is preparing to mark
further significant progress in the southern part of the
African continent — which includes your country,
Botswana — in the establishment of peace and stability
which Namibia, South Africa and Mozambique have
embraced one after the other, to general satisfaction.
I wish to convey my profound gratitude to your
predecessor, Ambassador Cárdenas, for the effective way in
which he led the Council last month.
The recent meeting of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity fully appreciated the
significance and scope of the Lusaka Protocol of
20 November 1994 and the promising prospects thus
opened up for the restoration of peace, stability and security
in Angola. In dispatching a strong delegation comprising
several Foreign Ministers and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity to participate in this debate,
Africa has committed itself as a whole to the success of the
process of national reconciliation in Angola and to the strict
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, with the invaluable
assistance of the United Nations. Moreover, the very
signing of the Lusaka Protocol was the result of efforts,

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
including those of the United Nations, focusing on a
regional negotiating mechanism led by the SecretaryGeneral's Special Representative, Maître Alioune Blondin
Beye, to whom I am pleased to pay a well-deserved
tribute.
The Lusaka Protocol, an extension of the Bicesse
Accords of May 1991, embodies the will of the Angolan
Government and of UNITA to make full use of political
means to put an end to a particularly devastating
fratricidal conflict. It is thus an important development,
marking the point of no-return in the Angolan people's
march towards the achievement of a notably better
national future.
Indeed, despite the precarious situation and the
difficulties inherent in moving from confrontation to
cooperation on the path to national reconciliation, the
steps taken by both parties and the stages that have
already been passed have greatly helped to meet the
conditions for the systematic implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, with a United Nations presence, whose
human and material resources can measure up to its tasks.

The cease-fire entered into force on
22 November 1994. In the view of the observers of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
II), it has been generally effective, and any violations that
may have been committed are considered minor. The
Joint Commission, established in implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and chaired by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has held several
meetings and is accomplishing its work satisfactorily. The
meeting of the Chiefs of Staff held on 10 January allowed
important decisions to be taken with a view to
guaranteeing respect for the military provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol, particularly by initiating a
disengagement of the forces of the two parties and thus
contributing to the consolidation of the cease-fire and to
a climate of mutual trust. The expected meeting between
President dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi should
strengthen this climate of trust and give decisive
momentum to the peace process.
The international community and the United Nations
should, in the words of the Secretary-General in his most
recent report on Angola, respond positively to this
challenge. The United Nations should not only assist in
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol in order to
speed up the peace process, but also coordinate and
facilitate humanitarian activities linked to that process.

21

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The task is both urgent and essential. We must assist
refugees and internally displaced persons to return to their
homes. We must ensure the reintegration into civilian life
of the demobilized soldiers and de-mine parts of the
territory, in order to allow the safe movement of persons
and goods and help the economy to recover. These are
areas of work which are equally crucial for strengthening
peace and stability in the country.
In his conclusions, the Secretary-General very clearly
indicates that the situation in Angola is encouraging and
that the dynamic of peace is well under way there. On this
basis and to consolidate the process, the Secretary-General

3499th meeting
8 February 1995
proposes that a new United Nations operation, UNAVEM
III, immediately take over from UNAVEM II, whose
mandate expires today.
Algeria endorses these conclusions, especially since,
as the Secretary-General has emphasized, the conditions
set by resolution 966 (1994) of 8 December 1994 for
deploying a new United Nations operation in Angola —
in particular, respect for the cease-fire — have been met.
UNAVEM III should be deployed as soon as possible, for
any delay or additional conditions could raise unnecessary
obstacles to progress in the peace progress. To
consolidate such progress and make it irreversible requires
a clear message and a firm commitment from the
international community.
The President: I thank the representative of Algeria
for the kind words he addressed to me.
Several speakers remain on my list. In view of the
lateness of the hour, I shall now, with the concurrence of
the members of the Council, suspend the meeting until
3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

22
