the actual death of the Councillor and that they were
convicted of murder and sentenced to death only because
the Court found that they had a "common purpose" with the
actual perpetrators,
Deeply concerned at the decision on 13 June 1988 of the
Pretoria Supreme Court to reject an appeal to reopen the
case to ensure a fair trial,
Deeply concerned also at the Pretoria regime's decision
to execute the Sharpeville Six in defiance of world-wide
appeals,
Convinced that these executions, if carried out, will
further inflame an already grave situation in South Africa,
1. Calls once again upon the South African authorities
to stay execution and commute the death sentences imposed
on the Sharpeville Six;
2. Urges all States and organizations to use their
influence and take urgent measures, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations, the resolutions of the
Security Council and relevant international instruments, to
save the lives of the Sharpeville Six.

"The question of South Africa: letter dated 23 November
1988 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/20289)"."

Adopted unanimously at tht
2817th meeting.

Adopted at the 2830th meeting by
13 votes to none, with 2 abstentions (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America).

Resolution 623 (1988)
of 23 November 1988

The Security Council,
Having learned with grave concern of the intention of the
South African authorities to implement the death sentence
imposed on Mr. Paul Tefo Setlaba, an anti-apartheid
activist, on the basis of so-called "common purpose",
Strongly urges the Government of South Africa to stay
execution and commute the death sentence imposed on Mr.
Paul Tefo Setlaba in order to avoid further aggravating the
situation in South Africa.

Decision

At its 2830th meeting, on 23 November 1988, the
Council proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled

" Ibid .• Supplement for October, November and December 1988.

THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ"

taken a heavy toll in human lives and caused vast
material destruction, in spite of the declared readiness
of the belligerent parties to cease such attacks.
"'The members of the Council insist that the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Iraq immediately cease all such
attacks and desist forthwith from all acts that lead to
the escalation of the conflict and which thereby create
further obstacles in the way of implementation of
resolution 598 ( 1987) of 20 July 1987 and undermine
the efforts of the Security Council to put an early end to
this conflict in accordance with the resolution.
"'They are convinced that the recent escalation has
demonstrated the need for full and rapid implementation of resolution 598 ( 1987).
" 'Determined to bring the conflict between the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq to an early end, the
members of the Council reaffirm their strong commitment to the implementation of resolution 598 ( 1987) as
an integrated whole, which is the only basis for a
comprehensive, just, honourable and lasting settlement
of the conflict.
"'They express grave concern that resolution 598
(1987), which has a mandatory character, has not yet
been implemented.

Decisions

At its 2798th meeting, on 16 March 1988, the Council
proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation between Iran and Iraq".

At the same meeting, the President of the Council made
the following statement:'•
"Following consultations, I have been authorized to
make the following statement on behalf of the members
of the Council:
"'The members of the Security Council express
grave concern over the fact that the tragic conflict
between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq continues and has entered its eighth year.
'"They strongly deplore the escalation of the hostilities between these two countries, particularly the
attacks against civilian targets and cities that have
" Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the
Council in 1980, 1982, 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986 and 1987.
'"S/19626.

9
