S/PV.8109

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8109th meeting

Monday, 20 November 2017, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lambertini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Demissie
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Alimzhanov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-39024 (E)
*1739024*

S/PV.8109

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, and His Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Michel Kafando.
Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of November,
and to take this opportunity to greet the members of
the Council.
In my briefing, I intend, on the one hand, to
report on the activities that I have carried out since
the Council’s previous consideration of the question of
Burundi (see S/PV.8013) and, on the other hand, to take
stock of recent developments in the matter. The mission
assigned to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi is very clear. It is to support the efforts of
the region — in other words, those of the mediator and
the facilitator — in order to advance the negotiations
whose purpose, I recall, is to implement the inclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue. That is what I have been
doing by meeting with the Burundian authorities and
political actors, meeting with the Burundian opposition
and representatives of civil society — including those
who are in exile — and meeting with African Heads of
State and partners of Burundi.
My first discussions with the mediator, President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, took place in August
in Entebbe. They focused on the urgent need to
convene a regional mini-summit in order to assess
the progress of the negotiations and, where possible,
2/10

20/11/2017

to coordinate decisions. At the conclusion of our
discussions, the mediator informed me of his intention
to meet with President Pierre Nkurunziza. I know that
he recently sent a special envoy carrying a message
to his counterpart in Burundi. I also met a number of
African leaders, always with the aim of raising their
awareness and requesting their support, given their ties
to the Burundian authorities.
My meeting with the Burundian opposition
abroad took place in Brussels on 14 October, and
brought together the leaders of the National Council
for Respect for the Arusha Agreement and the Rule
of Law (CNARED) as well as civil-society leaders in
exile. At this first meeting, I primarily explained the
purpose of my mission, which is chiefly a good-offices
mission that seeks, in support of regional efforts, to
bring closer together the positions of the Government
and the opposition with a view to promoting inclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue. My visit to Brussels also
gave me the opportunity to have discussions with the
Foreign Minister of Belgium and some representatives
of the European Union on the prevailing situation in
Burundi. My return to Bujumbura was an opportunity
to canvass the views of two very influential moral
authorities of the Catholic Church of Burundi, namely,
the bishops of Bujumbura and Gitega.
My meeting on 2 November with the Ombudsman
focused on the discussions he had had with the
opposition abroad in Helsinki and on the adoption
by the Government of Burundi of the new revised
Constitution. The Ombudsman assured me that, apart
from the decision not to take into account previous
terms served and the seven-year term of the presidential
term proposed in the Constitution, the Government
has respected all the other provisions of the Arusha
Agreement. All these activities that I was involved in
were contained in a report to the facilitator, with whom
I met on 3 November in Dar es Salaam.
Based on the overall summary, the facilitator,
in agreement with the mediator and the Burundian
Government,
has
decided
to
convene,
on
27 November, in Arusha, a dialogue session between
the representatives of the Government and all the
other Burundian stakeholders, including, of course,
the opposition in exile. These meetings will take
place from 27 November to 8 December, as I said, in
Arusha. We have been informed that the CNARED is
not disposed participate. A summit of Heads of State of
the Community of East African States is envisaged for
17-39024

20/11/2017

The situation in Burundi

January 2018, which, inter alia, will have to evaluate
the outcomes of these meetings.
With regard to the situation on the ground in
Burundi, I was in Bujumbura two weeks ago, and
everything appeared to be calm, apart from some
expressions of outrage against the International
Criminal Court’s decision to open preliminary
investigations into crimes against humanity committed
since 2015 in the country. The protests also denounced
reports of human rights violations, including allegations
of arrests, imprisonment, enforced disappearances,
inhuman and degrading treatment, restrictions on
freedom of association, intimidation and even hate
speech. The Burundian authorities have already turned
their attention to the upcoming elections, although
the issue of inclusive dialogue has not yet found a
proper resolution.
In conclusion, the United Nations remains
obligated, regardless of the difficulties ahead, to
continue its good-offices mission, standing shoulder
to shoulder with the subregion, in order to extricate
Burundi from the current crisis. We remain convinced
that the political process is the only way of untangling
the Burundian crisis.
Finally, with regard to relations between United
Nations and Burundi, the relationship seems to me to
be moving in the right direction. Indeed, the United
Nations Secretariat and the Government are continuing
negotiations on a draft headquarters agreement. It
should be noted, however, that the Government has not
yet taken the steps necessary to implement its decision
to fully cooperate with the Human Rights Council and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Negotiations are also ongoing with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The foregoing represents the main facts that I have
noted since the question of Burundi was discussed
during my last briefing to the Security Council on
the subject.
The President: I thank Mr. Kafando for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber: Mr. President, on behalf of the
members of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I would like to
thank you for inviting me to brief the Security Council
and for the continuous constructive cooperation
between the Council and the configuration. Members

S/PV. 8109

of the configuration noted with appreciation the
positive reference to the PBC contained in the Council’s
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/13, of 2 August.
As per established practice, the following statement
has been submitted to and approved by the members
of the configuration, including the country concerned,
Burundi.
Since my last briefing to the Council on 26 July
(see S/PV.8013), I have had a number of meetings in
New York, Addis Ababa and Geneva on Burundi in
my capacity as Chair of the configuration. During the
high-level week of the General Assembly, I met with
His Excellency Mr. Alain Aimé Nyamitwe, Burundi’s
Minister of External Relations and International
Cooperation, and we discussed the continuation of
the socioeconomic dialogue. Minister Nyamitwe
confirmed that the next round of the dialogue will
include additional partners, as agreed at the latesst
retreat, held in Bujumbura on 12 July. Also during the
high-level week, I met the Secretary General of the East
African Community (EAC), Mr. Libérat Mfumukeko;
the European Union Senior Coordinator for the Great
Lakes, Mr. Koen Vervaeke; and the Special Envoy of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the Great Lakes
Region, Ms. Katja Lasseur.
On 12 October, I had a meeting with His Excellency
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, the former President of Tanzania
and the EAC Facilitator for Burundi, as we were both in
Geneva on that day.
From 25 to 28 October, I used the opportunity of a
visit to Addis Ababa to discuss the situation in Burundi
with the Permanent Secretary of Burundi’s Foreign
Ministry, His Excellency Mr. Jean de Dieu Ndikumana;
the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, His Excellency Mr. Smaïl Chergui; the new
AU Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region,
His Excellency Mr. Basile Ikouebe; and the Head of
the United Nations Office to the African Union, His
Excellency Mr. Haile Menkerios. While in Addis, I
also met the Executive Secretary of the United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa, Under-SecretaryGeneral Vera Songwe, as well as experts from the AU,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) and members of the
diplomatic community.
On 8 November, I updated the configuration on my
activities and on recent developments in Burundi. The
new United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi,

17-390243/10

S/PV.8109

The situation in Burundi

Mr. Garry Conille, participated in that meeting of
the configuration. He characterized the situation in
Burundi as one of chronic vulnerability and informed
Member States about United Nations efforts aimed at
strengthening the resilience of the population.
Representatives from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees highlighted the gravity of the humanitarian
situation and indicated that the number of persons in
need of humanitarian assistance will possibly soon reach
6 million people, that is, over half of the population.
They noted a funding gap for the humanitarian
response plan of 50 per cent, as well as for the Regional
Refugee Response Plan, which is currently funded at
only 19 per cent.
In the subsequent discussion, the members of the
configuration expressed support for the engagement
of the configuration, namely, for its efforts to draw
attention to the deteriorating socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation. Member States reiterated their
unequivocal support for the EAC-led dialogue process,
although some of them expressed concern over the lack
of progress in the process. The human rights situation
was described by several delegations as concerning.
In that regard, the Permanent Representative of
Burundi, Ambassador Albert Shingiro, indicated that
the negotiations between his Government and OHCHR
about the outstanding memorandum of understanding
were in their final phase.
A number of representatives enquired about
the prospects of an amendment of the Constitution,
and they stressed their concern about the potential
impact on the spirit of the Arusha Accord. Other
representatives noted that amending the Constitution
is part of Burundi’s sovereign rights. The Permanent
Representative of Burundi stressed that this was an
internal matter and reassured PBC members that
changes to the Constitution would not be detrimental to
the spirit of the Arusha Accord.
From my interactions in recent months, I am
drawing the following conclusions:
First, with regard to the political dialogue,
President Mkapa remains committed to facilitating
the EAC-led political dialogue and he continues to
enjoy support inside and outside the region. At the
same time, the facilitation remains challenging. While
I heard disappointment regarding the lack of progress
4/10

20/11/2017

in the dialogue process, I was encouraged to see that
Secretary-General Guterres, as well as the members of
the East African Community, the African Union and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
continue to pay considerable attention to the situation
in Burundi. As the Special Envoy just mentioned, the
holding of the next Arusha round has been tentatively
scheduled for late November. I would like to encourage
Burundi’s political stakeholders to fully commit
to the continuation of the EAC-led process and to
constructively participate in the planned session.
Secondly, with regard to the socioeconomic
situation, national and international actors continue
to highlight challenges in the areas of food security,
health, education and energy. Against this background,
international partners are increasingly concentrating
on strengthening the resilience of Burundi’s population
and on their immediate humanitarian needs. On
20 October, for example, the European Union announced
a new population resilience support programme, with a
volume of €95 million.
Thirdly, on human rights, in my contacts I
continued to hear reports about human rights violations
in Burundi, as well as regrets about the outstanding
memorandums of understanding with the OHCHR and
the African Union for their work in Burundi. In my
meetings with the representatives of the Government
of Burundi, I continued to encourage them to swiftly
conclude these agreements.
The human rights situation has been discussed,
as the Assembly knows, in the Human Rights Council
in mid-September and by the Third Committee of the
General Assembly on 28 October. As is well known, at
its thirty-sixth session in Geneva, the Human Rights
Council adopted two resolutions on Burundi; one
extends the mandate of the Commission of Inquiry
for one year; the other asks the High Commissioner to
appoint an expert who will provide technical assistance
and capacity-building to the Government in the area of
human rights.
Fourthly, with regard to the question of refugees,
many of my interlocutors pointed to the return of
refugees from Tanzania to Burundi. On 31 August
in Dar es Salaam, the Governments of Tanzania and
Burundi and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees agreed to assist the voluntary repatriation
of 12,900 refugees who had by then registered their
desire to return. At the latest configuration meeting,
17-39024

20/11/2017

The situation in Burundi

Ms. Wafaa Saeed, the Deputy Director of the OCHA
Coordination and Response Division, underlined the
fact that the voluntary character of these repatriations is
essential and must be respected in the current movement
of return. As for reintegration, Ms. Saeed said:
“There is a strong need to improve the
socioeconomic and human rights situation in
Burundi to ensure the sustainability of returns
and reintegration at the community level, both
for refugees and those returning from internal
displacement within Burundi.”
In the subsequent discussion, it was also underlined
that it is essential to safeguard the civilian character of
refugee camps in accordance with the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees.
In view of this situation, I suggested to the members
of the PBC Burundi configuration that they focus on
the following four points for the time being.
First, national, regional and international actors
should continue to fully support the mediation efforts
undertaken by President Museveni and President
Mkapa on behalf of the EAC.
Secondly, while the ongoing efforts on the political
track remain important, the forthcoming election cycle
of 2020 requires increasing attention from all of us. I
believe that some kind of road map is required, defining
the necessary conditions for free, fair, peaceful and
democratic elections, as well as the necessary steps to
get there. I also believe that the PBC should be able to
contribute, in one way or another, to such an endeavour.
Thirdly, the socioeconomic conversation must
complement these efforts with a focus on addressing the
needs of the population, as well as existing obstacles for
cooperation. Such conversations with the Government
need to involve additional partners who were not able
to participate in our Bujumbura retreat of 12 July. I
remain committed to engaging on the socioeconomic
situation not only with the Government and Burundi’s
main donors, but also with the private sector, African
economic actors and academia.
Fourthly, the question of truth and national
reconciliation should receive more attention and
support. This will be one of the issues I am planning
to raise during my next visit to Burundi, which is
tentatively scheduled for early 2018.
The President: I thank Mr. Lauber for his briefing.

S/PV. 8109

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Michael Kafando, and Ambassador of Switzerland,
Mr. Jürg Lauber, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings.
Bolivia values and supports the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to pursue the
inter-Burundi dialogue in an inclusive environment.
In this regard, we see as significant progress the
recent meeting in Bujumbura among Mr. Kafando
and the Burundian authorities, the Ombudsman,
the Archbishops of Bujumbura and Gitega, and the
accredited diplomatic corps in the country, as well as
the Special Envoy’s visit to Dar es Salaam in Tanzania.
Bolivia also encourages all parties to support the
mediation being carried out by former President of
Tanzania Mr. Benjamin Mkapa and by President of
Uganda Mr. Yoweri Museveni, in accordance with
the Arusha Accord, which must continue to be the
cornerstone of this process. In the same way, we call
on the parties to implement the road map proposed by
Mr. Mkapa in order to achieve consensus and generate
the conditions necessary for a peaceful environment
during the upcoming elections to be held in 2020.
With that in mind, we believe that inclusive dialogue
is a prerequisite to solving the crisis. We therefore call
on all parties to engage in dialogue and to take steps
to restore trust and promote national reconciliation.
It is also important that the parties implement the
agreements and especially that they work together in
order to reach a negotiated political settlement. In this
connection, we acknowledge the efforts and work of
the East African Community (EAC), the Special Envoy
of the African Union, the President of the Burundi
configuration in the Peacebuilding Commission and
the United Nations country team.
We encourage them to continue with that work and
to strive to coordinate their efforts in order to achieve
better cooperation. We reiterate that all efforts should
take place in the context of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Burundi.
We appreciate what was stated in the the
communiqué of 19 October of this year at the seventh

17-390245/10

S/PV.8109

The situation in Burundi

Summit of Heads of State the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, which mentions the
improvement of the security situation in Burundi and
the support of the Summit for the inter-Burundian
dialogue led by the EAC. In that regard, we note the
efforts of the Burundi Government to re-establish
peace after the 2015 crisis, and we highlight the fact
that the security situation in the country has improved.
We encourage the Government to continue to build a
peaceful environment that contributes to the stability
and development of its country in the context of respect
for human rights.
In addition, we highlight the cooperation of the
Government of Burundi with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General during his visit. We also underscore
the fact that both parties have designated ad hoc
teams to negotiate and to finalize the cooperation
agreement between the Government of Burundi and the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
in Bujumbura. We also recognize the efforts of the
Government and the Ombudsman in raising awareness
with regard to the refugees. In that regard, we welcome
the voluntary return of 15,000 refugees to Burundi.
We encourage the international community to
continue to step up the funding of the humanitarian
response plan in Burundi. We call on countries that have
imposed sanctions to consider lifting them, since the
sanctions have proven to have negative consequences for
the lives of groups in situations of vulnerability, such as
women and children. Moreover, it should be taken into
account that unilateral sanctions constitute a violation
of international law. The sanctions have a negative
impact on the implementation of the Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. I reiterate that
they violate the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we believe that the full and committed
involvement of the international community, and of all
parties, is of the utmost importance given the complexity
of the process. In that regard, it is vital to continue to
consolidate the bases for achieving lasting stability in
Burundi in the context of the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me, first of all, to thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, and Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings.
6/10

20/11/2017

Uruguay reiterates its concern about the political,
humanitarian and human rights situation in Burundi,
whose people are suffering from the devastating
consequences of the crisis. We note the report of
Special Envoy Kafando on the results of his recent
visit to Burundi, which sought to help to relaunch
inter-Burundian dialogue process. We also note
his report on his meeting with the facilitator of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, former President Benjamin
William Mkapa. We reiterate our full support for his
handling of the situation and encourage him in carrying
out his work to continue to involve a broader range
of interlocutors from both the Government and the
opposition, as well as civil society.
In addition, we once again acknowlegde the
tireless efforts of the regional and subregional bodies
to overcome the stalemate in the political process
in Burundi. At their most recent summits, both the
African Union and the East African Community
reaffirmed their full commitment to a peaceful solution
to the crisis and underscored that dialogue was the only
possible way forward.
It is also worth recalling the road map that was
presented by facilitator Mkapa, which includes a series
of specific steps to relaunch the political process and to
generate conditions conducive to transparent, inclusive
and peaceful elections in 2020.
In that regard, Uruguay particularly encourages the
countries of the region to support Burundi in a unified
and coordinated way. We also call on all Burundian
parties to commit in good faith to the next stages of the
dialogue process, expected in the coming weeks.
At the same time, we demand that all actors refrain
from taking any step that could exacerbate the political
and social tension in the country, thereby jeopardizing
peace and stability and undermining the correct way
forward for the dialogue process.
Uruguay cannot but reiterate its concern about the
human rights situation in Burundi. In that regard, we
strongly condemn each and every abuse and violation
of human rights, whoever commits them, including
cases of extrajudicial executions, sexual violence in
the context of the political crisis, arrests and arbitrary
detentions, and the harassment and intimidation of
civil society organizations and journalists, as well as
restrictions on fundamental freedoms.
17-39024

20/11/2017

The situation in Burundi

In the light of that situation, we regret that
the Government of Burundi has not resumed its
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCR)
since that cooperation was suspended in mid-October
2016. We reiterate our call for the swift onclusion of a
memorandum of understanding for the resumption of
the Office’s activities in Burundi.
Turning to the humanitarian aspect, we support the
call made a few minutes ago by Ambassador Lauber
with regard to his contact with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNHCR and
the Burundian authorities. We also underscore the fact
that the human rights situation was discussed at the
Human Rights Council in Geneva in September, with
that body adopting two key resolutions on the issue.
Full respect for the human rights of all Burundians
is a necessary condition for holding an inclusive and
credible political dialogue and for establishing an
environment conducive to the organizing and holding
of peaceful and democratic elections in 2020.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to begin by
sincerely thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting on the situation in Burundi. I
would also like to warmly congratulate your country,
Italy, on its assumption of the rotating presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November. You,
Mr. President, can always count on the full support
of my delegation throughout your mandate, which
you have conducting with professionalism and great
attentiveness since the beginning of the month,
I welcome the presence among us of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, the former interim
President of Burkina Faso, Mr. Michel Kafando.
Through you, Mr. President, I would like to thank him
for the presentation of his report on his recent field visit
to Bujumbura. I would also like to thank my colleague
Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his
report and, in particular, for his personal involvement in
the peacebuilding process in Burundi for several years.
The purpose of my intervention is to share with
members of the Council the new positive developments
in Burundi since the previous meeting of the Council in
the Chamber in July (see S/PV.8013).

S/PV. 8109

On the political front, the inter-Burundian dialogue
continues smoothly. A new round of talks is planned
in the next few days in Arusha. Contacts at the highest
level through the Special Envoys have intensified in
recent days. President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda,
who, as the Council knows, is in charge of mediating
the dialogue process, has dispatched our colleague
Ambassador Adonia Ayebare, his Special Envoy, from
Uganda to Burundi to meet the national authorities.
He was first received by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation in Bujumbura,
the capital, and then by the Head of State himself, in
the interior of the country. The exchanges between the
two parties were fruitful. For his part, the facilitator
of the Inter-Burundian dialogue, Mr. Mkapa, held
productive consultations on 7 November in Kampala
with Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of Uganda
and mediator of the inter-Burundian dialogue. We
would like to recall that Mr. Mkapa received a visit
from the Ombudsman in September in the context of
consultations aimed at the resumption of the dialogue.
In the same vein, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, who is with us this morning, recently made his
second visit to Burundi and the region, during which
he held open and productive discussions with national
officials. During his stay in Burundi, the Special Envoy
received a warm welcome, with a tropical flavour, and
full cooperation from national authorities at all levels.
In the same vein, at the initiative of the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, who is here today, Ambassadors of the
greater subregion of Southern Africa met at an informal
work lunch meeting. At the end of the meeting,
participants agreed on the following points.
First, they agreed that the people of Burundi and
the region itself must maintain leadership in managing
the situation in Burundi. The contribution of other
actors outside the region should be limited solely to
supporting national and regional efforts.
Secondly, they agreed on the importance for
the international community continuing to support
Burundi’s socioeconomic sectors.
Thirdly, they called for the mobilization of the
necessary resources for the organization of free,
democratic and peaceful elections in 2020.

17-390247/10

S/PV.8109

The situation in Burundi

20/11/2017

Fourthly, they called for support for national and
regional efforts in the search for a lasting political
solution to the current situation through peaceful means.

youth — to act as messengers of peace by strengthening
security for all and encouraging peaceful coexistence,
social cohesion, reconciliation and national unity.

Fifthly, they called for the lifting of the economic
sanctions of the European Union against Burundi,
which have a negative impact not only on the lives of
vulnerable groups, such as women and children, but also
on the implementation of the Agenda for Sustainable
Development and, above all, on the creation of an
environment conducive to holding the next elections
in 2020.

With regard to constitutional affairs, my delegation
wishes to recall that the amendment of the Constitution
is an exercise that is exclusively a matter of national
sovereignty, not only for Burundi but also for the
countries represented here in the Security Council.
The issue is the responsibility of Burundians and
should not be the subject of debate by external actors
in a non-Burundian context. I would like to remind
the Council that the current exercise is aimed, first at
foremost, at Burundi’s long-term stability through an
end of the transitional period of our basic law of 2005.

My delegation hopes that, with the current positive
momentum, our partners that have adopted sanctions
and punitive measures against Burundi can move in
the direction of general peace in Burundi and lift such
counterproductive sanctions.
As you can see, Mr. President, regional dynamics
remain vibrant. In order to safeguard such regional
momentum, it would be desirable to avoid any attempt
to create parallel mechanisms that are likely to alter
the current trajectory of the dialogue. It must remain
first and foremost under the leadership of Burundians
and the subregion. The contribution of outside actors,
although commendable, should be limited only to
support. As much as possible, actors beyond the region
must — and this is very important — be careful about
taking unilateral decisions and positions of a political
nature that undermine the efforts of the East African
Community in the management of the Burundian
question. That wish was expressed by the Heads of
State of Uganda and Tanzania during their bilateral
meeting on 11 November in Kampala.
When it comes to strengthening democratic culture,
we remain convinced that in a country like ours, which
is still making efforts to consolidate peace, justice
and security, free, peaceful and transparent elections
are an essential part of consolidating the voice of the
people in outlining their future. Any alternative of
access to power through unconstitutional shortcuts is
unacceptable. The coups that we have seen in the past
remain for most Burundians a nightmare from which
they are trying to wake up today.
Since 2005, there has been a gradual consolidation
of the democratic culture in Burundi. In order to cement
that culture throughout the country, the President of the
Republic has urged all of the country’s forces — all 32
Burundian political parties, people from all religious
denominations, civil society, the media and the
8/10

The Constitution of 18 March 2005 has not
yet undergone any changes, even though it sets out
outdated provisions that are unsuited to the posttransition context and the East African Community
Treaty, which Burundi has ratified. Therefore, the
committee responsible for proposing amendments has
examined the constitutional provisions that are the
source of imperfections in maintaining, as they are,
provisions that have the merits and democratic values​​
that guarantee stability and peace in Burundi, the
protection of the political opposition, the protection of
the rights and interests of minorities, the protection of
the independence of certain institutions and, above all,
the legitimacy of the constitutional order. Almost all
the achievements of the Arusha agreement, which are
already in the current Constitution, such as ethnic and
gender quotas, will be safeguarded.
With regard to the security situation, the situation
on the ground since the Council’s most recent meeting
on Burundi in July is very positive (see S/PV.8013).
The security situation is generally good throughout
the national territory, and citizens go about their daily
activities peaceably. From the most distant hill to the
capital of Bujumbura, calm reigns. Burundians, in
their rich diversity, enjoy their political and civil rights
without any hindrance.
The return to normalcy was recognized and
emphasized by the seventh Ordinary Summit of the
Heads of State of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, which took place on 19 October
in Brazzaville. I would mention that that meeting,
which included 19 countries, mostly business people,
decided to hold its next summit in Bujumbura. That is
17-39024

20/11/2017

The situation in Burundi

an illustration of the emerging regional confidence in
our subregion.
In the area of ​​human rights, my country, Burundi,
remains convinced that any progress in the area of
human rights must be through dialogue, cooperation,
the mechanism accepted by all as the Universal
Periodic Review and the strengthening of the national
capacities of all the relevant stakeholders in the field.
Unfortunately, the growing tendency towards the
politicization of human rights to satisfy the political
interests of some States is hampering the efforts of
many countries, including Burundi. Human rights are
a universal concept that is amply outlined in several
international instruments. It constitutes one of the
three pillars of the United Nations. But human rights
are increasingly being abused by some States, which, if
they are not careful , are deviating from the objectives
of the Human Rights Council. Those objectives were
mandated to it by the General Assembly when it was
created on 15 March 2006 and fortified during the
establishment of the mechanism of the Universal
Periodic Review on 18 June 2007.
Regrettably, some members have become
accustomed to achieving the adoption of resolutions
by the Human Rights Council, and other mechanisms
established by it, to advance hidden agendas in
carefully targeted countries, while turning a blind
eye to massive human rights violations in countries
under their protection. It cannot be said enough that
politicization, selectivity and double standards, which
are starting tobecome blatant in the specific case of
Burundi, constitute real hindrances in the process of
promoting human rights. The international community
therefore should break from that counterproductive
stance and address the suffering of the peoples of the
world with the same level of attention, and with no
other geopolitical considerations.
With respect to national reconciliation, the
Government of Burundi, under the leadership of
President Pierre Nkurunziza, established the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission as part of the last phase
of the establishment of the institutions provided for
in the Arusha agreement in 2000. The members of the
Commission have been called upon to move quickly
to inform Burundians about the successes and failures
of the past, with a view to saying goodbye to the
political-ethnic antagonisms that have marked the dark
history of our country, and thereby build a bright future
for present and future generations. The Commission has

S/PV. 8109

already done an excellent job to date, and it deserves
the support of the international community to bring its
task to a successful conclusion.
On 8 November, the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
who is here with us, emphasized the importance of
lending support to the national reconciliation process.
Furthermore, the National Assembly adopted a bill
few months ago on the functional role of the national
council for unity and reconciliation. The new council
will work towards unity, equity and reconciliation of
the Burundian people and will also be at the forefront
in promoting positive values in our country.
With regard to the return of refugees who fled
the country for various reasons — which is of great
importance — the Government of Burundi continues
to call on refugees to return to help build a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Burundi. The seventh Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region, which brings
together 12 countries and took place on 19 October in
Brazzaville, made an enrgetic appeal to the countries
of the region that welcomed Burundian refugees to
facilitate their voluntary return to their native country.
And for those who do not wish to return to their country
immediately, for one reason or another, the Summit
itself urged host countries to resettle them far from
common borders, as stipulated in the 1951 Convention
relating to the status of refugees.
It is similarly very important for the host countries
that have generously welcomed Burundian refugees
to respect the civilian nature of the refugee camps,
in accordance with the requirements of the same
Convention and the various appeals of the Council.
Those present are aware that the repatriation of refugees
is a guarantee of subregional stability, now that among
those who have fled, some, including minors, have
been recruited, trained, supervised and subsequently
enrolled in rebel movements against Burundi. All of
that is in flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and other relevant conventions; the related
report of Council is available to the public.
The voluntary repatriation movement continues at
a satisfactory pace with the arrival of several thousand
citizens who had fled to Tanzania. More than 100,025
Burundians repatriated themselves in 2016, with more
than 68,000 up to 15 August, and 7,549 officially
after the tripartite meeting held from 29 to 31 August.

17-390249/10

S/PV.8109

The situation in Burundi

According to the planning of that meeting, at least
13,000 refugees will have been officially repatriated
from the neighbouring countries of Burundi between
7 September to 31 December. To recap, we estimate
that from 2016 to today, more than 175,000 refugees
have already returned to their country voluntarily. To
encourage the voluntary return movement, the Minister
of the Interior paid a working visit to the refugee camps
in Tanzania from 15 to 17 November. At the end of
his visit, the observation was that more than 40,000
refugees in Tanzania, including 26,000 in the Nduta
camp, hd registered to voluntarily return to Burundi
before the end of the year.
With regard to cooperation between Burundi and
the United Nations, that is a subject of paramount
importance for partners here. Burundi, just as
the members of the Council, maintains the same
commitment to strengthen and enhance its relations with
the United Nations, in strict respect of its sovereignty
and the free will of Burundians, within the framework
of its political future. In order to ensure the United
Nations presence in the human rights sphere, the draft
cooperation agreement with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is being
discussed between the two parties and is in its final
phase. In the case of the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, both parties have agreed
to designate ad hoc teams to negotiate and finalize a
cooperation agreement. The Special Envoy mentioned
that before my statement.

10/10

20/11/2017

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
once again that Burundi has, for more than two
years, been subjected to disproportionate political
and diplomatic pressure, which intentionally obscures
the progress already made and has led to the unjust
double-standard treatment over other Member States of
the United Nations. That long-standing attitude must
cease and give way to fair and equitable treatment.
We know that all is not perfect here as elsewhere, but
we remain convinced that it is not possible to resolve
political misunderstandings by intensifying pressures
through political reports and declarations. Burundi is
not asking for preferential treatment — far from it.
It simply asks that it be treated on its merits and in
accordance with the purposes and principles ​
of the
United Nations Charter and of international law.
Moreover, I must say that, thanks to the renewed
peace and undeniable control of the situation on the
ground, Burundi is not a threat to international peace
and security. Based on that observation, the Security
Council should consider in the near future to remove
Burundi from the list of countries that are on its agenda,
so as to address other areas of recent emerging tensions.
The President: There are more names inscribed
on the list speakers. I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

17-39024
