Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the International Committee may submit its observations to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session;
4. Invites Governments to transmit their observations on that part of the report of the Commission
on Human Rights on its twenty-eighth session relating
to this question;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
replies received and an analytic report on those replies
to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;
6. Decides to examine this question as a matter
of the highest priority at its twenty-seventh session,
taking into consideration the recommendations transmitted to the General Assembly by the Economic and
Social Council.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2855 (XXVI). United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund, 11º
Recognizing that, in countries assisted by the Fund,
children and adolescents represent about half of the
total population, and that their number will increase
by nearly a third in the decade of the 1970s,
~onvinced of the importance of ensuring that
children and adolescents receive their due share of
attention and investment in the developing process
of developing countries,
Recognizing the valuable role the Fund is playing,
in co-operation with Governments, the relevant technical and other agencies of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations, in furthering the
objectives of the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
W elcoming the efforts of the Fund to bring the
needs of children ·and adolescents in developing countries to world-wide attention and the practica! aid
the Fund gives to developing countries to enable them
to provide services for children and adolescents within
a unified approach to economic and social development,
Noting with approval the prompt and effective assistance that the Fund has provided in natural and other
disasters to meet the urgent needs of mothers and
children, who are particularly vulnerable and constitute
the large majority of those affected by disasters,
1. Commends the United N ations Children's Fund
for its very substantial and significant achievements
?uring its .t":enty-five years of operation, and expresses
1ts apprec1ation to all who helped contribute to those
achievements;
2. Endorses the policies of the Fund;
3. Requests the Fund to continue and expand its
co-operation with countries for the protection of the
younger generation and their preparation for future
responsibilities;
4. Appeals to Governments and other donors to
make every effort to increase their contributions to
the Fund, so as to enable it to reach its target figure
of $100 million by 1975.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
IIO Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8403), chap. VIII, sect. F.

93

2856 (XXVI). Declaration on the Rights of
Mentally Retarded Persons

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the pledge of the States Members of tbe
United N ations under the Charter to take joint and
separate action in co-operation with the Organization
to promote higher standards of living, full employment
and conditions of economic and social progress and
development,
Reaffirming faith in human rights and fundamental
freedoms and in the principies of peace, of the dignity
and worth of the human person and of social justice
proclaimed in the Charter,
Recalling the principles of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Intemational Covenants on
Human Rights, the Declaration of the Rights of the
0ñld and ~e ~tandards alr~ady set for social progress
m the constitutions, conventions, recommendations and
resolutions of the Intemational Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund and other organizations concemed,
Emphasizing that the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development has proclaimed the necessity of protecting the rights and assuring the welfare and rehabilitation of the physically and mentally disadvantaged,
Bearing in mind the necessity of assisting mentally
retarded persons to develop their abilities in various
fields of activities and of promoting their integration
as far as possible in normal üfe,
Aware that certain countries, at their present stage
of development, can devote only limited efforts to this
end,
Proclaims this Declaration on the Rights of Mentally
Retarded Persons and calls for national and intemational action to ensure that it will be used as a common
basis and frame of reference for the protection of
these rights:
1. The mentally retarded person has, to the maximum degree of feasibility, the same rights as other
human beings.
2. The mentally retarded person has a right to
proper medical care and physical therapy and to
such education, training, rehabilitation and guidance
as will.enable him to develop bis ability and maximum
potentlal.
3. The mentally retarded person has a right to
economic security and to a decent standard of living.
He has a right to perform productive work or to
engage in any other meaningful occupation to the
fullest possible extent of bis capabilities.
4. Whenever possible, the mentally retarded person should live with bis own family or with foster
parents and participate in different forms of community life. The family with which he lives should
receive assistance. If care in an institution becomes
necessary, it should be provided in surroundings and
other circumstances as close as possible to those of
normal life.
5. The mentally retarded person has a right to
a qualified guardian when this is required to protect
bis personal well-being and interests.
6. The mentally retarded person has a right to
protection from exploitation, abuse and degrading
treatment. If prosecuted for any offence, he shall

94

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

have a right to due process of law with full
recognition being given to bis degree of mental
responsibility.
7. Whenever mentally retarded persons are unable, because of the severity of their handicap, to
exercise a11 their rights in a meaningful way or it
should become necessary to restrict or deny sorne
or a11 of these rights, the procedure used for that
restriction or denial of rights must contain proper
legal safeguards against every form of abuse. This
procedure must be based on an evaluation of the
social capability of the mentally r~tarded p~rs~n
by qualified experts and must be subJect to penod1c
review and to the right of appeal to higher authorities.

2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2857 (XXVI). Capital punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2393 (XXIII) of 26 November 1968 concerning the application of the most careful
legal procedures and the greatest possible safeguards
for the accused in capital cases as well as the attitude
of Member States to possible further restriction of the
use of capital punishment or to its total abolition,
Taking note of the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council5 1 concerning the consideration by the Council of the report on capital punishment52 submitted by the Secretary-General in implementation of the aforementioned resolution,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1574 (L) of 20 May 1971,
Expressing the desirability of continuing and extending the consideration of the question of capital punishment by the United Nations,
l. Notes with satisfaction the measures already
taken by a number of States in order to ensure careful
legal procedures and safeguards for the accused in
capital cases in countries where the death penalty
stlll exists;
2. Considers that further efforts should be made
to ensure such procedures and safeguards in capital
cases everywhere;
3. Affirms that, in order fully to guarantee the right
to life, provided for in article 3 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the main objective to
be pursued is that of progressively restricting the number of offences for which capital punishment may be
imposed, with a view to the desirability of abolishing
this punishment in a11 countries;
4. Invites Member States which have not yet done
so to inform the Secretary-General of their legal procedures and safeguards as well as of their attitude to
poss,ible further restriction of the use of the death
penalty or its total abolition, by providing the information requested in paragraphs 1 (e) and 2 of General
Assembly resolution 2393 (XXIII);
5. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate as
soon as possible to Member States all the replies
already received from Member States to the queries
contained in paragraphs 1 (e) and 2 of resolution
2393 (XXIII) and those to be received after the
adoption of the present resolution, ,and to submit a
111 Ibid.,

chap. XVIII, sect. C.

52 E/4947 and Corr.1.

supplementary report to the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-second session;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General, on the
basis of material furnished in accordance with paragraph 4 above by Governments of Member States
where capital punishment still exists, to prepare a
separate report regarding practices and statutory rules
which may govem the right of a person sentenced
to capital punishment to petition for pardon, commutation or reprieve, and to submit that report to
the General Assembly.

2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2858 (XXVI). Human rights in the administra•
tion of justice
The General Assembly,
Recalling arti.cles 5, 10 and 11 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
663 C (XXIV), section I, of 31 July 1957, by which
the Council approved the Standard Mínimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners, 63
Convinced of the need for further concerted action
in promoting respect for and implementation of the
principles embodied in the aforementioned articles of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
1. Solemnly reaffirms the principies concerning
human rights in the administration of justice as embodied in articles 5, 10 and 11 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, namely, those referring
to the right not to be subjected to inhuman treatment
or punishment, the right to a fair and public hearing
by an independent and impartial tribunal in any civil
or criminal proceedings, the right, if charged with a
penal offence, to be presumed innocent until proved
guilty and the right not to be subjected to retrospective
criminal sanctions;
2. Invites the attention of Member States to the
Standard Mínimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
and recommends that they shall be effectively implemented in the administration of penal and correctional
institutions and that favourable consideration shall be
given to their incorporation in national legislation;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the establishment
within the work programme of the Comrrtission for
Social Development of the Working Group on Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners to
advise on methods of strengthening the implementation
of the Rules and of improving the reporting procedures
thereon;
4. Endorses the recommendation contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 1594 (L) of
21 May 1971 that the Commission on Human Rights
should, at its twenty-eighth session, examine the draft
principies relating to equality in the administration
of justice adopted by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities and
take a decision on further action;
5. Expresses the hope that the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-second session will be able to consider final proposals of the Commission on Human
Rights on these principies.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
53 See First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders: report prepared by the
Secretaria! (United Nations publication, Sales No.: 1956.IV.4),
annex I, A.
