UNITED
NATIONS

AS
General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
A/52/891
S/1998/376
6 May 1998
ORIGINAL:

GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Fifty-second session
Agenda item 135
REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL
FOR THE PROSECUTION OF PERSONS
RESPONSIBLE FOR SERIOUS VIOLATIONS
OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
COMMITTED IN THE TERRITORY OF THE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SINCE 1991

ENGLISH

SECURITY COUNCIL
Fifty-third year

Identical letters dated 5 May 1998 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council

I am attaching, for your consideration and that of the members of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, a letter dated 16 April 1998 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. In her
letter, President McDonald raises the problem faced by the Tribunal as a result
of the recent dramatic increase in the number of persons accused of crimes under
the Statute of the Tribunal who are in custody in the Tribunal’s Detention Unit
at The Hague. It is recalled that a similar request for the establishment of a
third Trial Chamber for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda was
submitted for the consideration of the Assembly and the Council on
15 October 1997 (A/52/504-S/1997/812) and that a resolution to that effect was
adopted by the Council on 30 April 1998 (resolution 1165 (1998)).
President McDonald notes that, with the current capacity of the two Trial
Chambers, and with the possibility that further indicted persons might be
transferred to the custody of the Tribunal or that several cases might be
severed, the Tribunal might require considerable time to complete all the
trials. This would run counter to the duty of the Tribunal to provide accused
persons with both a fair and expeditious trial, in the interest of the mandate
of the Tribunal for the maintenance of international peace and security in the
former Yugoslavia. President McDonald further notes that a number of Member
States have offered to help by financing the building of two additional
courtrooms. With the establishment of a third Trial Chamber, therefore, all
three courtrooms will be fully utilized.

98-12584 (E)

070598

/...

A/52/891
S/1998/376
English
Page 2

In order to address the foregoing requirements, President McDonald requests
that a third Trial Chamber of the Tribunal, staffed by three additional judges,
be established, and that a fourth judge be added, to be assigned as needed to
either a Trial Chamber or to the Appeals Chamber. She underlines the urgency of
this request, especially since a period of time would be required before a third
Trial Chamber is fully functional.
As requested by members of the Security Council after her address on
12 February 1998, President McDonald attaches to her letter a more detailed
report as well as an estimate of annual costs to the Tribunal of an additional
Trial Chamber and full utilization of the third courtroom. The Registry of the
Tribunal has estimated such annual costs as amounting to $14,150,000. The
Secretary-General notes that this unofficial estimate must be reviewed by the
Controller and detailed estimates will be made available to the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee.
The establishment of a third Trial Chamber and the election of four
additional judges would require the amendment by the Security Council of
Articles 11, 12 and 13 of the Statute of the Tribunal. Following such
amendment, the General Assembly would be requested to approve the related
increase in the budget of the Tribunal. Finally, the Security Council and the
General Assembly would have to elect the four additional judges in accordance
with the Statute of the Tribunal.
I would appreciate it if you would bring the present letter and its
attachments to the attention of members of the Security Council and the General
Assembly for their approval of the request for the establishment of an
additional Trial Chamber, and the election of four additional judges, for the
Tribunal.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

A/52/891
S/1998/376
English
Page 3

ANNEX
Letter dated 16 April 1998 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to refer to my address, on 12 February 1998, to the
Security Council, expressing the need of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia for an additional Trial Chamber of three judges and a fourth
judge to be assigned on an as-needed basis to either a Trial Chamber or the
Appeals Chamber. While I was at Headquarters, I also spoke with you regarding
this matter.
When I addressed the Security Council, a number of its members raised
questions relating to the financial aspects of the International Tribunal’s
proposal for additional judges and requested further details on the impact an
additional Trial Chamber would have on the budget of the Tribunal. I have the
honour to submit to you that report, which addresses that issue (see appendix).
The report contains a detailed financial statement of the staffing
requirements and costs for the Chambers, the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Registry, which will be made available to the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee. The request for
additional judges that the Security Council is called upon to consider, however,
is based on the need to provide accused persons in custody with an expeditious
trial and to utilize fully the court facilities that the Tribunal will shortly
have in place.
The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia at present has 25
accused persons in its Detention Unit. The Statute of the Tribunal guarantees
the accused a fair and expeditious trial. Yet some have been in custody for
long periods of time awaiting both the commencement and conclusion of their
trials. Based on the number of persons now in custody, there are 12 trials that
have to be conducted. Further, there are 47 persons who have been publicly
indicted who are not in custody; if they were all transferred, the Tribunal
would have a potential for at least 21 trials to be conducted. These numbers do
not take into consideration the real possibility of severance based on motions
for separate trials, which, of course, would greatly increase the numbers of
trials required.
In order for the International Tribunal to carry out its mandate, a number
of Member States have offered to help by financing the building of additional
court facilities to carry out our trials. One courtroom will be ready for trial
activity at the beginning of May 1998 and a second will be complete by late
June 1998. Obviously, the three courtrooms will not be fully utilized if the
Tribunal has only two Trial Chambers. The addition of one Trial Chamber would
allow the Tribunal to conduct trials simultaneously. Without this addition,
some accused who have recently been placed in custody may have to wait until the
year 2000 for their cases to begin, and certainly for their cases to be
concluded.

/...

A/52/891
S/1998/376
English
Page 4

The Security Council established the International Tribunal to help bring
about and maintain international peace and security in the former Yugoslavia.
If the Tribunal is to discharge this mandate, as a judicial institution, it must
demonstrate that it can and will provide accused persons with both a fair and
expeditious trial. Additional judges are needed for this purpose.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has also submitted a request
for additional judges. You have referred this request to the Security Council
for action (A/52/504-S/1997/812 of 21 October 1997). I am respectfully
requesting that you officially refer the present letter and the proposal of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to the Security Council in the
same manner. In this regard I would note that I have also sent a copy of the
report to the President of the Council.
There is an urgency to this request. Firstly, as I have indicated, the
number of accused persons in custody has increased dramatically in the last few
months. Secondly, there is a need to utilize fully the additional courtrooms
made possible by donations from Member States. Thirdly, time is needed to carry
out the necessary procedures for additional judges to be elected, should this
request be favourably considered. Therefore, I would sincerely appreciate any
assistance that you would provide to the International Tribunal in assuring that
this request and report are considered by the Security Council in a timely
manner.

(Signed)

Gabrielle Kirk McDONALD
President

/...

A/52/891
S/1998/376
English
Page 5

APPENDIX
Report by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
on the need for and additional Trial Chamber and the full
utilization of its courtrooms

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The present report is submitted in support of the proposal by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to establish an additional
Trial Chamber, as outlined in President Gabrielle Kirk McDonald’s presentation
to the Security Council of 12 February 1998. As President McDonald indicated,
the activities of the International Tribunal have increased dramatically in
recent months.
2.
Since October 1997, the number of accused persons in custody has increased
almost threefold, up from 10 to 29.a In mid- to late 1997 a number of Member
States recognized the need to provide additional assistance to the Tribunal as a
result of the increasing number of accused persons being brought to The Hague.
In order for the International Tribunal to carry out its mandate expeditiously,
those Member States offered to help by financing the building of additional
court facilities to carry out trials.b Initially, the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland provided funding for a second
courtroom, and that facility will be ready for trial activity at the beginning
of May 1998. Later in the year, the Governments of the Netherlands and the
United States of America supplemented by a donation from Canada, offered
assistance for a joint project to construct a third and expanded court facility,
which would accommodate joint trials of up to six accused. That courtroom will
be ready for trial activity in late June 1998.
3.
The International Tribunal currently has 12 trials to be conducted by its
two Trial Chambers.c Further, there are 47 additional public indictees who are
not in custody. Should all those indictees be transferred to the Tribunal,
there is a potential for 23 trials to be conducted. These numbers do not take

a
The Prosecutor withdrew indictments against three accused in December and
in March 1998 an accused who is paralysed was provisionally released pending
trial without objection by the Prosecution. One convicted person is awaiting
transfer for incarceration. There are presently 25 accused persons in the
Tribunal’s Detention Unit.
b

The Tribunal proposed the construction of a new court facility in its
budget for 1998. The proposal was approved by the General Assembly but
construction would not be completed before early 1999.
c

One trial is presently being conducted by a Trial Chamber of three judges
who were permitted by the Security Council in its resolution 1126 (1997) to
remain until November 1998 to complete the trial. (Prosecutor v.
Zejnil Delalić, Zdravko Mucić, also known as "Pavo", Hazim Delić and
Esad Landžo, also known as "Zenga", Case No. IT-96-21-T, T.Ch.II.)
/...

A/52/891
S/1998/376
English
Page 6

into consideration the real possibility of severance based on motions for
separate trials, which, of course would greatly increase the number of
proceedings required. Also, the total number of sealed indictments is known
only to the Office of the Prosecutor.
4.
The Statute of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
guarantees the accused a fair and expeditious trial. Yet some accused have been
in custody for long periods of time awaiting the commencement of their trials one accused was in custody for almost one year and three months before his trial
was commenced. Others have been in custody for two years awaiting the
completion of their trial. Because there has been only one courtroom to be
shared by the Trial Chambers and the Appeals Chamber, the available time in the
single courtroom has been allocated among the four pending trials as well as
appeals proceedings. This situation has created severe scheduling problems.
5.
The judges have approved amendments to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence
to accelerate the trials. However, even with these expedited procedures, a
third Trial Chamber is needed for the International Tribunal to best provide
expeditious trials to the accused persons in custody and to those who
undoubtedly will be transferred in the very near future.
6.
The Security Council established the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to help bring about and maintain international peace and security in
the former Yugoslavia. In less than four and a half years, the Tribunal has
developed into a functioning international criminal judicial institution, the
first of its kind. It has created an international code of criminal procedure
and has established precedent interpreting international customary law
proscribing serious violations of international humanitarian law. The
International Tribunal, which owes its creation to the Security Council, now
calls upon that body to enable it to discharge its mandate in accordance with
standards of due process. It would be a travesty to see the extensive work put
into building this institution stymied by an inadequately staffed Chambers,
Office of the Prosecutor and Registry.
7.
A number of members of the Security Council have raised questions relating
to the financial aspects of the proposal and requested further details on the
impact an additional Trial Chamber would have on the budget of the International
Tribunal. The cost estimate below indicates that the additional Chamber itself
will require an expenditure of less than $1.2 million per annum. The major
portion of the increased financial requirements arises directly from the full
utilization of the third courtroom and requirements for the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Registry. The costs attendant to those increases amount to
approximately $13 million per annum.

II.

FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS

8.
The capacity of the International Tribunal to fulfil its mandate is being
significantly enhanced by the addition of the two new courtrooms, but the
Tribunal will need resources for additional staff and equipment to carry out the
activity. The Tribunal’s 1998 resource level was designed to accommodate two

/...

A/52/891
S/1998/376
English
Page 7
Trial Chambers,d as well as investigative, prosecutorial and support costs at
the level of two operational courtrooms and an average of 18 detainees.e The
increase in the number of detainees and the availability of three court
facilities will be addressed during the remainder of 1998 by short-term
measures. For 1999, there will be a pressing need to utilize the third
available court facility to provide expeditious trials for detainees who will
have been held in remand for some time. A third Trial Chamber, consisting of
three additional judges and a rotating judge, is required.
9.
An analysis has been prepared of the direct costs for a third Trial
Chamber, consisting of four judges, five Professional legal staff and two
secretaries. This amounts to $1,153,400 for a full calendar year.
10. In addition, preparation for trials, support costs and operational
requirements for the courtroom to be used by the new Chamber must be taken into
consideration. Approximately 125 additional staff would be required for
prosecution and registry tasks. This includes staff and expenses for the
Prosecutor’s Office to complete investigations and to prepare and carry out the
prosecution of cases and Registry requirements for court management, translation
and interpretation, supplies, witness and defence costs, furniture and equipment
and administrative support personnel. The cost for these items is $12,996,600
for the full calendar year.
11. The addition of a third Trial Chamber and the related support would
significantly speed up the completion of the Tribunal’s mandate. A summary
description of the costs involved and additional staff required is provided in
the table below.
Estimated annual cost to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia of an additional Trial Chamber and full
utilization of a third courtroom
(Thousands of United States dollars)
Type of expenditure

Total

Chambers
Judges’ salary and common staff costs

812.0

Salary costs, secretarial support

68.9

Salary costs, legal support

272.5

Total, Chambers

1 153.4

d
A third Trial Chamber was retained temporarily to complete the Celebici
trial, which had begun prior to the election and appointment of new judges in
November 1997.
e

The 1998 budget assumed 12 detainees from January to June, increasing to
24 detainees in the second half of the year.
/...

A/52/891
S/1998/376
English
Page 8

Type of expenditure

Total

Office of the Prosecutor
Personnel costs

3 253.8

Consultants and experts

80.1

Travel of personnel

351.3

Total, Office of the Prosecutor

3 685.2

Registry
Registry costs
Personnel costs

3 609.2

Interpretation and translation

1 262.2

Travel of personnel

60.0

Total, Registry

4 931.4

Court-related costs
Witness costs

545.7

Defence counsel

2 400.0

Total, court-related costs

2 945.7

Administrative support costs
Communications

226.9

Miscellaneous services

65.1

Supplies

282.2

Acquisition of equipment

860.1

Total, administrative support costs

1 434.3

Grand total

14 150.0

-----
