United Nations

A/RES/57/37

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 22 (p)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/57/L.21 and Add.1)]

57/37.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific
Islands Forum

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/41 of 7 December 2001,
Noting with satisfaction the report of the Secretary General, 1
Recalling that one of the purposes of the United Nations is to achieve
international cooperation in addressing international problems of an economic,
social, cultural or humanitarian character,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the Pacific Islands Forum,
established in 1971, is to promote regional cooperation among its members through
trade, investment, economic development and political and international affairs,
Welcoming the ongoing efforts towards closer cooperation between the United
Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum and its associated institutions,
Bearing in mind the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations on the existence of regional arrangements or agencies for dealing with such
matters relating to the maintenance of international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action and other activities consistent with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations,
Welcoming the assistance given by the United Nations towards the
maintenance of peace and security in the Pacific Islands Forum region,
Welcoming also the fact that in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,
adopted in its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, heads of State and Government
resolved to address the special needs of small island developing States by
implementing the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small

_______________
1

02 54014

A/57/475.

A/RES/57/37

Island Developing States 2 and the outcome of the twenty-second special session of
the General Assembly, 3
Recognizing that the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit
on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”) 5 recently
reaffirmed the special needs of small island developing States and called for an
international meeting in 2004 6 to review the Barbados Programme of Action,2
Taking note of the communiqué of the thirty-third meeting of the Pacific
Islands Forum, held in Suva from 15 to 17 August 2002, 7
Affirming the need to strengthen the cooperation that already exists between
entities of the United Nations system and the Pacific Islands Forum in the areas of
economic and social development, as well as in political and humanitarian affairs,
Mindful of the need for the coordinated utilization of available resources to
promote the common objectives of the two organizations,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum, 1 as well as his efforts to
strengthen that cooperation;
2.
Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations to take the necessary
measures, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the Pacific Islands Forum,
to promote and expand cooperation and coordination between the secretariats of the
two organizations in order to increase the capacity of the organizations to attain
their common objectives;
3.
Recommends that further consultations be undertaken by the secretariats
of the Pacific Islands Forum and the United Nations to develop contacts and
promote cooperative activities in a more structured, regular and transparent manner,
including an examination of the option of formalizing cooperation and coordination
between the two organizations in the future;
4.
Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies, in consultation with the
Pacific Islands Forum, to implement the framework for cooperation in peacebuilding adopted at the fourth high-level meeting between the United Nations and
regional organizations in 2001 8 by developing long-term peace-building
programmes to address the security threats in the Pacific Islands Forum region;
5.
Urges specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of
the United Nations system to cooperate with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations in order to initiate, maintain and increase consultations and programmes
_______________
2
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
3
See resolution S-22/2.
4
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
6
Ibid., para. 61.
7
A/57/331, annex.
8
See S/2001/138.

2

A/RES/57/37

with the Pacific Islands Forum and its associated institutions in the attainment of
their objectives;
6.
Invites initiatives from Member States to assist in the cooperation efforts
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session the
sub-item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum”.
56th plenary meeting
21 November 2002

3
