United Nations

A/RES/63/185

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 March 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 64 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/430/Add.2)]

63/185. Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the fundamental importance, including in response to
terrorism and the fear of terrorism, of respecting all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law,
Reaffirming further the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1
0F

Reaffirming that States are under the obligation to protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all persons,
Reiterating the important contribution of measures taken at all levels against
terrorism, consistent with international law, in particular international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law, to the functioning of democratic institutions and the
maintenance of peace and security and thereby to the full enjoyment of human
rights, as well as the need to continue this fight, including through international
cooperation and the strengthening of the role of the United Nations in this respect,
Deeply deploring the occurrence of violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of the fight against terrorism, as well as
violations of international refugee law and international humanitarian law,
Recognizing that respect for all human rights, respect for democracy and
respect for the rule of law are interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
Noting with concern measures that can undermine human rights and the rule of
law, such as the detention of persons suspected of acts of terrorism in the absence of
a legal basis for detention and due process guarantees, the deprivation of liberty that
amounts to placing a detained person outside the protection of the law, the trial of
suspects without fundamental judicial guarantees, the illegal deprivation of liberty
and transfer of individuals suspected of terrorist activities, and the return of suspects

_______________
1

08-48189

Resolution 217 A (III).

A/RES/63/185

to countries without individual assessment of the risk of there being substantial
grounds for believing that they would be in danger of subjection to torture, and
limitations to effective scrutiny of counter-terrorism measures,
Stressing that measures used in the fight against terrorism, including the
profiling of individuals and the use of diplomatic assurances, memorandums of
understanding and other transfer agreements or arrangements, must be in
compliance with the obligations of States under international law, including
international human rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law,
Recalling article 30 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
reaffirming that acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental
freedoms and democracy, threatening the territorial integrity and security of States
and destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international
community should take the necessary steps to enhance cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism, 2
1F

Reaffirming its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal and unjustifiable, and
renewing its commitment to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and
combat terrorism,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Noting the declarations, statements and recommendations of a number of
human rights treaty monitoring bodies and special procedures on the question of the
compatibility of counter-terrorism measures with human rights obligations,
Emphasizing the importance of properly interpreting and implementing the
obligations of States with respect to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and of abiding strictly by the definition of torture
contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 3 in the fight against terrorism,
2F

Recalling its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002, 58/187 of 22 December
2003, 59/191 of 20 December 2004, 60/158 of 16 December 2005, 61/171 of
19 December 2006 and 62/159 of 18 December 2007, Commission on Human
Rights resolutions 2003/68 of 25 April 2003, 4 2004/87 of 21 April 2004 5 and
2005/80 of 21 April 2005, 6 and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, including Council
resolution 7/7 of 27 March 2008, 7 and Council decision 2/112 of 27 November 2006, 8
3F

4F

5F

6F

7F

_______________
2
See sect. I, para. 17, of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III).
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
6
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
8
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. I, sect. B.

2

A/RES/63/185

Recalling also Human Rights Council resolution 6/28 of 14 December 2007, 9
by which the Council decided to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism for a period of three years,
8F

Recalling further its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993 and, inter alia,
the responsibility of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
promote and protect the effective enjoyment of all human rights,
Acknowledging the work of the Human Rights Council in promoting respect
for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the fight against
terrorism,
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted on 8 September 2006, 10 and reaffirming its relevant clauses on
measures to ensure respect for human rights for all, international humanitarian law
and the rule of law as the fundamental basis for the fight against terrorism,
9F

Recalling its resolution 62/272 of 5 September 2008, in which it called upon
the United Nations entities involved in supporting counter-terrorism efforts to
continue to facilitate the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism,
Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
1.
terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims and their
2.
families, expresses its profound solidarity with them, and stresses the importance of
providing them with assistance;
Expresses serious concern at the occurrence of violations of human
3.
rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of countering terrorism;
Reaffirms the obligation of States, in accordance with article 4 of the
4.
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 11 to respect certain rights as
non-derogable in any circumstances, recalls, in regard to all other Covenant rights,
that any measures derogating from the provisions of the Covenant must be in
accordance with that article in all cases, and underlines the exceptional and
temporary nature of any such derogations; 12
10F

1F

Calls upon States to raise awareness about the importance of these
5.
obligations among national authorities involved in combating terrorism;
Reaffirms that counter-terrorism measures should be implemented in full
6.
consideration of the human rights of all, including persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and must not be discriminatory on
grounds such as race, colour, sex, language, religion or social origin;
Calls upon States not to resort to profiling based on stereotypes founded
7.
on grounds of discrimination prohibited by international law, including
discrimination on racial, ethnic and/or religious grounds;
_______________
9

Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I.
Resolution 60/288.
11
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
12
See, for example, General Comment No. 29 on states of emergency adopted by the Human Rights
Committee on 24 July 2001.
10

3

A/RES/63/185

8.
Urges States, while countering terrorism, to fully comply with their
obligations with regard to the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
Also urges States to fully respect non-refoulement obligations under
9.
international refugee and human rights law and, at the same time, to review, with
full respect for these obligations and other legal safeguards, the validity of a
refugee status decision in an individual case if credible and relevant evidence
comes to light that indicates that the person in question has committed any
criminal acts, including terrorist acts, falling under the exclusion clauses under
international refugee law;
10. Calls upon States to refrain from returning persons, including in cases
related to terrorism, to their countries of origin or to a third State whenever such
transfer would be contrary to their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law, including in cases where there are substantial grounds for believing that
they would be in danger of subjection to torture, or where their life or freedom
would be threatened in violation of international refugee law on account of their
race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
opinion, bearing in mind obligations that States may have to prosecute individuals
not returned;
11. Also calls upon States to ensure that guidelines and practices in all border
control operations and other pre-entry mechanisms are clear and fully respect their
obligations under international law, particularly refugee law and human rights law,
towards persons seeking international protection;
12. Urges States, while countering terrorism, to ensure due process
guarantees, consistent with all relevant provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,1 and their obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,11 the Geneva Conventions of 1949 13 and the Additional Protocols
thereto, of 1977, 14 and the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 15 and
the 1967 Protocol thereto 16 in their respective fields of applicability;
0H

1H

12F

13F

14F

15F

13. Urges all States to take all steps necessary to ensure that persons
deprived of liberty, regardless of the place of arrest or detention, benefit from the
guarantees to which they are entitled under international law, including the review
of the detention and, if they are subjected to trial, fundamental judicial guarantees;
14. Opposes any form of deprivation of liberty that amounts to placing a
detained person outside the protection of the law, and urges States to respect the
safeguards concerning the liberty, security and dignity of the person and to treat all
prisoners in all places of detention in accordance with international law, including
international human rights law and international humanitarian law;
15. Acknowledges the adoption of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in its resolution 61/177 of
20 December 2006, and recognizes that the entry into force of the Convention will
be an important step in support of the rule of law in countering terrorism;
_______________
13

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
15
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
16
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
14

4

A/RES/63/185

16. Reaffirms that it is imperative that all States work to uphold and protect
the dignity of individuals and their fundamental freedoms, as well as democratic
practices and the rule of law, while countering terrorism;
17. Encourages States, while countering terrorism, to take into account
relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions on human rights, and encourages
them to give due consideration to the recommendations of the special procedures
and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and the relevant comments and views
of United Nations human rights treaty bodies;
18. Calls upon States to ensure that their laws criminalizing acts of terrorism
are accessible, formulated with precision, non-discriminatory, non-retroactive and in
accordance with international law, including human rights law;
19. Recognizes the need to continue ensuring that fair and clear procedures
under the United Nations terrorism-related sanctions regime are strengthened in
order to enhance their efficiency and transparency, and welcomes and encourages
the Security Council’s continued enhancement of efforts in support of these
objectives, while emphasizing the importance of these sanctions in countering
terrorism;
20. Urges States, while ensuring full compliance with their international
obligations, to include adequate human rights guarantees in their national
procedures for the listing of individuals and entities with a view to combating
terrorism;
21. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General 17 and
the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism 18 submitted pursuant to resolution 62/159, and takes note of the
recommendations and conclusions contained therein;
16F

17F

22. Welcomes the ongoing dialogue established in the context of the fight
against terrorism between the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the relevant bodies for the promotion and protection of human
rights, and encourages the Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to
strengthen the links and to continue to develop cooperation with relevant human
rights bodies, in particular with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
and other relevant special procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights
Council, giving due regard to the promotion and protection of human rights in the
ongoing work pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions relating to
terrorism;
23. Calls upon States and other relevant actors, as appropriate, to continue to
implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,10 which, inter
alia, reaffirms respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as the fundamental
basis of the fight against terrorism;
2H

_______________
17
18

A/63/337.
See A/63/223.

5

A/RES/63/185

24. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner and the Special
Rapporteur to continue to contribute to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, including by raising awareness about the need to
respect human rights while countering terrorism;
25. Requests the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to continue
its efforts to ensure that the United Nations can better coordinate and enhance
support to Member States in their efforts to implement their obligations under
international law, including international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law, while countering terrorism;
26. Calls upon international, regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen information-sharing, coordination and cooperation in promoting the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;
27. Acknowledges with appreciation the cooperation between the Special
Rapporteur and all other relevant procedures and mechanisms of the Human Rights
Council as well as the United Nations human rights treaty bodies, and urges them to
continue their cooperation, in accordance with their mandates, and to coordinate
their efforts, where appropriate, in order to promote a consistent approach on this
subject;
28. Requests the Special Rapporteur, in the context of his mandate, to
continue to make recommendations with regard to preventing, combating and
redressing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of
countering terrorism;
29. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur
in the performance of the tasks and duties mandated, including by reacting promptly
to the urgent appeals of the Special Rapporteur and providing the information
requested, as well as to cooperate with other relevant procedures and mechanisms of
the Human Rights Council dealing with the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;
30. Calls upon States to give serious consideration to responding favourably
to requests by the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries;
31. Welcomes the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to implement the mandate given to her in 2005, in resolution 60/158, and
requests the High Commissioner to continue her efforts in this regard;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the Human Rights Council and to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session;
33. Decides to consider at its sixty-fourth session the report of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2008

6
