UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2602d

MEETING:

26 JULY 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2602)

. .. ... ... ... .. ... .... ... .. .... ... ... .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17351);
Letter dated 25 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mali to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17356) . .

1

WPV.2602 and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and .Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted.before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2602nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 26 July 1985, at 4.15 p.m.
President: Mr. Guennadi I. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda ‘(S/AgenW26!2)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17351);
Letter aated 25 July 1985 from the Permanent Re-presentative of Mali to the United Nations addressed to the President ‘of the Security Council
(S/17356)
The meeting was caBed to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 24 July 1985 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/17351);
Letter &ted 25 July 1985 from the Permanent Reprosentative of Mali to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/17356)
1. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decisions-taken at the previous meetings on this item [26OOth and 2601s~ meetings], I invite the
representative of Mali to take a place at the Council table;
I invite the representatives of the Central African Republic, Cuba, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic,
Kenya, Senegal, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Zaire to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Niare (Ma@ took a
place at the CounciI table; Mr. Gbezera-Bria (Centrat Afri-

can Repubhc), Mr. Oramas Oliva (Cuba), Mr. Worku (Ethiopia), -Mr. Hucke (German Democratic Republic), Mr.
Mudho (Kenya), Mr. Ba (Senegal), Mr. von Schirnding
(South Africa), Mr. EI-Fattai (Syrian Arab Republic) and
Mr. Bagbeni Adeito Nzengeya (Zaire) took the pIaces
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Members of the Council have before them document
S/17354/Rev.l,
which contains the revised text of a draft
resolution submitted by Denmark and France.
3. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/17360, tihich contains the text of a
letter dated 26 July 1985 from the representative of Tunisia, addressed to the President of the Security Council.
4. The first speaker is the representative of Central African Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. GBEZERA-BRIA
(Central African Republic)
(interpretation from French): I should like first of all to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. Preceding speakers have paid tribute
to your long and varied experience in international affairs
and to your diplomatic skills. I associate myself with that
tribute.
6. I also wish to express my great esteem for your predecessor, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and
Tobago, who presided over the Council’s deliberations last
month. At a time when the Council is once again dealing
with the question of the South African Government’s policy of apartheid, Trinidad and Tobago offers a picture of a
successful multiracial society.
7. I also appreciate the honour which you have bestowed
upon my country in allowing it to address the Council and
to air its views on the grave situation prevailing in South
Afi-ica.
8. Based on the groundless premise of racial superiority-in
this case, white-the system of apartheid stands
our strikingly in our world in that the negation of the right
to be different, racism, is made into a philosophy of State
and constitutes the State’s very foundation.
9. That white minority has exclusive enjoyment of all
rights and privileges, and arrogates to itself the principles
of dignity, equality and justice-principles
universally rec-

ognized as applying to all persons. A chosen race, it
decides the destiny of others and above all of the majority
which does not exist, since blacks are considered, in the
words of a Chairman of the Group of African States, as
“non-persons”.
‘.

18. This is why my country here welcomes the exemplary
and extremely courageous action taken by France in having not only recalled its ambassador to South Africa and
suspended all investments in that country, but also in having requested these emergency meetings of the Council.

10. The system of apartheid thus identifies, categorizes
and pens in on the basis of skin colour. It denies nationality to 20 million blacks, plunders their lands and fragments
a country.

19. The authors of the draft resolution [~17354/Bev. I],
which in my country’s view is a positive text, explained
yesterday the spirit in which the text was drafted and the
need for the Council, in the present tragic situation in
South Africa, to arrive at a common position. It is in fact
desirable for the Council to rally together before this new
challenge hurled at it by the racist regime.

11. At other times and in other places, the world mobilized to tight against a system which sought to govern a
world on the basis of the specious, terrible criterion of
racial inferiority and which also identified, categorized,
penned, annihilated.

20. Therefore my delegation is convinced that negotiations will result in a text that will not only live up to the
expectations of the international community but also contribute to the victory of freedom, dignity and justice in
South Africa.

12. How human, or rather, how the sacred values of the
human person are defended in South Africa by the men,
women, children, who have stood up against the sophisticated arsenal of repression by the minority regime of
South Africa and its countless criminal actions inside and
outside its borders..

2 1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of Zaire. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

13. The established of a state of emergency in 36 districts,
under the cover of which the racist regime increases its
arbitrary arrests and. detentions without trial and carries
out forced displacements, signals a grave deterioration of
the situation in that country. It is difficult to justify the
establishment of a state of emergency; it is difficult to
justify the unjustifiable, unless one really is at bay.

22. Mr.

BAGBENI

(interpretationfrom

ADEITO

NZENGEYA

(Zaire)

French): The delegation of Zaire would

like first of all to associate itself with all those who
extended their congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month of July. Trusting in your qualities as a consummate diplomat together with your long experience in this
tield, and furthermore taking into account the fact that
you are the Vice-Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, I remain fully convinced that you will
successfully conduct the work of the Council on this question before us.

14. There is no superiority whatsoever on the basis of
skin colour. Skin colour is no indicator of maturity or
immaturity. It gives no grounds for human beings to refuse
to treat their fellow human beings as such.
15. My country, the Central African Republic, whose
national motto is “zo kouC zo 20” and “so zo la”, in other
words, that “each man is a man”, and that “before each
man stands another”, who has a right to respect and to
dignity, rejects unambiguously and condemns any system
that denigrates the affirmation of human identity and the
preservation of the human being. This is the constant policy of my country and of its Head of State, General AndrC
Kolingba.

23. My delegation, furthermore, is grateful to the representative of Trinidad and Tobago for the skill with which
he presided over the Council during the month of June.
24. My delegation is pleased at this opportunity to present the position of its Government on this question. It
was pure outrage and a refusal to stand resigned in the face
of the cruelty of the racist regime of apartheid that led
France and the Group of African States to call for the
convening of an emergency meeting of the Council.

16. Apartheid, which in our day remains a crime against
mankind and a threat to international peace and security,
cannot be reformed. It must be dismantled and yield to a
free, indivisible and democratic society, because only the
eradication of that scourge and the exercise by the majority of its right to participate in the administration of the
public affairs of its country, either directly or through
freely chosen representatives in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, can restore peace
and harmony to that part of Africa.

25. Emboldened by the impunity with which it was able
to perpetuate all its crimes over a period of four decades
and by the assistance provided it all along by some,, the
apartheid Pretoria regime has once again awakened the
conscience of the world community by decreeing a state of
emergency to allow its police to exterminate the black population of South Africa in order to gain mastery over the
territory of South Africa without the presence of the indigenous population of that territory.

17. My country is aware of the immense difficulties, the
uncompromising
positions and the very different and
highly tenacious interests that must be overeome for the
attainment of racial justice in South Africa.

26. If any supervisory commission or the Commission
on Human Rights had been able to count the number of
killings, disappearances, deportations and acts of genocide
2

in the subterranean prisons of South Africa. it would certainly have discovered that thousands of people, mostly
blacks, had been done away with by this policy not only of
racial discrimination and aparzheid, but also of extermination, pure and simple, of the black race of South Africa.

France, which has just adopted a firm and decisive position towards the regime of South Africa.
34. Zaire is pleased, furthermore, that France, the country of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
country of Rousseau’s Social Contract and so many other
historic decisions that have determined the future of peoples and defined fundamental human freedoms, that
France reacted so promptly and so aptly to the horrors
and plunders of the Pretoria regime by imposing on it
appropriate diplomatic, economic and financial sanctions.

27. Indeed, it is more and more a matter of public record
that the policies of apartheid and of racial discrimination,
which up until now have denied to the majority of the
South African black people its most fundamental human
rights, have been becoming more and more a criminal
policy used against the black population.

35. My delegation expresses its thanks to the Govem-

28. The Botha regime is trying not only to consolidate its
policy of apartheid, which has been recognized as being a
crime against humanity and a threat to international peace
and security, but to wipe the black population off the map
of South African territory in order to continue occupying
the land without the indigenous inhabitants.

ment of France.

29. Otherwise, it is hard to believe that, at a time when all
the other racial communities in South Africa are enjoying
certain rights and are spared certain humiliations, only the
black population continues to suffer arbitrary arrests-the
number of which has now reached the record of 9OO-and
unjustified removals and killings; in a word, barbarous
and inhuman repression.

37. The delegation of Zaire also hopes that this initiative
will be supported by most other States, which heretofore
had relations with South Africa.-

36. In our view, the French initiative should be supported and endorsed by all Member States in order to
bring down the Pretoria regime and to force it to dismantle
its system of apartheid and racial discrimination.

38. Zaire fervently hopes that the revised draft resolution
submitted by France and co-sponsored by Denmark, as
discussed with the Group of African States [S/17354/
Rev.& will meet with the approval of all members of the
Council.

30. Zaire strenuously denounces and condemns the
methods of repression imposed by the racist regime on the
black people, and it will tight energetically not only against
racial discrimination and Pretoria’s hideous apartheid policy as crimes against human dignity, but also against all
the obstacles to Namibian independence erected by that
regime.

39. Furthermore, my delegation feels that this positive
step taken by France may win over other countries so as to
pull up the racist roots of the Pretoria regime, thus allowing the majority black population of South Africa to exercise its civil and political rights in a democratic system.

31. It is within this context that on 25 May 1985 at Kinshasa, on the occasion of the celebration of the Day of
Liberation of Africa, Zaire’s Commissar of State for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation urgently
appealed to the international community to continue to
exert ever greater pressure on the Pretoria regime, to compel it to put an end to its policy of repression and
apartheid.

40. The international community must consequently
take this opportunity to devise comprehensive measures
not only to put an end to the state of emergency decreed in
the 36 districts inhabited by blacks, not only to allow the
immediate and unconditional liberation of Nelson Mandela and all other political prisoners or the adoption of
political, diplomatic, economic, financial and telecommunication sanctions, but also, and above all, to eliminate
completely apartheid in South Africa in order to build a
democratic society based on justice and equal rights.

32. The Commissar of State also called on Governments
to cease providing any assistance whatsoever to South
Africa and to impose more severe sanctions against it. The
Executive Council of Zaire, he continued, condemns Pretoria’s apartheid policy and denounces the policy of bantunization, which deprives the black people of South
Africa both of its freedom and of all its rights by keeping it
under the booth of the white minority.

41. I wish to thank members of the Council for their
kind attention to the position of the Executive Council of
Zaire which I have just presented.
42. The PRESIDENT (inteqwetation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

33. In concluding his appeal, the Commissar of State
called on world public opinion to assist the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) and to exert pressure to bring about the unconditional liberation of Nelson
Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress of
South Africa (ANC), as well as all his companions. Hence
the delegation of Zaire is extremely pleased that the appeal
made by the Zairian Commissar of State is shared by

43. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): I am pleased to extend to you, Sir, on
my own behalf and in my capacity as, Chairman of the
Group of Arab States for this month, heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
3

50. The situation in South Africa calls now, not. tomorrow, for the immediate imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against the Pretoria regime, which
practises mass murder, commits heinous crimes against
humanity, perpetrates one act of aggression after another
against the peoples of Angola,. Mozambique and Botswana, threatens to launch more brutal invasions against
neighbouring countries and persists in colonizing and
exploiting Namibia, thus defying the Charter of the United
Nations and the international will expressed by the Council on scores of occasions.

for the month of July. I am certain that the Council,
thanks to your long experience and wisdom, will live up to
the particular responsibilities assigned it in a month during
which the world is witnessing processions of martyrs
mowed ,down by the fire of the racist, oppressive regime.
44. I take this opportunity to associate myself with the
previous speakers in paying a tribute to your predecessors,
the Minister for Foreign AfTairs of Trinidad and Tobago
and the representative of that friendly country, for the
exemplary manner in which they guided the Council’s
affairs during its consideration of the aggression of the
Pretoria racists against Angola and Botswana, and during’
its consideration of the question of eliminating racist colonialism from Namibia.

51. ‘By pursuing those policies, South Africa gravely
threatens international peace and security and flouts the
relevant provisions of the Charter. It is therefore incumbent upon the Council to use the collective security
machinery against’ South Africa.

45. The Council ‘is meeting today not only to consider a
complaint similar to those lodged in the past. Today’s
meeting must be one in which we express, with the entire
world, solidarity with those who lead the liberation struggle and with the broad masses in South Africa struggling
against the terrorism, persecution and servitude imposed
upon them. The South African masses have gone beyond
the stage of demonstrations and protests and have taken
the initiative to resist in self-defence, district by district,
house by house and neighbourhood by neighbourhood.

52. We cannot, intellectually or practically, differentiate
between the Fascist, racist practices of Pretoria against the,
South African people and its occupation of Namibia or its
aggressive practices against the front-line States. The apartheid regime practises settler colonialism at home and corn-.
mits :, one act of aggression .after another against
neighbouring States to extend its hegemony and control
over them.
I
53. The Council should facilitate the birth and growth of
a revolution against a regime that is an international outlaw; it should not embark, through utopian resolutions, on
disfiguring or misleading this revolution by espousing allegations that do not reflect noble Africa’s political, demographic, geographic and political realities.

46. Regardless of the attempts of Pretoria and its allies to
brand the upheaval as terrorism, there is a growing popular revolution in the full senseof the word, and the Council
cannot but salute that revolution and pay tribute to the
heroism of its sons. We believe that the emergence of the
revolution of the people of South Africa, from the point of
view of principle and results, is for the benefit of humanity
in its entirety and in the interest of peace and the restoration of stability and justice in southern Africa.

54. Sanctions are imperative to end the war’being waged
by Pretoria against the people of South Africa and the
neighbouring countries and to attain the complete independence of Namibia. The argument that economic and
other sanctions will adversely affect the black masses belittles the struggle of those masses. He who has proven his
willingness to die for the sake of freedom and dignity is not
afraid of poverty or hunger. Both publicly and in his heart
of hearts, he says c*My freedom and the freedom of coming
generations nurtures my humanity and my’ dignity-not’
your .doilars, which are invested in the exploitation of my
land, my sweat and my blood.‘*

47. The Council, despite the intransigence of those who
persist in protecting Pretoria, must support this revolution;
it deeply relieves the peoples of the world which have lost
faith in the credibility of those who, on the one hand,
condemn apartheid and, on the other, strengthen it.
48. ‘The truth has emerged in all its tragic dimensions,
and all peoples have espoused the struggle of the South
African people following the debunking of the arguments
propagated by those who benefit politically, strategically
and materially from prolonging servitude and exploitation:

55. The question before the Council is not the state’of
emergency originally declared to mislead the world by
creating the impression that Pretoria believes in the supremacy of law and kills, displaces and tortures in accordance
with the provisions of law. Has the world forgotten that
the apartheid regime is a regime of institutionalized terrorism and violence, practised under laws established to make
possible the waging of war against the people of South
Africa? Whether or not the state of emergency is lifted will
not change a thing. What is required of the Council is the
adoption of concrete effective measures to dismantle that
regime and to supplant it with.a regime that accords with
the will of the struggling masses and is based on freedom
and equality without any discrimination.

49. Here the South ,African people is speaking its final
words to the Council and to the entire world. It is saying:
enough hypocrisy, enough manipulation of reality, enough
toying with human feelings and aspirations, enough misleading slogans and dilatory tactics. The South African
militants have said no-and we join with them-to the
policy of “constructive engagement” which provides the
white tyrants of South Africa with the ways and means to
devastate, destroy, displace and dismember the country, to
strengthen apartheid institutions and to increase the brutaiity of racist aggression against the, neighbouring African
States.
4

56. Yesterday we heard the representative of the Pretoria
r&ime. He attributed the state of emergency to the need to
protect blacks from blacks-as if the upurfheid regime had
been created to be an arbiter, a judge, a policeman and a
guardian over the black masses, while cruelty is at the basis
of that regime, which does not acknowledge the presence
of 90 per cent of the population, although it lives at its
expense.
57. In his flagrant hypocrisy, the representative of South
Africa reminded us, as Arabs, of the statements of the
representative of Israel, his comrade and fellow-member of
the racist gang. We wonder; for how long will the United
Nations allow representatives of the racist rkgimes of Pretoria and Tel Aviv to address it? Is it not time to expel
them from membership in an Organisation created in the
wake of the Second World War to eliminate fascism and
all manifestations of terrorism, aggression and racism?
58. We reaffirm our solidarity, as peoples and Govemmen& with Africa’s struggle by all means. We are confident that the South African masses, thanks to their
struggle under the leadership of the national liberation
movements embodied in the ANC and the Pan Africanist
Congress of Azania (PAC) will triumph over the ruling
clique. The terrorists are those who resist the will of peoples to achieve liberty, independence, self-determination,
equality and justice.

which is a threat to peace and stability in the region and
the entire world, and in this body the international community resolutely condemned the criminal policy pursued :
by that regime both inside and outside the country. Now
the Council again has reason to reject a further escalation
of the crimes committed by the racist regime of South
Africa against the people of that country.
65. Many representatives of States here have very convincingly uncovered the oppressive facts of the latest
crimes of the apartheid regime. The ‘state of emergency
installed in 36 districts of South Africa since 21 July especially affects the larger and most densely populated settlements of the black majority of the country and confers
new full powers on the apparatus of racist oppression for
terrorizing all opponents of apartheid.
66. .In the fust few days alone after the proclamation of
the state of emergency, another 16 people murdered and
more than 800 arrested were added to the crime register of
the Pretoria regime; more than 500 people have been killed
over the last, 10 months.

67. The Special ‘Committee against Apurtheid rightly
stated in its declaration of 24 July 198%
“The road from Sharpeville and Soweto to Crossroads and Uitenhage has been one of escalating resistance by the people and indiscriminate violence by the
regime, resulting in the killing and wounding of people,
including women and children.“’

59. World imperialism, which seeks to rein in the aspirations of the masses by every means, is bound to recede and
shrink. That is the lesson of history.

68. We share the assessment that the state of emergency
constitutes Botha’s open declaration of war against
oppressed people and the opponents of aparrheid. It is
more proof of State-organized terrorism by the ruling circles of the white minority and a clear indication that the
racist regime is historically doomed.

60. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretarion from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
61. Mr. HUCKE (German Democratic Republic): Permit me, Sir, to extend to you the heartiest congratulations
of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of July. Your efforts as
President over the last few weeks have already shown that
you, as the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, with which the German Democratic Republic is,
closely and fraternally linked, are using all your great
diplomatic skill to lead the Council in the interests of securing peace, solving conflicts and promoting international
co-operation.

69. The new wave of terror in South Africa is an expression of the worsening economic and political crisis of the
apartheid system, which has constantly been deepened by
the high expenditures for securing the policy of apartheid
both inside and outside the country and by the continuation of the illegal occupation of Namibia. However, that
policy, which has become stuck in a deep crisis, was possible only because the racists are sure of support from certain imperialist allies, notably the United States. With a
policy of so-called constructive engagement, which is
aimed at global strategic and economic interests, and with
verbal condemnation and half-hearted measures, the system of apartheid is not liquidated, but only encouraged.

62 Our appreciation also goes to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the,Permanent Representative of Trinidad
and Tobago for holding the high offtce of the presidency
so effectively in the month of June.
63. I thank you, Sir, and the members of the Council for
the opportunity given to me to explain.my country’s position on the item under discussion. We appreciate the initiative of France and the Group of African States to convene
the Security Council as a timely step in the right direction.

70. The upswing of the liberation movement in South
Africa, led by the ANC, and the multiplicity of mass
actions furnish proof that the manoeuvres of the regime to
consolidate its minority rule by an alleged reform of qpurtheid have failed. Against the ever greater revolt of the
oppressed and outlawed masses, Pretoria sets in motion its
perfected machinery to suffocate their protest.

64: Only a few weeks have passed since the Council last
had to deal with the policy of apartheid in South Africa,

71. In his message on the occasion of the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination this
5

year, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of
ihe Socialist Unity Party of Germany and the Chairman of
the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic,
Erich Honecker, declared:

to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
77. Mr. WORKU (Ethiopia): Allow me at the outset, Sir,
to congratulate you on your assumption of the high office
of the presidency. Givkn your diplomatic dexterity and
finesse, we have no doubt that the Council will have very
fruitful deliberations.

“Mindful of the bitter historical experience, the
people and the Government of the German Democratic
Republic oppose with disgust and indignation the practices of the racist and Fascist apbrheid rtgime in South
Africa whose policy of State terrorism seriously
endangers international peace and security. They condemn the attempts, in disregard of worid-wide protests
and United Nations decisions, to preserve the criminal
apartheid regime as an instrument for destabilizing the
region and preventing any social progress.“2

78. I also thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago for the able
manner in which they guided the proceedings of the Council during the month of June.
79. I should also like to express my gratitude to you, Sir,
and your colleagues in the Council for the opportunity
accorded to us to participate in this debate.

72 The German Democratic Republic supports the democratic demands of the African population for the terniination of the genocide policy against the population, the
immediate cessation of the state of emergency, the release
of the political prisoners, including Nelson Mandela, $e
suspension of restrictions on persons and organizations,
the liquidation of the policy of bantustanization, the creation of democratic conditions, the introduction of a universal fran&se and the elaboration of a new constitution.

80. Once again the Council is meeting to consider the
abhorrent situation prevailing in South Africa. Once again
the world community has been alerted to the tragic situation arising from the imposition of a state of emergency by
the terrorist rkgime in Pretoria.
81. The international community is painfully aware of
the loss of life in that unhappy country. During the last
three months alone, over 500 defenceless persons have one
way or another been murdered as a result of the terrorist
practices of the apartheid regime. Others, in the hundreds,
have been subjected to mass arrest and detention. What is
particularly alarming about the declaration of the state of
emergency which was imposed on the black masses of
South Africa on 20 July is the fact that it allows the fascist
forces of aparzheid to arrest, torture, maim and kill the
black population in the name of peace and order. It enables them to pursue in a manner which is undoubtedly
more vicious and brutal what they have actually long been
practicing. The imposition of this notorious state of emergency has already led to the arrest of many leaders of the
democratic forces and movements in South Africa. The
number of those .lost or unaccounted for is alarming. In
all, this has created a state of terror in a country which has
yet to witness peace and stability.

73. The situation requires speedy action by the United
Nations and the Security Council. International pressure
on Pretoria, in accordance with the legitimate demands of
the South African fighters against aparrheid, must be
enhanced.
74. Like many other States, the German Democratic
Republic supports here in this debate the following
demand made by the Committee against Aparrhefd at its
meeting on 24 July:
“As a first step, the Security council must consider
the matter urgently, determine that the situation in
South Africa constitutes a threat to international peace
and security in terms of Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations and decide on’effective sat&ions
against the apartheid +gime.‘r3

82. ‘This state if affairs cannot go unchecked. It is indeed
appropriate that the Council should consider measures to
be taken against a rdgime which continues to defy intemational public opinion. In this regard, we welcome the
timely initiative taken by the Government of France and
the efforts that Government has deployed in its endeavour
to ensure the immediate convening of the Council, This is
a step in the right direction and is worthy of emulation by
those who continue to collaborate with the Pretoria
@me.

75. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
should like to info- the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Yugoslavia in which he
requests to be invited to participate in thediscussion of the
item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent 0: the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussi.on, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

83. What we are witnessing today in South Africa is a
continuation-nay,
an escalation-of the heinous scheme
involving the bantustanization, arrest, torture and mass
murder of the black majority by a rkgime which has never
harboured even the most elementary notion of human
decency, For decades, those who have chosen to wage a
struggle for freedom, justice and peace in South ,Africa

At t& invitation of rhe president, Mr. Djokic’(Yugoslavia)
took the place reserved for trim at the side of the C’auncl
CXamber.
76. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him
6

porary society. It has become clear that apartheid cannot
be changed. It can and should be totally eradicated.

have been subjected to the systematic repression which has
become the hallmark of the Pretoria regime, and they continue to be subjected to that repression.

9 1. Now that a state of emergency has been dedared, it is
more evident than ever that the abhorrent system of apurtheid constitutes permanent aggression against the majority
of the population of South Africa. Hundreds of persons
have been arrested so far. At the same time, at least 11
people, most of them very young, have been killed in
clashes with the racist regime’s security forces. Since last
September, some 500 people have been killed and thousands injured as the’tragic toll of the new illegal discriminatory constitution.

84. In an attempt to arrest the rising tide of democracy
and social justice in the country, the regime has been
uprooting communities and condemning them to a life in
arid and semi-arid wastelands. Its response to peaceful
demonstrations by defenceless citizens has been more violence and terror. Throughout these years, this regime has
enjoyed the unfailing support of some countries which
regrettably maintain close contact with South Africa. Consequently, whenever the international communitydemands
the adoption of stronger measures against the racist regime
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, those same countries advise caution in the
treatment of apartheid. We find this attitude totally unacceptable and dilatory.

92 The racist r&me has been conducting large-scale
arrests of leaders of the organizations rallied together in
the United Democratic Front (UDF), trade unionists, lawyers, students and the leading figures of the civil rights
groups opposing racism and the policy of apartheid. By
declaring a state of emergency and conferring full powers
on the army and the police, the regime has once again
demonstrated that it believes only in naked force, repression and terror.

85. Failure to act promptly would mean condoning the
state of terror which has been generated by the repressive
regime and the continuation of the human suffering which
has been going on in South Africa for far too long. We
therefore call upon the Council to act and adopt effective
measures against the Pretoria regime, including those provided for by Chapter VII of the Charter.

93. The Security Council and the General Assembly
have repeatedly cahed upon South Africa to abandon the
policy of apartheidand to stop its increasingly ruthless acts
of discrimination,
detention, criminal prosecution and
enforcement of this obnoxious system through sweeping
laws and brutal police methods.

86. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is ‘the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
87. Mr. DJOKIC (Yugoslavia): At the outset, Sir, I wish
to convey to you our congratulations upon your assumption of the presidency for the month of July. We are we!1
aware of your diplomatic skill and experience, and we wish
you every success in guiding the work of the Council this
month.

94. Over the years, all those acts of the Pretoria regime
were meant to institutionalize racial discrimination and to
undermine the moral and political principles and fundamental objectives of the Organization and the intemational community, including those embodied in the
Universal Declaration of Human Bights. It is evident that
the latest measures represent a blatant violation of the
principle of the rule of law and of respect for basic human
rights. We view the imposition of the state of emergency as
a formally declared war on almost 75 per cent of the population of South Africa and demand that such an indiscriminate measure be met with vigorous condemnation.

88. I should like to express our appreciation to the delegation of Trinidad and Tobago, to that country’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs and to its representative for the competent, outstanding manner in which they guided the work of
the Council during the month of June.
89. Much has been said about apartheid, which has been
rightly proclaimed by the General Assembly to be a crime
against humanity and a constant threat to international
peace and security. Today, in the mid-1980s, apartheid has
turned South Africa into a country with an anachronistic
and shameful system of State-controlled racism, into a
society lacking any respect for human rights and human
dignity.

95. The apartheid State has time and again unleashed its

military might against patriotic and progressive men,
women and children, at Soweto, Cassinga, Johannesburg
and elsewhere in that country of pain and suffering, and
beyond its borders as well. The established system of discrimination, repression and aggression represents the basis
on which the internal and foreign policies of the minority
racist regime are founded.

90. For decades, the policy of apartheid of the minority
racist regime of South Africa has been causing grave concern to the international community, since it represents a
system based on the very antithesis of the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The South
African regime, by its persistent and most outrageous violations of international law, has isolated itself from the
basic values which constitute the very essence of contem-

96. The illegal occupation of Namibia is continuing, and
the regime is committing acts of aggression against the
front-line States. The decision of the South African regime
to form a so-called interim government in Namibia was yet
another among the illegal attempts by the racists to prolong the occupation of that Territory by internal
manoeuvres.
7

97. Pretoria is developing an enormous military potential, including nuclear technology for military purposes,
and is ruthlessly exploiting the human and natural resources of Namibia. The system of the policy of apartheid is
threatening to transform the whole region into an integral
part of global bloc confrontation and rivalry for strategic
positions. This is in direct contravention to the legitimate
interests of the oppressed people of Axania, to. the rights of
self-determination and independence of the people of Namibia and to the rights of all States in the region to sovereignty, territorial integrity, security, independence and
peaceful development.

tative of the UKRAINIAN
REPUBLIC.

SOVIET

SOCIALIST

103. Little more than four months have passed since the
Council, after deliberating on the serious situation in
South Africa resulting from the latest acts of repression on
the part of the racist regime, adopted resolution 560
(1985), which firmly condemned the Pretoria regime for
the murders of innocent Africans and arbitrary arrests.
That resolution called on South Africa to release unconditionally and immediately all political prisoners. Last
month, the Council took up the problem of Namibia,
which remains unsolved through Pretoria’s fault, as well as
the situation resulting from the acts of aggression committed by South Africa against Angola and Botswana. The
resolutions adopted by the Council on those matters made
appropriate demands on South Africa.

98. The non-aligned countries have consistently underlined the urgent need for eliminating ‘apartheid and called
for the establishment of a society based on equality regardless of race, colour, religious belief or sex. .At the Seventh
Conference of Heads ‘of State or .Govemment of NonAligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983,
stressed their resolve to intensify joint efforts in support of
the peoples of southern Africa. Strong support was given
also to the liberation movements in southern Africa [see
S/15675 and Corr. 1 and 2 annex, sect. IJ.

104. However, recent events in South Africa very clearly
demonstrate that the racist regime continues to remain
deaf to the repeated demands of the United Nations and of
the international community as a whole. In South Africa
blood is flowing again. House-to-house searches are going
on and arbitrary arrests made. In the last few days alone,
more than 800 freedom fighters have been thrown into the
racist prisons. Under the cover of the state of emergency
imposed by Pretoria, the racists’ police and army are step
ping up terror and repression. The worsening situation in
South ‘Africa will inevitably, lead to a greater ,threat to
international peace and security.

99. In March this year, in the wake of yet another dramatic manifestation of violence, the Coordinating Bureau
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries demanded‘
that Pretoria put an immediate end to its policy of terror
and uprooting of the indigenous African people from their
homes and banishing them to artificially created bantustans. The Bureau commended the massive united resistance of the oppressed people of South Africa against the
apartheid regime and reaffirmed the legitimacy of their
struggle for a united, non-racial and democratic South
Africa [see S/17009, annex]. .

105. The situation ‘in South Africa has worsened and
become truly explosive because the Pretoria regime, trampling underfoot the legitimate rights of the overwhelming
majority of the population of the country in.disregard of
the will of the international community, is stubbornly pursuing a policy of perpetuating the apartheid system and
shoring up the rule of the racist minority. After failing in
its political manoeuvring, the racist regime of Pretoria has
returned to its more usual methods-the use of guns and
bayonets. However, this new violence on the part of the
aparrheid regime will lead only to‘a greater upsurge in the
national liberation struggle ‘in South Africa.

100. We in Yugoslavia strongly oppose and condemn the
use of force against innocent people and the imposition of
the state of emergency in South Africa. We express our
total solidarity and will to continue to render -our full
,moral, political and material support to the courageous
struggle of the people in southern Africa against apartheid,
racism, colonialism and discrimination. Support for the
liberation struggle in southern Africa and for the liberation
movements-the ANC and the PAC in South Africa and
SWAP0 in Namibia-is
the most efficient way to eliminate apartheid and establish freedom, equality.and dignity
in that part of the world.

106. We feel complete solidarity with those who are so
courageously lighting apartheid; we firmly support their
just struggle for a future of freedom.
107. As correctly pointed out in the statement made by,
the Special Committee against ‘Apartheid on 24 ‘July this
year, in connection with the serious deterioration- of the
situation in South Africa.

101. It is our firm belief that the Council should strongly
condemn the imposition of the state of emergency and call
for its immediate abrogation. The Council should also resolutely condemn the continued massacres of the oppressed
people and arbitrary arrests and repression. It should
demand the urgent and full eradication of apartheid and
undertake to consider concrete measures against the
oppressive regime of South Africa, including measures
provided by Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

“The responsibility for the tragic loss of life rests not
only on the terrorist regime in Pretoria, but also on
those Powers that have continued to hinder and frustrate effective international action to force that regime
to abandon apartheid and tepression.“3
108. It is absolutely clear that political, dipiomatic, economic, military and other assistance and support.provided
South Africa, whatever name you give it-“constructive

102. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as the represen8

engagement” or anything else-will not lead to a solution
of the problem: the elimination of aparrhefd. On the contrary, it will only lead to a hardening of Pretoria’s position
and encourage even more brazen behaviour on its part. It
is precisely because it knows it can count on the United
States and several other Western countries,- and Israel as
well, and feels secure that they will protect it from sanctions, that racist South Africa has been settling scores so
brutally with the indigenous population, disregarding
United Nations decisions condemning uparzheid.
109, The situation which has arisen in the southern part
of the African continent calls for firm and, above.all, effective measures on the part of the international community.
An important role in this must be played by the Security
Council. In view of the South African regime’s continued
disregard of United Nations resolutions, its steadily hardening apartheid practices and policies, its persistent acts
of .aggression against independent African States, the
build-up of its military potential and South Africa’s continuing plans for the development of nuclear weapons, the
Ukrainian SSR firmly supports the call for the Council’s
adoption of all necessary measures against the racist
regime in South Africa, including comprehensive, mandatory sanctions provided in Chapter VII,of the Charter of :
the United Nations, which, in the view of a majority of.
countries, are the only remaining peaceful means for compelling Pretoria to give up its policy of apartheid, terror
and repression. It is time to put an end to the tyranny of
racism. This can be done only through joint efforts on the
part of the entire international community, and first and
foremost the members of the Security Council.
110. I now resume’ my function ,as PRESIDENT.

,

111. Mr. de KEMOULARIA
(France) @trerpreturion
from French): Mr. President, as you yourself indicated at
the beginning of this afternoon’s meeting, my delegation
submitted a revised draft resolution which has been distributed under the symbol S/17354/Rev.l and which is now
before the Council. This draft broadly takes into account
suggestions made to us since yesterday. It is therefore my
honour at this time to request that it be put to the vote in
the Council.
112. Mr. BASSOLE (Burkina Faso) (interpretation from
French): It is my honour, on behalf of the delegations of
Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru and Trim- :
dad and Tobago to submit to the Council the following
amendment to draft resolution S/17354/Rev.l:
“Strongly warm South Africa that failure to do so
would compel the Security Council to meet forthwith to
consider the adoption of appropriate measures under
the United Nations Charter, including Chapter VII, as
additional pressure to ensure South Africa’s compliance
with relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions;” [S/173631.
,i
I propose that this amendment be inserted after operative
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution.

113. The authors of this amendment have worked in
good faith and a spirit of co-operation in an effort to
improve and strengthen the draft resolution before us.
They hope that this amendment, which should do that,
will be accepted by the Council.
114. The PRESIDENT
(inferpreration from Rmiun):
The representative of France has proposed that the Council proceed to a vote on the draft resolution distributed
under the symbol S/17354/Rev.l.
115. The representative of Burkina Faso, together with
the delegations of Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru and
Trinidad and Tobago, has submitted an amendment to
draft resolution S/17354/Rev. 1.
116. Article 33 of the rules of procedure provide, that a
proposal to introduce an amendment has precedence over
a draft resolution. I shall therefore put the amendment
proposed by the representative of Burkina Faso to the
vote.
A vote was taken by show if hands.

In fayour: Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: ‘United Kingdom of Great Britain’ and Northern -Ireland; United States of America.’
Abstaining: France.
l’here were I2 votes in favour, 2 against and 1 abstention.
The amendment was not adopted, owing to the negative
votes of two permanent members of the Council
117. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
shall now call on members of the -Council ,who wish to
speak before the voting on the revised draft resolution
contained in document S/17354/Rev.l. That draft resolution, sponsored by Denmark and France, has just been
introduced by the representative of .France.
118. Mr. MAXEY (United Kingdom): The draft resolution submitted by the delegations of Denmark and France
symbolizes the Council’s revulsion at the continuing violence and killing in South Africa and at the repressive
measures invoked. Apartheid is the antithesis of democracy
and of the civil and political rights which democratic countries uphold. The policy and practice of apartheid have
therefore evoked particularly strong feelings in democratic
countries. They offend the very principles on which our
societies are founded.
119. While no one can claim a monopoly of concern; it is
true to say that nowhere are there deeper and more
genuine feelings about the situation in South Africa than
in the United Kingdom. My Government, in reaching its
decision on this draft resolurion, has taken full account of

the need to emphasize to the South African Government
that there is no sympathy anywhere in the international
community for apartheid and repression. Rhetoric and
symbolic acts, however, will not resolve the enormously
complex problems of South Africa. These are problems
which, above all, will need to’be resolved within South
Africa and by all the people of South Africa. It is very
difficult for us to consider them objectively. Apartheid
arouses deep-seated emotions in all of us.

before the vote, I shall now put to the vote the revised draft
resolution contained in document S/l7354/Rev. 1.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, France, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

120. However, the situation which it has created in South
Africa requires the most serious and sober thought on the
part of the Council. This is, as we have said before, a
matter where our objective should be to unite, not divide,
the Security Council and the United Nations.

Against: None.
Abstaining: United Kingdom of Great Britain
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

121. Most of the draft resolution which is before us
accords generally with the existing policy of my Govemment and of our European partners-a policy, as I have
said, .which combines pressure and persuasion-but we
cannot endorse in particular its operative paragraph 6. To
us, the sale of South African krugerrands is not a major
issue. Many years ago the United Kingdom declined to
participate in South Africa’s civil nuclear programme
because the South African Government refused to accept
the safeguards of the International
Atomic Energy
Agency. We have long urged other Governments to adopt
a similar attitude. With our Commonwealth partners we
participate in the Gleneagles’ Agreement on sporting contacts with South Africa. It goes without saying that the
United Kingdom upholds strictly the mandatory embargo
enacted under Security Council resolution 418 (1977) to
govern the sale of arms to South Africa.

and

By 13 votes to zero, with 2 abstentions, the draft resolurion
was adopted [resolution 569 (1985)].
125. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
shall now call on members of the Council who wish to
make statements after the vote.
126. Mr. de KEMOULARIA
(France) (interpretation
from French): France, which took the initiative in calling
for these emergency meetings of the Council in view of the
continuation and worsening of the suffering caused by the
apartheid system in South Africa, is pleased at the adoption of the draft resolution it submitted to the Council with
the co-sponsorship of Denmark after having in great measure taken into account the comments made by the nonaligned members of the Council.

122. However, we cannot vote for this draft resolution
and were obliged to vote against the amendment just submitted because, as I said earlier, it would not, in our view,
be responsible to call for measures that would not achieve
the changes we all seek in South Africa and which could
indeed prove counter-productive. It would not be responsible to try to engender economic disruption in South Africa
when it is clear that the economic advancement of all sections of the population-and
particularly of the pooresthas been a powerful catalyst for change and increases the
pressure on the South African Government to dismantle
completely the apartheid laws. Measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations would thus not
be an effective way of achieving constructive internal
change in South Africa. The Council should be seeking to
build, not to destroy. Above all, it should seek by all
means to promote a genuine dialogue within South Africa
between all sections of the community, and not to encourage further violence or a widening of the grave divisions
which at present exist. k

127. France thanks all the members of the Council for
the constructive spirit and seriousness they have shown
during our work. None the less my country believes that
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations do not apply to the question the Council has had
before it. That is why my delegation abstained in the vote
on the draft amendment in document S/17363.
128. The Council’s adoption of this resolution is the
gravest warning that has been issued to South Africa to
condemn its policy of racial discrimination and the violation of human rights. Let us hope that this warning may be
heeded.
129. Mr. BASSOLE (Burkina Faso) (interpretationfrom
French): On behalf of Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru,
Trinidad and Tobago and Burkina Faso, I should like to
make the following statement.
130. The Council has just adopted resolution 569 (1985)
on the situation in South Africa. The delegations of the
aforementioned countries voted in favour of that resolution. Our votes should be understood as expressions of our
firm condemnation of the heinous apartheid regime and
everything it represents, as well as the systematic murders
and arbitrary arrests and detentions carried out by the
racist Pretoria regime following imposition of the state of
emergency in South Africa.

123. We and our European partners stated on 23 July
[s/17362, annex] that we were looking for significant and
rapid progress within a reasonable period of time in South
Africa. We shall watch developments in the months ahead
with close concern.
124. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
Since no other member of the Council wishes to speak
IO

talking with South Africa, it could lead to results that none
of us would wish. However, as we said in our statement
before the Council yesterday [260&h meefing], we believe
that actions to restrict new investments in South Africa
both undermine the economy of that country and create
additional hardships for blacks in South Africa. Isolating
the South African economy further with economic sanctions would only do further harm to the black majority in
South Africa.

131. We have joined in the appeal for the immediate
removal of the draconian measures instituted by the
regime. We believe that apartheid is the root cause of all
the tension and instability prevailing throughout southern
Africa. We are in favour of the measures against South
Africa advocated in paragraph 6 of the resolution.
132. If, on the one hand, we have already expressed our
appreciation of the initiative taken by France within the
Council, as well as the efforts of the sponsors of the draft
resolution, Denmark and France, to take account of certain concerns of the non-aligned countries, on the other
hand we regret that the resolution adopted by the Council
suffers from a fun&mental omission, in that it contains no
reference-even a veiled one-to measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, which we feel the
Council should impose against South Africa.

138. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrerpretationj?om Russian): The Soviet delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document S/17354/Rev.l.
Similarly, we voted for the
amendment to it proposed by a group of non-aligned
States members of the Council [S/17363]. We voted for
the draft resolution because it vigorously condemns the
system of apartheid, the policies and practices of the upartheid regime, the mass arrests and murders that have been
carried out by the criminal elements in Pretoria and the
state of emergency that has been declared in that country,
and because it contains a demand that the state of emergency be revoked.

133. That omission could have been overcome to a large
extent through the inclusion of our amendment [S/I7363J,
which is identical to the text of Council resolution 566
(1985), adopted on 19 June, on the situation in Namibia.
We regret that two permanent members voted against that
paragraph today, which has led to a weakening of the
Council’s position and thus sends Pretoria a false message.
We hope, however, that the Council will revise that position in the near future. Furthermore, we deplore such formulations as “the Republic of South Africa” and “the
South African Government”. We do not recognize such
language, and it is not in such terms that we are accustomed to designating the racist South Afi-ican r&me in
the United Nations. Any other expression that might in
any way whatsoever tend to legitimize the racist rigime
would not be acceptable to us either.

139. At the same time, we should like once again to
emphasize that the draft resolution did not reflect The just
and completely warranted demands of the African States
and other non-aligned countries for the imposition of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against the racist rkgime
in South Africa, as laid down in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
140. We regret that the amendment put forward by the
group of non-aligned States members of the Council, containing a warning that sanctions would be imposed against
the racist r&ime, was vetoed by the United States and the
United Kingdom. We also regret that those countries,
which said that they condemned the racist regime, failed to
support even the draft-insuff%ziently
strong, in our
opinion-put
forward by Denmark and France. That is a
further indication of whose side those countries are on.

134. Mr. CLARK (United States of America): The
United States supports most of the elements in the resolution the Council has just adopted. The United States wants
an end to the state of emergency in South Africa. Clearly,
the underlying problem in South Africa is apartheid, and
the impatience to see that system change underlies the
current turmoil.

141. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprebfion from Russian):
The Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on the agenda.

135. The Government of South Africa must understand
that the question is not whether but how apartheid is going
to end.

i%e meeting rose at 6 p.m.

136. We reiterate our call for serious talks between the
Government of South Africa and black leaders aimed at
establishing a just society in South Africa.
’ See A/AC.1 lVL.627,
z See A/ACJIS/PV.560,
’ See A/AC. 1 WL.627,

137. We will maintain our policy of constructive engagement with South Africans. If there is no voice of reason

11

NOTES
p. 1.
p, 62.
p. 2.

-41

&I

2 l+s *I

&

. lJWl .L;i fl$ cj$ll
,,c d&l 2 UI
.c;;c$,i4r.~~j~,j.;L”;‘~pr~l:J!~~J~~~~jll

BRmB4zerabRdiC
B~~~~lbQt~~~~#~~!~A~B~~~~
w$ulnalL,
!

&.A

Js J,.Al

pi/l ;‘rrtj

iis

& J&i

,+Q

inm#baMarEH!3fitHAhm

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
UnitedNationspublications
maybeobtainedfrombookstores
anddistributorsthroughout~the
world.Consultyourbookstore
or writeto: UnitedNations.Sales
Section,NewYorkor Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURERLES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIE!G
Lespublications
desNationsUniessontenventedans les librairieset les agences d@sitaircs
du mondeentier.Informez-vous
aupr&s
devotre libraireou adresscz-vous
B : NationsUnies.
6ectiondesventes.New York ou Gentve.
ICAK llOJIYYMTb
W3fiAHWS OPrAHH3Am
O6M,UMHEHHblX
H3J.tamtn
Opratttt3attutt06aenmtettxstxHatmRMOXHO WHTb
B KHHlKHbtX
it arettTcTBaX
BO BCCX PaftOHaX
MHpa.
Mara3HHe
AJtH ttHUIHTe
tt0 al.tpecY:
ItpoJtalKe
H’JllaHHtt.
HbK)-hpX
HllH

fianomtre
OprtWH3aUHX
XKeHeBa.

cttpaBXH
06 it3JtaHHRX
06SellHHeHHbtX

B BattEn

HAUMQ
~ara3mtax
XHHEHOM

HatmU. CetCUHa
II0

COMO CONSEGUIRPUBLICACIONESDE LAS NACIONESUNIDAS
Laspublicaciones
delasNaciones
Unidasest&nen ventaenlibrerfasy casas
distribuidoras
en
todaspartesde1mundo.Consulte
asulibnro o dirljasea: Naciones
Unidas.Seccib deVentas.
NuevaYork o Ginebra.

Litbo in UnitedNations,New York

00300

90-61439-January1995-l

,925
