VI.

Resolutiom adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

ÜERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, JAMAICA, NIGERIA, PHILIPPINES and UNITED K!NGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTIIBRN
ffiELAND.

31/134.

lmprovement of the status and role of
women in education

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women emphasizes the need to
take all appropriate measures to ensure to women
equal rights with men in education at all levels,
Recalling further its resolutions 3520 (XXX), 3521
(XXX), 3522 (XXX), 3523 (XXX) and 3524 (XXX)
of 15 December 1975,
Recagnizing that the full and complete development
of a country requires the maximum participation of
women on equal terms with men in all fields,
Recagnizing alsa the necessity for women to have
equal rights, opportunities and obligations with men,
particularly in the fields of education and professional
and vocational training, to enable their full participation in the process of development,
Recagnizing further the importance of promoting the
education of women and its impact on the rearing of
the young generation,
N ating that, despite the world-wide progress in reducing illiteracy, the illiteracy rate for women far exceeds that of men and, in sorne cases, continues to rise,
Recagnizing the importance of exchange of experience in the elimination of illiteracy and improvement
of the educational standard of women at the national,
regional and international levels,
l. Appeals to all States which have not yet done so
to become parties to the Convention against Discrimination in Education, 1960,64 elaborated by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and to the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 611 and the Human Resources
Development Convention, 1975,66 elaborated by the International Labour Organisation;
2. Calls upan States to undertake, whenever necessary, in their economic, social and cultural programmes,
specific short-term and long-term measures aimed at
improving the status and role of women in education,
bearing in mind the following:
(a) The provisions of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women;
(b) The provisions of the World Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year 67 concerning education and
training, particularly with respect to an increase in
literacy and equal access of women at every level of
education, as well as the provisions of the Convention
and Recommendation against Discrimination in Education, 1960 and the appropriate recommendation concerning technical and vocational education of the United
64 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 429, p. 93.
Labour Organisation, Conventions and Recommendations, 1919-1966 (Geneva, 1966), Convention No.
111.
66 International Labour Oflice, Official Bulletin, vol. LVIII,
1975, Series A, No. 1, Convention No. 142.
67 Report of the World Conference of the lnternational
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. II, sect. A.
611 International

111

Nations Educational, Social and Cultural Organization,
and the provisions of the Discrimination (Employment
and Occupation) Convention, 1958, the Human Resources Development Convention, 1975 and the appropriate recommendations concerning discrimination
( employment and occupation), employment ( women
with family responsibilities) and human resources development of the International Labour Organisation;
3. Calls upon States, whenever necessary, to undertake all possible measures to eliminate illiteracy among
women, especially during the United Nations Decade
for Women;
4. Calls upan States which have not yet done so
to consider undertaking all appropriate measures:
(a) To introduce free and compulsory education
at the elementary leve! and, where possible, free education at all levels, including professional, vocational and
technical education, which should be accessible to
women without discrimination;
(b) To promote co-education;
(e) To ensure that men and women have access
on a footing of equality to scholarships and other study
grants when these are provided nationally or are made
available to States under bilateral or multilateral agreements;
5. Recammends that States should introduce measures to expand the exchange of experience on issues
concerning the improvement of the status and role of
women in education, particularly through courses, seminars and symposiums organized at the national, regional
and international levels;
6. Invites Member States, as well as the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Labour Organisation and other
organizations of the United Nations system, including
regional commissions, and interested intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations having consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, to submit to the Secretary-General their observations concerning the improvement of the status
and role of women in education;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Directors-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Labour Organisation and taking into account the comments and observations received under
paragraph 6 above, to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session a report on the status and role
of women in education;
8. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its thirty-third session.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/13:i.

International Research and Training lnstitute for the Advancement of W ornen

The General Assembly,
Rccallini its rcsolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975,

Noting the recommendations made by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 1998 (LX) of
12 May 1976,
