S/2014/158*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 March 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2109
(2013), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 July 2014 and requested updates every three
months on the implementation of the UNMISS mandate. The present report covers
major developments from the issuance of my report of 8 November 2013
(S/2013/651) to 6 March 2014. It also provides an update on the implementation of
resolution 2132 (2013), by which the Council temporarily increased the overall
force levels of UNMISS through inter-mission cooperation to support the protection
of civilians and the provision of humanitarian assistance during the crisis that
started on 15 December.

II. Political developments
2.
In my previous report on South Sudan, I highlighted the divisions within the
ruling party, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM). I indicated that the
divisions were potentially destabilizing and urged the President of South Sudan,
Salva Kiir, to continue reconciliation efforts ahead of the meeting of the party’s
National Liberation Council scheduled to be held before the end of 2013.
3.
Regrettably, collective efforts to reconcile the differences between SPLM
leaders that were supported by the countries of the region, international partners and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel did not succeed. By the end of
November 2013, tensions between the President, the former Vice-President, Riek
Machar, and other senior SPLM leaders increased. In a press conference on
6 December, Mr. Machar publicly accused the President of dictatorial tendencies
and unilateral decision-making, among other things. The Vice-Chairman of SPLM and
current Vice-President of South Sudan, James Wani Igga, responded on 8 December,
describing the allegations as baseless and cautioning all against inciting a rebellion.
4.
When the meeting of the SPLM National Liberation Council was finally held,
after many postponements, on 14 December, the differences among the leaders of
the party came to a head. The meeting was scheduled to take place over three days,
to allow participants to discuss and endorse the party’s basic documents, including
* Reissued for technical reasons on 12 March 2014.

14-24982* (E)

120314

*1424982*

S/2014/158

its manifesto and constitution. After a day of heated debate, Mr. Machar and a few
other Council members did not turn up for the session on 15 December, at which the
party adopted the documents.
5.
On the evening of 15 December, events took a violent turn. Various elements
of the Presidential Guard started fighting in their barracks in Juba, near the venue of
the National Liberation Council meeting. UNMISS was unable to ascertain what
exactly had triggered the fighting. However, on the morning of 16 December, the
President held a press conference during which he described the fighting that had
taken place overnight as an attempted coup d’état perpetrated by forces allied with
Mr. Machar. Mr. Machar, who had fled Juba when the fighting erupted, rejected the
accusations of an attempted coup, stating that the fighting had resulted from a brawl
among Presidential Guard troops in the barracks and that the accusations of a coup
were a pretext for the Government to apprehend its political opponents.
6.
The fighting quickly spread to the general headquarters of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) and other military installations. By 16 December, it had
spilled out of the barracks into the residential areas of the capital, pitting supporters
of each side against one another and resulting in large-scale killings and human
rights abuses. While thousands of fleeing civilians and deserting members of the
national security forces sought refuge in UNMISS bases, on 17 December the
Government announced that it had arrested 11 individuals whom it had accused of
plotting the attempted coup with Mr. Machar. Most of the individuals had
participated with him in the press conference of 6 December.
7.
The fighting continued during the subsequent days and spread to Jonglei,
Upper Nile and Unity States. SPLA, into which various militias had been loosely
integrated, broke up: commanders defected and members of the rank and file took
up positions against those loyal to the President and their SPLA comrades. Large
numbers of civilians were killed by forces from both sides, as the defections
continued and the fighting spread.
8.
On 19 December, Mr. Machar announced to the press that he had appealed to
SPLM and SPLA to remove the President from office. Two days later, on
21 December, he told the press that he was in rebellion against the Government. On
3 February, he announced to the press that he had formed a “resistance” group to
fight the Government. The armed opposition forces subsequently became known as
the SPLM/A in Opposition, after Mr. Machar’s representatives negotiated and
signed a cessation of hostilities agreement in Addis Ababa under that name.
9.
From 19 to 21 December, a delegation of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Council of Ministers, supported by the United Nations and
the African Union, travelled to Juba in an effort to contain the crisis and persuade
the parties to settle their differences peacefully. They met the President of South
Sudan and political actors to obtain a first-hand understanding of the crisis and
explore possible interventions. On 26 December, a second IGAD delegation, led by
the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, and the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Hailemariam Dessalegn, visited Juba for talks with the President of South Sudan,
members of the Cabinet and the detained SPLM leaders to probe further into the
root causes of the conflict and discuss how best to address it. These efforts
culminated in the convening, on 27 December in Nairobi, of an extraordinary
summit of IGAD member States. Participants in the summit appointed three special
envoys (Ambassador Seyoum Mesfin of Ethiopia, General Lazaro Sumbeiywo of

2/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

Kenya and General Mohamed Ahmed Mustapha al-Dabi of the Sudan) to support the
Government of South Sudan and the members of the self-proclaimed SPLM/A in
Opposition to reach, in an inclusive manner, a resolution to the crisis and initiate a
dialogue by 31 December.
10. IGAD, following individual consultations, proxy talks and direct talks,
commenced the formal negotiation process between the parties in Addis Ababa on
4 January. After approximately 20 days of talks, on 23 January the Government and
the SPLM/A in Opposition signed agreements on the cessation of hostilities and on
the status of detainees, thus paving the way towards an inclusive dialogue and a
process of national reconciliation. Opposition political parties and civil society
organizations have underscored their strong interest in participating in the national
dialogue on the way forward. The second phase of the political dialogue and
national reconciliation process resumed in Addis Ababa on 10 February. In the
meantime, fighting at various locations continues and both sides remain in breach of
the cessation of hostilities agreement.
11. The second phase of the political dialogue and national reconciliation process,
which resumed in Addis Ababa on 11 February, adjourned on 3 March. During that
round, the parties reached agreement on the modalities of the monitoring and
verification mechanism and discussed the way forward on the national dialogue and
issues related to SPLM. The parties are expected to reconvene for talks later in
March. In the meantime, fighting at various locations continued and both sides
remained in breach of the cessation of hostilities agreement.

III. Security situation
A.

Onset and progression of the current crisis
12. The political crisis and the break-up of the security forces have affected the
10 states of South Sudan in different ways. The consequences on the civilian
population too have varied from state to state. Four of the 10 states of South Sudan,
namely Jonglei, Unity, Upper Nile and Central Equatoria, have seen the worst of the
fighting since the onset of the current crisis on 15 December. Lakes and Warrap
States have received thousands of displaced persons from Jonglei and Unity States,
respectively, as a consequence of the fighting. The effect on the remaining four
states (Eastern and Western Equatoria and Northern and Western Bahr el Ghazal),
where there has been no fighting, has so far been limited to small-scale
displacement from the other states, some defections and a recruitment drive by the
Government to replenish the SPLA ranks depleted by the defections.
13. As the fighting escalated in the greater Upper Nile region, the President
declared states of emergency in Jonglei and Unity States on 1 January and in Upper
Nile State on 17 January. On 20 January, in an emergency session, the National
Legislative Assembly unanimously approved the President’s decisions for a period
of six months.
Central Equatoria State
14. In Central Equatoria State, Juba county has been the most affected. Large
numbers of civilians have reportedly been targeted and killed in Juba, especially

14-24982

3/22

S/2014/158

during the first three days of fighting, and there have been reports of a continuation
of sporadic human rights violations. Fighting has also occurred in Yei, Mangalla and
Terakeka counties, as well as in Rokon, on the border with Western Equatoria State,
and in Rajaf, to the south, where clashes broke out in barracks as troops deserted. In
the environs of Juba, fighting took place as SPLA pushed anti-government forces to
the outskirts of the city. For more than two weeks, from 18 December to 4 January,
there was intensive fighting on the Juba-Bor axis, particularly around Gemmazia, as
anti-government forces attempted to advance towards Juba from Bor. Pockets of
anti-government forces continue to be scattered in the vicinity of Juba, where
former militia leader Gabriel Tanginye is reported to be mobilizing forces against
the Government. It is also reported that former Minister of the Environment Alfred
Ladu Gore, who left Juba after the crisis erupted, maintains a rebel presence in the
vicinity of Juba with a group of anti-government forces.
15. On 10 January, the Governors of Central, Eastern and Western Equatoria States
convened an “emergency Equatoria conference”, during which they declared their
support to the Government and agreed to mobilize 5,000 recruits each to defend the
Equatorian territory and people. In Central Equatoria State, the Governor was able
to mobilize several thousand youth in support of the Government.
16. While the situation in Juba has stabilized somewhat, the capital remains
vulnerable to possible destabilization by nearby pockets of anti-government forces.
Moreover, the large number of deserters from the security forces who are sheltered
in sites meant for the protection of civilians in UNMISS compounds are also a
significant source of security risks for UNMISS and the internally displaced persons
in the compounds. The deserters are also perceived by the Government as a fifth
column.
Jonglei State
17. The capital of Jonglei State, Bor, fell under the control of anti-government
forces on 18 December after Major-General Peter Gadet, the Commander of SPLA
Division 8 headquarters in Panpandiar, defected along with most of his soldiers.
Large numbers of civilians were reportedly targeted and killed during and following
the defection.
18. A seemingly ethnically motivated deadly attack on 19 December by an armed
group at the UNMISS base in Akobo, Jonglei State, where civilians were seeking
refuge, resulted in the deaths of two UNMISS peacekeepers, one international
consultant and at least 19 civilians, and precipitated the evacuation by the Mission
of all personnel from Akobo. The following day, in Yuai, two UNMISS helicopters
came under direct small-arms fire by anti-government forces while evacuating
military personnel and internally displaced persons. In Bor, on 24 December, several
shells hit the UNMISS compound, resulting in injuries to three peacekeepers. The
risks faced during this period of deteriorating security prompted the Mission to
relocate its personnel from Yuai and Gumuruk.
19. While SPLA forces recaptured Bor on 25 December, the town fell under the
control of anti-government forces, for the second time, on 31 December. SPLM/A in
Opposition forces and a column of several thousand armed Nuer youth moved
towards Bor from the greater Akobo area and started to advance southward along
the main road from Bor to Juba. Heavy fighting between SPLA and anti-government
forces ensued in the days that followed. With SPLA reinforcements from the greater

4/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

Bahr el Ghazal region and Uganda People’s Defence Forces on the front line, SPLA
was able to push the anti-government forces north and eventually recapture Bor on
18 January. Anti-government forces continue to hold on to Akobo, Nyirol and Uror
counties in the State.
Unity State
20. On 21 December, the commander of SPLA Division 4 in Bentiu defected,
along with the bulk of his forces, overthrew the Governor of Unity State and
appointed himself as the new caretaker Governor. Following his lead, the vast
majority of SPLA Division 4 defected. The same day, Bentiu fell under the control
of anti-government forces. SPLA retook Bentiu on 10 January, following heavy
fighting in northern areas of Unity State. SPLA has continued its offensive in Unity
State to reclaim other counties and towns under the control of anti-government
forces. Anti-government forces appear to maintain a presence in Panyijar and
Mayendit counties. Other areas, including the oilfields, remain contested, and the
flow of oil from Unity State oilfields has stopped. Early in February, despite signing
the cessation of hostilities agreement, SPLA forces attacked and captured Leer, the
home town of Mr. Machar, in violation of the agreement.
Upper Nile State
21. Malakal, the capital of Upper Nile State, fell under the control of
anti-government forces on 25 December. It was recaptured by SPLA on
27 December, fell back under anti-government control on 14 January and was
recaptured again by SPLA on 20 January. While SPLA consolidated its position in
Malakal, anti-government forces maintained a hold on a number of other areas
outside Malakal, including in Nassir and Ulang counties; yet other areas remained
contested. On 18 February, SPLM/A in Opposition forces once again attacked and
took over Malakal, another serious violation of the cessation of hostilities
agreement.

B.

Other armed group activities
22. In the months preceding the crisis, progress had been made in ending
rebellions. On 25 November, the President issued a decree confirming the
reintegration and commissioning of Lieutenant General Bapiny Monytuil of the
South Sudan Liberation Army (SSLA) and Major General Johnson Olony of the
South Sudan Democratic Army (SSDA) into SPLA. The leadership council of the
former South Sudan Liberation Movement/Army (SSLM/A) issued a statement on
27 November expressing support for the President’s announcement. Thereafter,
SSLA troops in Unity State awaiting integration joined the fighting on the SPLA
side after being attacked by anti-government forces in Mayom county.
23. On 30 January, in Addis Ababa, the Government signed a cessation of
hostilities agreement with the South Sudan Democratic Movement/Army (SSDM/A)
Cobra Faction, the armed group led by David Yau Yau. Notably, in the agreement,
the SSDM/A Cobra Faction agreed to remain neutral in the conflict between SPLA
and SPLM/A in Opposition forces. Despite speculation to the contrary, from the
onset of the crisis, David Yau Yau’s armed forces have desisted from engaging in the
conflict.

14-24982

5/22

S/2014/158

IV. Humanitarian situation
24. On 14 November, aid agencies launched a consolidated appeal for 2014-2016
with a three-pronged strategy to address residual humanitarian needs, boost
community resilience and build the capacity of key institutions in South Sudan. The
humanitarian situation deteriorated sharply, however, following the outbreak of
violence in mid-December. Within the first four weeks of the crisis, almost
500,000 persons were displaced within South Sudan and around 74,300 people had
crossed into neighbouring countries. These numbers have continued to grow, with
total displacement now reaching 900,000 persons, some 167,000 of whom have
crossed into neighbouring countries. More stark, however, is that the number of
civilians who have tipped into the “acute” or “emergency” categories of food
insecurity has increased from 1.1 million to 3.2 million. In addition, some
500,000 displaced persons are in urgent need of food aid, which means that the
survival of 3.7 million South Sudanese is currently in question.
25. Aid agencies have put on hold the consolidated appeal they had launched in
November and issued a crisis response plan that seeks to achieve three aims: to save
lives and alleviate suffering, to support the resumption of livelihoods and to
preposition stocks before June, which is when heavy rains will render roads
impassable. The plan focuses on emergency relief, exception made for a few
projects that aim to boost capacity to plant, fish and keep livestock alive. Given that
3.7 million people are already experiencing acute food insecurity, should people be
unable to move with their livestock or plant at the outset of the rainy season, there is
a significant danger that the current situation of food insecurity could deteriorate
into famine. Given the magnitude of the crisis, a level 3 system-wide humanitarian
emergency was activated by the Emergency Relief Coordinator on 11 February
2014, to ensure the rapid mobilization of an effective response.
26. Within its bases, UNMISS has assumed the lead in the management of safety
and security of civilians in the protection sites within its bases, while humanitarian
aid partners are providing clean water, emergency latrines, food, health care and
shelter to civilians. Mitigating the risk of outbreaks of diseases such as cholera by
improving sanitation and access to clean water has been a key priority. Nevertheless,
the likelihood of serious health crises is high given the blistering heat, severe
overcrowding and the lack of space for an adequate number of latrines. It is
incumbent on the authorities to provide UNMISS with more space to create an
additional area for the protection of civilians in Juba and Bor or, more importantly,
to create the security conditions necessary for the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of civilians. In that regard, the efforts of the Government of China to build an
alternate protection site in Juba are highly appreciated. At the same time, efforts
have been made to address intercommunal tensions within protection areas.
Meanwhile, contingency planning has been initiated, including the prepositioning of
humanitarian supplies inside UNMISS bases and the exploration of other locations
to be used as potential sites for the protection of civilians in case of a further
deterioration in the situation.
27. The Government and SPLM/A in Opposition have both committed themselves
to facilitating humanitarian access to all civilians in need, which has allowed
humanitarian actors to continue to work in areas where Government forces are
present and in areas where SPLM/A in Opposition forces are present. However, in
several of the areas with the greatest needs, daily activities and humanitarian access

6/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

have been constrained by active hostilities, interference in humanitarian operations
and attacks on aid workers and assets, among other obstacles. Many of the
compounds of aid agencies, including nearly all humanitarian premises and
warehouses in Bor, Bentiu and Malakal, have been looted by armed actors from both
sides, as well as criminal elements. Three aid workers have been killed and in
January 106 aid workers were prevented from relocating from Yirol in Lakes State
to Juba for safety. More than 75 humanitarian vehicles have been commandeered or
stolen, primarily in Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile States. Although partners have
since scaled-up activities and are providing assistance wherever security and
logistical conditions permit, access and capacity constraints on the ground continue
to pose a challenge.

V. Human rights
28. On 21 February, UNMISS issued a public interim report on the serious human
rights violations that had occurred from 15 December 2013 to 31 January 2014.
Another, more comprehensive, report will be published by the Mission at the end of
April 2014. As noted in the interim report, the crisis has had widespread negative
consequences for the human rights situation in many parts of the country, namely in
areas of greatest military confrontation (in the national capital and in Jonglei, Upper
Nile and Unity States). UNMISS estimates that thousands of people have been
killed during the hostilities. Both parties to the conflict have been responsible for
ethnically targeted attacks on civilians and have failed to comply with international
humanitarian and human rights law. There have been reports of extrajudicial
killings, conflict-related sexual violence (including rape), torture, looting, the
destruction of property, the recruitment of children and other violations of major
concern. In view of the serious reports of grave human rights violations associated
with the crisis, UNMISS has given utmost priority to monitoring, investigating,
verifying and reporting on the most serious of allegations. These incidents are now
under investigation but are still subject to further corroboration and verification.
Finally, UNMISS has also undertaken substantial protection interventions in
numerous cases involving human rights defenders and individual victims, including
those subject to sexual and gender-based violence.
29. By mid-February, UNMISS had conducted roughly 600 interviews with eye
witnesses, victims and government and security officials in sites for the protection
of civilians and other locations who reported on the deliberate targeting of civilians,
both South Sudanese nationals and foreigners, in extrajudicial and other unlawful
killings, including mass killings. Enforced disappearances, gender-based violence,
such as rapes and gang rapes, and instances of ill-treatment and torture were also
reported. In Juba, SPLA soldiers were reported to have engaged in numerous
targeted killings of civilians of Nuer origin following house-to-house searches. A
mass killing was also reportedly perpetrated by security elements at Gudele police
station in Juba. In Malakal, Dinka civilians were allegedly targeted and killed by
Nuer armed youths, as well as by deserters from SPLA and the South Sudan national
police service, who were presumably aligned with opposition forces. In a number of
instances, SPLA soldiers of Dinka origin in Malakal were reportedly shot after
being forcefully disarmed at military barracks. Between 16 and 20 December, SPLA
soldiers were also engaged in inter-ethnic fighting at military barracks; the clashes

14-24982

7/22

S/2014/158

resulted in deaths on both sides, notably during an attempt to disarm the
predominantly Dinka tank unit.
30. Between 16 December and 9 January, security forces of Nuer origin (including
presumably defected elements of SPLA, the national police service, the wildlife
service and the fire brigade) allegedly targeted security forces and civilians of Dinka
origin in extrajudicial killings, the looting of businesses owned by foreign nationals
and conflict-related sexual violence, notably against foreign women. After gaining
control of Bentiu on 10 January, combined pro-government SPLA/SSLA forces
allegedly joined by elements of the Justice and Equality Movement reportedly
engaged in looting and the burning of property of Nuer civilians in Rubkona and
Bentiu. Those forces also allegedly engaged in the extrajudicial killing of Nuers,
looting and the wanton destruction of property as anti-government forces fled to
southern counties.
31. Meanwhile, in Bor, after fighting broke out along ethnic lines among SPLA
and national police elements, deserting SPLA soldiers and Nuer youth allegedly
killed Dinka civilians in their homes or while they were trying to flee to safety.
UNMISS is investigating allegations of a mass rape and the killing of women at the
Episcopal Cathedral compound in Bor, as well as allegations of killings at Bor State
hospital. UNMISS is also investigating several allegations according to which SPLA
and civilians of Dinka origin have engaged in the targeted killing of Nuer civilians
in the vicinity of the site for the protection of civilians in the UNMISS Bor
compound, after the SPLA recapture of Bor on 24 December. Finally, UNMISS has
investigated reports of mass graves in Juba, Bentiu and Rubkona, in addition to the
attack of 19 December on the support base in Akobo county.
32. UNMISS has received numerous reports of arbitrary arrest and detention. In
the first three days of the crisis, approximately 400 national police officers from the
Nuer ethnic group were reportedly disarmed and arrested in Juba. UNMISS visited
several police stations and other places of detention around Juba but so far has not
been able to confirm these detentions. It has also been reported that civilians have
been detained arbitrarily at various locations.
33. UNMISS has received reports of widespread looting, occupation and
destruction of residential and commercial property. In Juba, SPLA elements
reportedly stormed, looted, demolished and burned houses. In Malakal, Bentiu and
Rubkona, shops and houses were similarly occupied, looted, vandalized and burned
by elements of the security forces, including those who had deserted and joined the
anti-government forces, as well as armed youths and the so-called “white army”. In
Bentiu, foreign business owners were reportedly targeted in looting incidents.
34. Concurrently, on 30 December 2013, the African Union Peace and Security
Council decided to establish a commission of inquiry to investigate human rights
violations and other abuses committed during the armed conflict in South Sudan and
to make recommendations on the best ways and means to ensure accountability,
reconciliation and healing among all South Sudanese communities. As a follow up
to that decision, the African Union Commission has taken steps to develop terms of
reference for the commission of inquiry, select its members and mobilize the support
required for the effective discharge of its mandate.

8/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

VI. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement and security of
United Nations staff
35. A few days into the crisis, the relationship between the Government and
UNMISS started to grow increasingly tense, amid mounting anti-United Nations
sentiment emanating from misperceptions about the Mission’s role during the crisis.
There were unfounded allegations that UNMISS was not impartial and that the
Mission was aiding and abetting the anti-government forces. Hostile public
statements were made by senior officials of the Government. The ability of
UNMISS to move freely was increasingly obstructed. Demonstrations against the
United Nations were organized in several state capitals, including Rumbek (Lakes
State) and Aweil (Northern Bahr el Ghazal State).
36. The situation reached a critical point on 19 January, when the Minister of
Information, together with 65 armed SPLA soldiers, sought to forcibly enter the site
for the protection of civilians in the UNMISS compound in Bor, Jonglei State. After
the State Coordinator refused to grant entry to the armed soldiers, some of them
threatened the State Coordinator and revoked all safety assurances previously given
to United Nations personnel and assets in the area. Subsequently, following hostile
statements against the United Nations from the Government, a number of incidents
of harassment, threats and serious status-of-forces agreement violations occurred,
including by SPLA soldiers in Bor, who attempted to forcibly enter the UNMISS
compound on four occasions. On 20 January, President Kiir gave a press conference
during which he criticized UNMISS and accused the United Nations of attempting
to act as a parallel government. This resulted in more demonstrations against the
Mission in Juba (Central Equatoria State) and Kwajok (Warrap State). Subsequently,
on 23 January, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a press statement explaining
that the President’s remarks had been misinterpreted. Following his meeting with
my Special Representative, Hilde Johnson, on 24 January, the President held another
press conference, in which he largely retracted his comments about UNMISS and
instructed Government security ministers to protect United Nations and
international personnel. While the situation has since abated to some degree, some
Government officials have continued to make critical public remarks about the
Mission. The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé
Ladsous, visited Juba on 3 February and protested these issues in his meeting with
the President of South Sudan.
37. During the reporting period, UNMISS experienced many serious incidents that
constitute violations of the status-of-forces agreement between the United Nations
and the Government of South Sudan. Incidents affecting the Mission’s ability to
implement its mandate were also carried out by anti-government forces. From
6 November to 21 February, 60 cases involving threats against and the harassment,
physical assault, arrest and detention of United Nations staff and the seizure of
United Nations vehicles were recorded.
38. The most egregious incidents occurred in Jonglei State. As mentioned above,
on 19 December, in Akobo, an armed group attacked the UNMISS base, where
civilians were seeking refuge; the attack resulted in the deaths of two UNMISS
peacekeepers and one International Labour Organization consultant, the wounding
of another UNMISS peacekeeper, the death of 19 civilians and the wounding of at
least 13 other civilians. In Yuai, on 20 December, two UNMISS helicopters being
used to evacuate military personnel and internally displaced persons came under

14-24982

9/22

S/2014/158

direct small-arms fire by anti-government forces and, on 29 December, an UNMISS
helicopter on an aerial reconnaissance mission was fired upon by anti-government
forces in the Gadiang area, Jonglei State. The aircraft sustained damage but no
injuries were reported. My Special Representative lodged a strong protest on both
incidents with Mr. Machar. In Bor, on 24 December, several shells hit the UNMISS
compound, which resulted in injuries to three peacekeepers. Other incidents
included the commandeering of vehicles belonging to the United Nations country
team and threats to the UNMISS supply line.
39. In Malakal, Upper Nile State, the UNMISS compound was caught in the
crossfire between SPLA and anti-government forces on at least two occasions. On
26 December, fighting between the two sides in the vicinity of the UNMISS
compound resulted in the death of one civilian and the injury of seven others inside
the site for the protection of civilians in the same compound. Similarly, on
20 January, further fighting between SPLA and anti-government sides resulted in
two rounds of artillery fire hitting the UNMISS compound in Malakal. The incident
resulted in the wounding of 32 civilians in the UNMISS protection site and damages
to the hospital in the United Nations compound.
40. On 5 January, another incident of concern occurred at the UNMISS compound
in Juba, Central Equatoria State: gunfire erupted between two groups of armed men
in combat fatigues. During the firing, seven persons, including one woman and one
child, were injured and an UNMISS sentry tower was hit.
41. While UNMISS continues to investigate incidents as they occur, the Mission
has, on each occasion, brought the incidents to the attention of the relevant
Government authorities, reminding them of their obligations under the status-offorces agreement, and has requested an investigation and accountability, as a
deterrent. With regard to the more egregious cases, the Mission has sent a formal
protest note and presented a démarche to the Government at the highest levels. To
protest the various incidents, UNMISS also met representatives of both SPLA and
anti-government forces. During these meetings, UNMISS emphasized its
impartiality and highlighted the responsibilities of the parties under applicable
South Sudanese and international law and sought assurances that neither force
would endanger United Nations personnel and assets.
42. In the light of the deteriorating security situation, on 20 December 2013 the
United Nations endorsed the relocation of non-critical personnel from affected duty
stations. On 21 December, 40 non-critical personnel were relocated from Bentiu to
Juba and then to Entebbe, Uganda. On 22 December, some United Nations civilian
personnel were relocated from Bor to Juba. Also on 22 December, 450 United
Nations personnel were relocated from Juba to Entebbe and 164 personnel were
relocated to Nairobi. On 27 December, UNMISS determined that the return of
extremely critical personnel to Bor was essential to meet programme-critical needs
for the protection of civilians. On 24 January, UNMISS relocated two staff members
outside South Sudan, following an assessment by the Department of Safety and
Security that concluded that their personal security in the host country could no
longer be guaranteed owing to public threats by senior Government officials.

10/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

VII. Implementation of the Mission mandate during the
crisis period
43. The current staffing strength of the Mission as at 4 February was
869 international staff, 1,321 national staff and 409 United Nations Volunteers, with
vacancy rates of 16, 25 and 27 per cent, respectively. As noted above, the
deterioration in the security situation that followed the outbreak of fighting on
15 December compelled UNMISS to relocate outside the country and to place on
administrative leave non-critical staff from the conflict-affected areas, leaving only
those needed to perform the critical tasks that had to continue during the crisis.
Protection of civilians
44. When the fighting erupted in Juba and spread throughout the greater Upper
Nile region, tens of thousands of civilians fled from areas where large numbers of
killings were taking place, including to escape targeted attacks against particular
communities, and arrived at UNMISS compounds in Juba, Bor, Akobo, Bentiu,
Malakal and Melut to seek refuge. The Mission opened its gates and its military
engineers, working with humanitarian partners, quickly prepared sites in the
compounds for the protection of civilians, despite having minimum facilities to
accommodate them. Since then, as many as 85,000 civilians have sought protection
in eight UNMISS compounds across the country.
45. The influx of so many civilians into United Nations premises and their
settlement there is an unprecedented development, one that has presented unique
challenges and placed a huge strain on Mission resources. UNMISS has strived to
ensure adequate security for the protection sites in its bases and has worked with
humanitarian partners to provide sufficient assistance to displaced persons. With the
arrival of additional uniformed capabilities pursuant to resolution 2132 (2013), the
operational focus has gradually shifted beyond UNMISS bases.
46. The UNMISS three-tiered strategy for the protection of civilians has remained
valid but will be revised given the significant changes in the operational context. In
the interim, the Mission has developed a medium-term, three-tiered response plan to
guide its protection activities during the current crisis.
47. Under the first tier of the plan (protection through political process), the
Mission has intensified political engagement with the parties to the conflict to help
prevent an escalation of violence and ensure the protection of civilians in
accordance with international humanitarian law. UNMISS has urged restraint and
promoted a peaceful political resolution to the crisis through the IGAD-led process.
The Mission has also engaged with civil society, youth and church leaders, as a
preliminary step for the eventual development of an inclusive reconciliation process.
48. Under the second tier of the plan (protection from physical violence), in
November 2013 the Mission began reinforcing its military presence at locations in
Jonglei, Lakes, Warrap and Unity States where civilians were deemed to be at
greatest risk, in preparation for the dry season. However, with the onset of the crisis
on 15 December, UNMISS had to redeploy and refocus its military presence across
the country at the strategic hubs of Juba, Bor, Malakal and Bentiu, where the
fighting has been most intense. Following the tragic attack on the UNMISS base in
Akobo on 19 December, UNMISS has strengthened the defence of its bases.

14-24982

11/22

S/2014/158

49. Significant military assets have been required to protect civilians in UNMISS
bases from external and internal threats. The presence of former combatants, the
availability of weapons and overcongestion in the sites has generated significant
security and crime-related concerns. The Mission has had to respond to incidents on
a daily basis, including with the use of force. UNMISS has undertaken periodic
weapons searches in the sites to maintain their civilian character. It has introduced
ground rules for displaced persons and is working with local leaders and authorities
to address criminal cases. The situation has taken UNMISS into uncharted territory,
as it develops, together with the Secretariat, a strategy to address criminality in the
protection sites and ascertain the resources necessary to implement the strategy.
50. The demands placed on the Mission within and near its bases and delays in the
arrival of additional troops have constrained the military’s ability to proactively
patrol locations affected by the conflict. Daytime and night-time patrols started to
take place in Juba in January and have gradually been extended to Bor, Malakal and
Bentiu to deter violence and help create an improved security environment with a
view to enabling the eventual return of displaced persons. With the arrival of the
additional troops authorized under resolution 2132 (2013), this more robust posture
of the Mission will be extended. As at 22 February UNMISS had treated 14,745
people in 13 medical clinics, including 1,849 for gunshot wounds, and evacuated
hundreds of casualties from areas of heavy fighting. Wounded combatants from both
sides have received medical treatment in UNMISS bases. During the period from
the onset of the crisis to 10 February, 110 babies were born in sites for the
protection of civilians at the UNMISS bases in Juba, 50 were born in Malakal, 13 in
Bentiu and 10 in Bor.
51. Under the third tier of the plan (establishment of a protective environment),
UNMISS has focused on creating security conditions conducive to the provision of
humanitarian assistance in protection sites for displaced persons by using Mission
assets to provide site management and to support humanitarian agencies in the
delivery of assistance. In this context, the Mission has coordinated closely with the
protection cluster and other humanitarian actors under the leadership of the Resident
Humanitarian Coordinator. This has involved working with community leaders on
security and protection concerns and responding to the needs of individuals
belonging to the most vulnerable groups. The Mission has also strengthened its
human rights monitoring and investigation capacity.
52. Approximately 40 per cent (295,880 people) of the total displaced population
are children. In the Bentiu, Bor, Juba and Malakal protection sites, 592 unaccompanied
or separated children are receiving family tracing and reunification support. Of that
number, 68 have been reunited with their families. In addition, 84 families looking
for missing children have registered the names of their missing children. In the
United Nations House protection site, five children were reported as abducted and
tortured by the SPLA, two of whom were kept for two days in a prison container.
Child protection agencies have set up referral centres in the protection sites for
children who are survivors of gender-based violence.
53. Meanwhile, reports have been received alleging that the mobilization and
recruitment of youths by both SPLA and anti-government forces have taken place.
The so-called “white army”, which Mr. Machar says is under his command,
reportedly comprises large numbers of armed children.

12/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

54. Serious crimes of conflict-related sexual violence have also been reported in
the four states directly affected by the conflict, with credible allegations that such
violence has been perpetrated by SPLA, national police and anti-government forces.
These grave incidents are now under investigation, as reflected in the section on
human rights, and will be reported to the Security Council pursuant to Council
resolution 1960 (2010).
Reinforcement of the Mission
55. In order to give UNMISS adequate capacity to cope with the crisis, the
Security Council, by its resolution 2132 (2013), approved my recommendation to
temporarily increase the overall troop and police strength of the Mission. The
interim troop level of UNMISS has been raised to 12,500 personnel and the police
component to 1,323 personnel, including appropriate formed police units, through
temporary transfers from existing peacekeeping operations through inter-mission
cooperation, as well as, if needed and subject to further Council consideration,
complementary force and asset generation.
56. Under Security Council resolution 2132 (2013), the Mission has received more
aviation assets. On 6 January, three Mi-17 utility helicopters (Bangladesh) were
deployed to UNMISS from the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), together with one commercial
Mi-26 helicopter. Currently, one C-130 fixed-wing aircraft (Bangladesh) remains on
standby in MONUSCO for use by UNMISS. The rotation of the Bangladeshi
engineering company has been delayed until September to allow the Mission to
continue to utilize its services during the ongoing crisis.
57. Timely approval by the Security Council of the surge capacity for UNMISS
military and police components under the inter-mission cooperation arrangements
played a critical role in enhancing the Mission’s capacity to save lives and protect
civilians from further harm. Completion of the deployment of the surge capacity
remains a priority. It is important that this capacity remain deployed for at least
12 months, with approval from the Security Council to temporarily raise the troop
ceilings for the military and police components of the Mission. This one-year period
would fit with the likely timeline of internally displaced persons returning only after
a peace process has been agreed upon and leave the dry months in the latter half of
2014 for stabilization in return areas. The increase in the troop ceiling could be
reviewed at the end of the 12-month period and be closely linked to the outcome of
the political negotiations between the parties.
58. The deployment of the military surge capacity will take place in three phases
(see annex), keeping in mind the situation on the ground, the ability of troopcontributing countries to deploy and the absorption capacity of UNMISS. In the first
phase, which is expected to be completed by the end of March 2014, the first half of
the Nepalese battalion, with 350 troops from the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the first half of the Ghanaian battalion, with
300 troops from the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), and the
Rwandan battalion, with 850 personnel from the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), are expected to be deployed to the mission
area. As at 21 February, 328 Nepalese troops from MINUSTAH, a Rwandese
advance party (20 personnel) from UNAMID and a Ghanaian advance party
(30 personnel) from UNOCI had deployed to the mission area. In the second phase,

14-24982

13/22

S/2014/158

which is expected to be completed by the end of June 2014, the main bodies of the
Nepalese battalion (500 troops) and of the Ghanaian battalion (550 troops) will be
deployed. The third phase includes the deployment of the remaining two battalions
and will be executed after the Mission has reviewed the situation and completed
preparations to absorb them. Those two battalions will be required to perform
additional tasks related to the protection of civilians and stabilization and to recreate
the force reserve that has been fully committed. The rainy season is fast approaching
and, once it begins, the Mission will have to depend largely on air assets to
undertake most of the operational tasks. It is therefore a priority that the first two
phases be completed before the rainy season peaks.
59. Five priority tasks have been identified for the military component:
(a) protecting civilians; (b) contributing to the creation of security conditions
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance, as requested and within
capability; (c) supporting human rights investigations and reporting; (d) providing
support to the IGAD monitoring and verification mechanism, if and when requested
and authorized by the Security Council; and (e) protecting United Nations personnel
and installations.
60. In order to organize the Mission’s military component for the effective
fulfilment of the above-mentioned tasks, the establishment of three sector
headquarters is essential, given the increased scope of control accompanying the
arrival of the new units and the associated command and control issues. The sector
headquarters would be established where the force reinforcements will be in place,
namely in Malakal, Bor and Bentiu.
61. The Nepalese troops from MINUSTAH and Nepal will deploy to Juba and be
responsible for the security of the site for the protection of civilians and facilities at
the United Nations House. As the battalion’s main body and its contingent-owned
equipment arrive, troops will increase their patrolling efforts in Juba and areas
outside Juba where it is known that internally displaced persons might return to. It is
expected that the Rwandan battalion from UNAMID will deploy directly from the
Sudan to Malakal and be responsible for the security of sites for the protection of
civilians and United Nations compounds in Malakal and other vulnerable areas in
the northern part of Jonglei State to include those areas vacated at the beginning of
the crisis (e.g. Yuai and Akobo). The Ghanaians from UNOCI and Ghana will
deploy to Bentiu, where they will initially be responsible for the security of sites for
the protection of civilians and UNMISS facilities. As the battalion’s main body and
its contingent-owned equipment begin to arrive, troops will assume additional
security responsibilities in western Warrap State and southern Unity State. Two
Kenyan companies will deploy to Warrap State and be responsible for areas near
Kwajok and Turalei. That deployment would also support efforts in the event that
violence or fighting spills over from Unity State into Warrap State.
62. Three medium-lift helicopters from Rwanda and three medium-lift helicopters
from MONUSCO (inter-mission cooperation) will be based in Juba and Bor,
depending on the security threat and be utilized for logistical and operational
requirements in areas considered to be under heightened threat. Tasks will include
reconnaissance missions, troop movements, resupply missions and the conduct of
dynamic patrols. The arrival of additional battalions will allow the force to
reconstitute its reserve battalion in Rumbek. The reconstituted battalion will be
ready to respond immediately in areas where troops are not present or are present in

14/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

insufficient numbers to handle any additional crisis that may occur. The level II
hospital contributed by Sri Lanka will be deployed to Bor in order to reinforce the
current level I facilities there. Construction of the hardstand facilities has begun and
will be ready when the unit arrives in March or April. With the arrival of the surge
troops, the UNMISS force will have increased capability to deter possible threats
against the civilian population, engage in the protection of civilians under threat
where possible and help create an improved security environment to eventually
allow internally displaced persons to return home safely and voluntarily. During the
rainy season, the waterways of South Sudan become the main route for the
transportation of both people and goods. The concentration of internally displaced
persons along these waterways, the need to protect supplies being transported on
them, the advent of the rainy season and fighting in various parts of the country are
factors that make a strong case for UNMISS to have a riverine battalion as part of
its military component. The riverine capacity will also be a much cheaper substitute
for aerial supply operation.
63. With regard to the police component, three formed police units consisting of
351 personnel have been deployed under Security Council resolution 2132 (2013) to
sites for the protection of civilians in UNMISS compounds in the four areas most
affected by the crisis. In that regard, two formed police units (Bangladesh) have
been deployed from MONUSCO and one (Nepal) from the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL). These formed police units, along with other United Nations
police personnel, are performing critical functions for the protection of civilians
under imminent threat in Juba (at the United Nations House and in Tomping), Bor,
Bentiu and Malakal, where the vast majority of the over 74,000 internally displaced
persons currently seeking protection in United Nations camps are present. Tasks
entrusted to these formed police units include the protection of internally displaced
persons, public order management within United Nations compounds, the screening
of dangerous substances, riot control during the distribution of humanitarian
assistance, the protection of United Nations staff and assets and the protection of
vulnerable groups, such as women, children and persons with disabilities.
64. While reinforcement through the deployment of formed police units has
contributed greatly to security, law and order and the protection of internally
displaced persons on United Nations premises, the deployment of three units in four
locations poses serious challenges to their operational capacity owing to a lack of
contingent-owned equipment and in terms of self-sustainability and command and
control. The three formed police units are deployed at four locations to meet the
need for the presence of such units in Juba, Bentiu, Malakal and Bor, respectively,
adversely affecting the integrity of the chain of command and logistics.
Furthermore, since these units responded to the crisis by deploying immediately, the
entire equipment of the camp, particularly heavy and fixed assets, were not
transferred to UNMISS, requiring a rear party to remain behind in the original
camp.
65. There are over 700,000 internally displaced persons in conflict-affected areas,
over 74, 000 of whom are in UNMISS bases. They are not expected to return home
voluntarily and safely until they are convinced that there is a secure environment to
do so. These formed police units are therefore likely to remain engaged in activities
related to the protection of civilians for some time to come. The number of formed
police units, therefore, would need to be increased to four considering the Mission’s
need to cover four locations (Malakal, Juba, Bor and Bentiu). Such a deployment

14-24982

15/22

S/2014/158

would also be needed beyond the scope of the inter-mission cooperation framework,
through fresh deployments, with flexible adjustments in the number of formed
police units personnel, to overcome the serious challenges faced by UNMISS.
Logistical support and financial implications
66. Considering the reinforcement of the Mission and the deployment of surge
capacity, the Secretariat will have to re-evaluate the support capacity of the Mission,
as the existing capacity may not be sufficient to sustain the reinforcement.
Refocusing Mission priorities
67. Planning for the coming 12 months was based on two scenarios: the most
likely scenario and the worst case scenario. The scenarios are planning tools to
enable the United Nations to prepare itself in order to save lives and protect
civilians and United Nations personnel in a timely fashion. In the most likely
scenario, the cessation of hostilities agreement is likely to be partially implemented
and the political negotiations are unlikely to deliver a comprehensive peace
agreement covering the governance, security and reconciliation aspects of the
conflict in the coming months. A large number of internally displaced persons will
remain at United Nations protection sites, especially during the rainy season, and
human rights violations are bound to continue in the absence of a peace agreement
and reconciliation. United Nations personnel and facilities will remain subject to
obstructions from both sides, including movement restrictions and demands for
facilities and supplies. In addition, the humanitarian situation could continue to
deteriorate as agricultural activities are paralyzed and there are few signs of an
economic recovery. The worst case scenario envisages the possibility of an increase
in fighting and violence, violations of the integrity of United Nations premises and,
therefore, forced entry by security forces into sites for the protection of civilians,
continued atrocities and grave violations of human rights and, last but not least, an
increased risk of involvement by external actors.
68. In the light of those scenarios, the Mission must reprioritize its activities
towards five main activities: (a) protecting civilians under imminent threat of
violence; (b) contributing to the creation of security conditions conducive for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, as requested and within capability; (c) increasing
human rights monitoring and reporting; (d) fostering intercommunal and national
dialogue; and (e) supporting the IGAD monitoring and verification mechanism and
political dialogue in support of the Addis Ababa negotiations, if and when requested.
As a result of this necessary reprioritization and to reinforce its ability to engage
with both parties on the urgent need to respect international humanitarian and
human rights law, UNMISS has adjusted its posture and is proceeding with a
strategic shift, from a stand dedicated to peacebuilding, State-building and the
extension of State authority, to one of strict impartiality in its relations with both
parties. This shift is necessary to enable liaison and coordination activities with both
parties for the effective implementation of the Mission’s redefined priority tasks in
conflict-affected areas.
69. Until a comprehensive peace agreement is reached by the parties, UNMISS
would focus its engagement on activities aimed at enhancing human rights
monitoring and reporting and the protection of civilians under imminent threat of
violence. In particular, UNMISS would need to put on hold any operational and

16/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

capacity-building support to either party that may enhance their capacity to engage
in conflict, commit human rights violations and abuses and undermine the Addis
Ababa negotiations process. However, to prevent further destabilization, the Mission
will continue its mandated activities in those states that have so far been spared by
the conflict, provided they do not directly contribute to enhancing the fighting
capacities of the parties or undermine the Addis Ababa negotiations. Support to
SPLA would be limited to the military justice sector and focus on monitoring and
reporting on the trials of those accused of perpetrating atrocities.
70. UNMISS will continue to engage with the South Sudan national police service
and the national justice and corrections institutions to enhance human rights
protection, monitoring and reporting, and support training to increase the protection
of civilians under threat of violence, enhance security around protection of civilians
sites and potential areas of return for internally displaced persons and prevent
arbitrary detentions or the excessive use of force in law and order management.
Engagement with the national police will also be contingent upon the completion of
a review of these activities under the human rights due diligence policy.
Concurrently, it is essential that a strong UNMISS early warning and civil affairs
capacity be maintained in the states where violence has not erupted, to carry out
local-level engagement with communities, in order to help reduce the risk of
intercommunal animosities spreading further throughout the country.
71. The crisis in Jonglei State in general and in Pibor county in particular has been
the focus of the Mission’s strategy and activities on the protection of civilians since
2011/12. The effort to bring all the communities of Jonglei State to the negotiating
table was intended to address inter-tribal conflict, which had reached a climax
involving attacks and revenge attacks between the Lou Nuer and Murle
communities. UNMISS has participated in and backed the initiatives of the bishops
to undertake negotiations between David Yau Yau and the Government. Following
the signing of the cessation of hostilities agreement between David Yau Yau and the
Government, Pibor county has experienced relative peace and stability. The
UNMISS support base in Pibor county is now operational and the civil affairs
component has resumed its mandated activities. Coordination and cooperation is
taking place between forces loyal to David Yau Yau and national authorities, and
civilians are returning to Pibor town and beginning to move freely. In keeping with
the UNMISS responsibility to provide support for peace consolidation, UNMISS
will assist the bishops, who have been central to the negotiations, by supporting
their peace awareness-raising efforts in Pibor, Boma and other villages. Linked to
this will be UNMISS support to peacebuilding initiatives among Murle. In
recognition of the particular need for humanitarian actors to return to the county,
UNMISS will support the work of United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations to deliver programmes in support of the peace process.
72. This temporary reprioritization of the Mission’s mandated tasks is proposed
for formal endorsement by the Security Council, pending a more thorough
integrated review of the mandate once the parties to the conflict have reached a
comprehensive political agreement. To support this reprioritization and face the
challenges of the new political and security environment, military and police
reinforcements would also be needed for a period of one year.

14-24982

17/22

S/2014/158

VIII. Observations and recommendations
73. The people of South Sudan had already endured far too much suffering before
they became citizens of an independent country of their own. Unfortunately, that
suffering has reached even greater levels since the violence that erupted on
15 December. The extent of death, destruction, gross violations of human rights and
displacement in such a short period has few precedents. The leadership responsible
for this conflict must heed the calls of the population and put an immediate end to
the violence and suffering.
74. In my previous report to the Security Council, I stated that South Sudan was at
a crossroads and that the most critical determinant would be the internal dynamics
within SPLM and how they would be managed. However, appeals for reconciliation
between the leaders of SPLM, from both internal and regional stakeholders, have
gone unheeded and tensions have mounted.
75. It is a tragedy that South Sudan has been plunged into a crisis as severe as the
currently unfolding conflict. The damage done in such a short time is staggering.
Not only has the conflict caused massive loss of innocent life, but major towns such
as Bor, Malakal and Bentiu have been completely destroyed and close to 1 million
people have been displaced or have sought refuge abroad. Livelihoods have been
lost, markets destroyed and, most critically, lack of freedom is preventing people in
rural areas in the most affected states from hunting, fishing and planting crops,
which means that the already increasing food insecurity could spiral into famine.
Security institutions, especially SPLA, have partially disintegrated and their
legitimacy has been massively eroded by the atrocities committed. Deep animosities
and old wounds between communities have been reopened and exacerbated. The
investment made in capacity-building across many sectors has been lost and the
goodwill that the country had earned from the international community has been
eroded.
76. By allowing differences and the power struggle within the ruling SPLM to
spiral out of control and cause a devastating conflict and a national crisis, the
political leaders of South Sudan collectively have failed their people and severely
set back a country that was already struggling to emerge from a state of fragility.
While the declared intention by Mr. Machar to remove an elected government by
force is unacceptable, both sides now bear full responsibility for bringing the
senseless fighting, as well as the continuing loss of lives and the unfolding
humanitarian crisis, to an immediate end. By fully complying with the cessation of
hostilities agreement they signed on 23 January under the auspices of IGAD and by
fully cooperating in an inclusive political process, the parties can set the country on
a path to peace, profound national reconciliation and fundamental systemic reform.
77. Justifiably, the people of South Sudan had high expectations at independence
on 9 July 2011. The only way to satisfy these legitimate expectations is through
good governance, inclusive democratic institutions and the delivery of the basic
services they have been deprived of for so long. In every crisis there is opportunity,
to make fundamental changes on the basis of lessons learned and mistakes
corrected. For such an opportunity to be seized, the violence must stop and the
Government must assume responsibility for the protection of all its citizens. The
peace process under way in Addis Ababa must seek to address the root causes of the
persistent fragility and instability of South Sudan and include the democratic

18/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

transformation of the country as an element necessary for good governance. I call on
SPLM to address its internal political crisis immediately. And I call on the
Government and on all South Sudanese stakeholders to take the opportunity
presented to them by IGAD and other regional partners to engage in dialogue, in
good faith, towards national reconciliation and an open democratic system of
governance that can respond to the basic needs of the population and protect their
human rights.
78. The ethnic dimension of the killings and abuses is most alarming. The affected
populations and their community leaders and key stakeholders must make every
effort to start the healing and reconciliation processes in order to save South Sudan
from sinking into a deeper abyss. In order for reconciliation to take root and
succeed, accountability too is essential. Justice will be required to right the wrongs
suffered by so many. The United Nations will stand by the people of South Sudan
and I pledge to make every effort to ensure that expectations are met and that the
perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians are brought to justice. In that
regard, the United Nations stands ready to provide support to the commission of
inquiry of the African Union, if requested by the African Union Peace and Security
Council, as appropriate and feasible and in coordination with other possible
partners, and encourages its establishment and operationalization as soon as
possible.
79. UNMISS was deployed to assist the people of South Sudan in building a new
nation and it remains committed to that goal. During the unfolding conflict, the
Mission will be an impartial and independent international presence that will
continue to assist all victims of the conflict and protect civilians under threat of
violence. The main priority, as long as the conflict continues, must be to meet the
needs of the people, the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons, the victims of
abuse and the thousands who will suffer with the disruption of livelihoods.
80. The main focus of the Mission will be on the protection of civilians, human
rights and contributing to the creation of security conditions conducive to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, as requested and within capability, in the areas
most affected by the conflict. The Mission will protect those in need, within its
means. The Mission’s impartiality going forward is the sine qua non of all its
actions throughout the country as long as the conflict persists.
81. While some areas have been affected less than others, this is a national crisis.
Within its means, UNMISS will continue to facilitate local-level reconciliation
initiatives and continue its capacity-building work as it relates to the protection of
civilians and ensuring respect for human rights.
82. In the less-affected states, where there is no fighting, it is essential that a
strong UNMISS early warning capacity be maintained. Capacity to engage local
communities in order to help reduce the risk that intercommunal animosities spread
further is also essential, as mentioned earlier in this report. Subject to a review
under the United Nations human rights due diligence policy, the Mission will
continue its mandated activities to prevent further destabilization as long as those
activities do not enhance the capabilities of the parties to engage in conflict and do
not undermine the Addis Ababa negotiations. These principles will guide UNMISS
action throughout the country for an interim period until the IGAD peace process
has facilitated a broad-based and sustainable resolution to the crisis. Once the IGAD
peace process has been concluded, the Secretariat will consult the Government,

14-24982

19/22

S/2014/158

South Sudanese actors and partners of the United Nations family
recommendations for a new mandate to support stabilization in South Sudan.

on

83. As noted in the present report, I expect that insecurity will continue for some
time in the States most affected by the conflict and that those displaced will
continue to fear returning to their homes until a security environment conducive to
such return has been established. I therefore request that the Security Council
consider authorizing a temporary increase in UNMISS military strength to 12,500
troops (see paras. 53-60 above) and of its police strength by four formed police units
(see paras. 61-63 above). I intend to deploy the requested additional five battalions
in three phases. The additional resources requested will further assist UNMISS in
protecting civilians.
84. Resolving the conflict and addressing the fear of civilians, which prevent them
from returning to their homes, can only be resolved by the political leadership of
South Sudan. I call on all parties to commit themselves fully to finding a lasting
solution to the root causes of the conflict. I call on the military leadership of both
parties to end the conflict and ensure the protection of civilians. I remind them of
their obligations under international humanitarian law. Finally, I remind them that
all those responsible for atrocities and abuses must be held accountable.
85. I have taken note with deep concern of the violations of the status-of-forces
agreement and of incidents of harassment of United Nations personnel in South
Sudan. Such violations and cases of harassment must stop immediately. I call upon
the international community to impress upon all stakeholders the crucial need for
the United Nations to work and move freely in South Sudan.
86. I commend the timely efforts of IGAD to resolve the conflict and express my
full support for the mediation process under way. I call upon IGAD to make the
mediation process as inclusive as possible and to keep good governance and human
rights at the centre of all its efforts.
87. I would like to thank the Security Council for its timely adoption of resolution
2132 (2013) and, within that context, to also thank the leadership of MONUSCO,
UNMIL, UNOCI, UNAMID and MINUSTAH, as well as the troop- and policecontributing countries concerned for the provision of additional troops, police and
air assets under the inter-mission cooperation arrangements.
88. In closing, I would like to express my gratitude to my Special Representative,
Hilde Johnson, and the staff of UNMISS for their hard work under extremely
difficult circumstances. I also extend my deep thanks to the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and the non-governmental organizations who are
also working in arduous conditions to provide humanitarian assistance and
protection to those in need.

20/22

14-24982

S/2014/158

Annex
Implementation matrix for the reinforcement of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan
Type

Units to be deployed during
phase 1 (March 2014)

Units to be deployed during
phase 2 (June 2014)

Units to be deployed during
phase 3 (Late 2014)

Infantry

Nepal: 350

Nepal: 500

Battalion 1: 850

Ghana: 300

Ghana: 550

Battalion 2: 850

Rwanda: 800

Kenya: 310

Aviation
support

Nine additional military
utility helicopters: 165

Bangladesh: three military
utility helicopters
(inter-mission cooperation)

Riverine
support

1 riverine unit: 200

Other

Level II: 63

Bangladesh engineering
company: 275
Three sector headquarters:
120

Total
a

14-24982

1 450a

1 423

2 450

Minus three military utility helicopters (Bangladesh) under the inter-mission cooperation
framework.

21/22

S/2014/158

22/22

14-24982
