A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/231
17 June 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 106
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

[without reference to a Main Committee (A/52/L.74)]
52/231. Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and the Platform for Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions, in particular resolution 52/100 of 12 December 1997, on the follow-up to the Fourth
World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action, as
well as agreed conclusions and relevant resolutions of the Commission on the Status of Women and the Economic
and Social Council on the follow-up to the Conference,
Reaffirming the commitments made in the Beijing Declaration1 and the Platform for Action,2
1. Decides that the high-level plenary review to appraise and assess the progress achieved in the
implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women,3 and the Platform for
Action five years after its adoption, and to consider further actions and initiatives shall be held as a special session
of the General Assembly for five days, from 5 to 9 June 2000;
2. Also decides that the special session should reaffirm the commitment to the Platform for Action and
further focus, inter alia, on obstacles encountered in implementation as well as on strategies to overcome those

1

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2

Ibid., annex II.

3

Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 July 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect.
A.

98-77299

/...

A/RES/52/231
Page 2

obstacles, with a view to implementing fully the Platform for Action as well as taking further action and
initiatives;
3. Recalls that, in keeping with General Assembly resolution 52/100, the Commission on the Status of
Women will serve as the preparatory committee for the review and will be open-ended for the purposes of the
preparations;
4. Decides that the preparatory work, which should be supported by inter-sessional consultations convened
by the open-ended Bureau of the Commission on the Status of Women as needed, will be carried out by the
Commission at its forty-third and forty-fourth sessions in the years 1999 and 2000, respectively, and that the fortythird and forty-fourth sessions will be extended by five days each to complete the preparations;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the regional commissions, to develop a
standardized questionnaire, with a focused set of indicators, on all critical areas of concern as a framework to assist
national Governments in their assessment of and reporting on the implementation of the Platform for Action;
6. Encourages those Governments that have not yet done so to submit their national plans of action to the
Division for the Advancement of Women of the Secretariat by September 1998 as an input to the start of the
review during the forty-third session of the Commission, and encourages Governments to submit in 1999
information on their implementation of the Platform for Action, focusing particularly on positive actions, lessons
learned, obstacles, key challenges remaining and a vision for gender equality in the next millennium;
7. Invites Governments to prepare their national evaluations on the implementation of the Platform for
Action with the involvement of civil society;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to invite all entities of the United Nations system, including the
specialized agencies, funds and programmes, to be involved actively in preparatory activities and to participate
at the highest level in the special session, including through presentations on best practices, obstacles encountered
and a vision for the future to accelerate implementation of the Platform for Action and address new and emerging
trends;
9. Encourages appropriate regional preparatory activities for the special session, inter alia, by Governments
in cooperation with the regional commissions, and recommends submission of the results as an input to the
Commission at its forty-fourth session, in the year 2000;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the Commission at its forty-third session, in addition to the
documentation already foreseen in the long-term work programme of the Commission for the review and appraisal
of the implementation of the Platform for Action, suggestions on further initiatives and actions that might be
considered during the review, with attention to mainstreaming gender equality and to common trends and themes
across the twelve critical areas of concern;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide in the report on emerging issues, to be submitted to the
Commission at its forty-fourth session, additional material on further actions and initiatives for the preparation of
the outlook beyond the year 2000;
12. Invites the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to provide information in
1999 on the implementation of the Platform for Action, based on its review of reports of States parties to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;4

4

Resolution 34/180, annex.

/...

A/RES/52/231
Page 3

13. Invites the Secretary-General to integrate in his reports information from relevant treaty-monitoring
bodies on their efforts, within their mandates, to mainstream a gender perspective;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its special session a comparative
report on how different categories of projects and programmes of United Nations organizations are including
women's interests and gender mainstreaming issues and on resources allocated in this regard;
15. Recommends that the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank focus on gender
issues in the Human Development Report and the World Development Report for the year 2000;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to provide by the end of 1999 a compilation of updated statistics and
indicators on the situation of women and girls in countries around the world by issuing, for example, a volume
of The World's Women;
17. Calls upon States, the United Nations and non-governmental organizations to undertake necessary
measures with a view to providing appropriate information to the public on the implementation of the Platform
for Action and the process of preparations for the special session of the General Assembly;
18. Emphasizes the important role of non-governmental organizations in implementing the Platform for
Action and the need for their active involvement in preparations for the special session, as well as the need to
ensure appropriate arrangements for their contributions to the special session;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to make available the necessary resources for the participation of the least
developed countries at the special session in accordance with past practice.

87th plenary meeting
4 June 1998
