UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1913th

MEETING:

21 APRIL
UN

NEW YORK

1976

L\BM>RY

OCTloi

CONTENTS
Page

... ... .. .. ... ... .. .. .. ... .. ... .. ... . .

12

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution 384(1975)(S/12011)
. ... .. .. ... ... . ... ... .. .. ... .. .. ... ... .. .. .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l913)

S/PV. 1913

.

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ 1.I, are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196$, became fully operative
on that date.

1913th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday; 21 April 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. HUANG

Hua (China).

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l913)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011)
The meeting

of the agenda

wus called

Adoption

to order

at 12 noon.

of the agenda

The agenda was udupted.
The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 $1975) (S/12011)
1. The PRESIDENT
(trunslation
from Chinese):
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier [1908th
and 1910th to 1912th meetings], I shall now invite the
representatives of Australia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia,
Malaysia,
Mozambique,
the Philippines,
Portugal and Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitution of the President, Mr. Anwur Sani
(Indonesia)
und Mr. Galvdo Teles (Portugal)
took
places at the Couricil table and Mr. Harry (Australia),
Mr. Cumara
(Guinea),
Mr. Fernandes’ (GuineaBissau), Mr. Singh (Malaysia),
Mr. Lobo (Mozambique), Mr. Yungo (Philippines)
and Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council.chamber.
.
2. The PRESIDENT
(tmnslution
from Chinese):
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the fact that a draft resolution sponsored
by Guyana and the United Republic of Tanzania has
been circulated in document S/12056.
3. The first speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.

of Guyana,

4. Mr. SANDERS
(Guyana): MY delegation
has listened intently to thk statements-deliveied
by the
representatives of the people of East Timor, and with
no less interest to the statements of the representatives of Portugal and Indonesia, all of which bear
upon the issue before the Council, in so far as they
inform our perspective of the situation in East Timor.
5. I should like to express the gratitude of my delegation to the Secretary-General
for the manner in which
he has undertaken his task in pursuance of paragraph 5
of Security Council resolution 384 (1975). My delegation has studied with concern the resultant report
of the Secretary-General,
which furnishes a comprehensive account of the activities of Mr. Winspeare
Guiccardi, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral.
Whilst
acknowledging
the difficulties
encountered by the Special Representative as he sought
to execute his duties, difficulties which have been
responsible
in some measure for the limitations
reflected in his report, my delegation is of the firm
opinion that his report has contributed
largely to a
better understanding of the present situation in East
Timor.
In particular,
my delegation
has taken
cognizance of the finding of the Special Representative
that “any accurate assessment of the situation as a
whole remains elusive” and tliat “without doubt it
continues to evolve” [S//2011, annex, paru. 373.
6. It is the evolution of that situation to which my
delegation would now like to address itself, since the
just aspirations of the people of East Timor can be
fully realized only in accordance with established
principles long recognized by the United Nations, as
enshrined in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
-the Declaration on ‘the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples-and
2131 (Xx)-the
Declaration of the Inadmissibility
of Intervention
in
the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of
Their Independence and Sovereignty. The application
of the principles of these resolutions would prescribe
that. there should be no interference in the domestic
affairs of East Timor and that the people of the Territory should be allowed to exercise freely their right to
self-determination.
It is in this context that my delegation holds firm that the Indonesian armed forces in the
Territory of East Timor should be withdrawn completely in order that the people of the Territory can
exercise freely their right to self-determination.
My
delegation notes also that the Government of Indonesia
has not fully complied with the terms of paragraph 2
of resolution 384 (1975). Whilst welcoming the state-

11, In the operative paragraphsof the draft resolu
tion, the Council:

ment of the representative of Indonesia [1909th
m~stlng] that the armed forces are in the process of.
being withdrawn from the Territory, my delegation
hopes that the relevant terms of the draft resolution
which I shall shortly introduce will receive a more
positive and prompt response. By this I mean that the

“1. Gulb upon all States to respect the terri
torial .integrity of East Timor, as well as the inalien
able right of its people to self-determination ir
accordancewith General Assembly resolution 15 lr

Government of Indonesia should without delay.: or
preconditions take away its armed personnel still
remaining in the Territory. There should certainly be
no further buildup of the Indonesian presence in the
Territory.

WV>;

“‘2. Culls upon the Government of Indonesia tc
withdraw without further delay all its forces from the
Territory;

7. My delegation also fully supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General

‘that his Special

Repre-

“3. Requests the Secretary-General to have hir
Special Representative continue the assignmenl
entrusted to him under paragraph 5 of Security
Council resolution 384 (1975) and pursue consulta-

sentative should continue to hold consultations with
all the parties concerned and in this context considers
it feasible for the Council. to extend the mandate of
the Special Representative so as to allow him to pursue
further consultations with all the parties concemedand I stress “all the partiesconcerned”.

tions with the parties concerned;
“4. Further ,requests the Secretary-General
ta
follow the implementation
of the present resolution
and submit a report to the Security Council as soon
as possible;

8. My delegation would also like to urge all States to
co-operate fully with the .efforts of the United Nations,
especially those of the Security Council, to ensure a
prompt and peaceful solution to the issue, thus assuring
the people of East Timor of the free exercise of their
right to self-determination,
in total accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
relevant General Assembly resolutions.

“5. Calls upon all States and other parties concerned to co-operate fully with the United Nations to
achieve a peaceful solution to the existing situation
and to facilitate the decolonization
of the Territory;
“6.

9. On behalf of the.delegation of the United Republic
of Tanzania and on behalf of my own delegation,
I have the honour to introduce the draft resolution in
document S/12056 for consideration by the members
of the Security Council.

.Decides to remain seized of the situation.”

12. On behalf of the United Republic of Tanzania and
Guyana I commend this draft resolution to members
of the Council and urge their full support.
13. It is also the firm hope of the sponsors that the
draft resolution will meet with the active co-operation
of the Government of Indonesia.

10. In the preamble of the draft resolution the Council
reaffirms “the inalienable right of the people of East
Timor to self-determination
.and independence”
and
states its belief that “all efforts should be made to
create conditions that will enable the people of East
Timor to exercise freely their right to self-determination”. The Council also notes that ‘%he question of
East Timor is before the General Assembly”, which is
the proper United Nations forum for matters of
decolonization.
I feel it apposite to stress that the
role of the Council is purely one of. maintaining
international
peace and security. The Council also
takes note of “the statement by the representative
of Indonesia” before the.Council.

14. - The PRESIDENT
(tran?lation frvm Chinese):
In view of the fact that it has been almost two weeks
since we began consideration of the question of the
situation in Timor, I think that we should take timely
action with regard to the serious situation that now
exists in Timor. I therefore hope that at tomorrow’s
meeting we shall be able to hearthe various statements
of representatives and their comments on the draft
resolution and then proceed to vote on the draft.
The meeting

rose at 12.15 p.m.

2
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00150

83-40801-August

1984-2,200
