S/PV.9256

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9256th meeting

Wednesday, 8 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr.Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Ms. Shaheen
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-03878 (E)
*2303878*

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs; and Mr. Roger Waters, civil peace activist.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: We are approaching a tragic
anniversary. Almost one year has passed since the
military offensive in Ukraine by the Russian Federation
on 24 February 2022, inflicting untold suffering on the
Ukrainian people and creating ripple effects across
the globe.
According to information on weapons flows
obtained through publicly available media sources,
over the past months a number of Governments have
announced that they were providing military assistance
to Ukraine for its defence needs. That assistance has
included the transfer of heavy conventional armaments
and munitions, including infantry fighting vehicles, air
defence capabilities, large-calibre artillery systems,
uncrewed combat aerial vehicles and missile systems,
as well as small arms and light weapons. Most recently,
States have announced the transfer of progressively
heavier modern systems, such as main battle tanks.
There have also been reports of States transferring
weapons, such as combat drones, to the Russian armed
forces for use in Ukraine. Other reports have indicated
the transfer of major conventional arms, including
artillery rocket systems, to a private military security
company involved in the conflict.
The large-scale influx of weapons into any
situation of armed conflict amplifies concerns
regarding the escalation of the conflict and risks of
diversion. Measures to counter the potential diversion
of weapons and ammunition will be key to post-conflict
2/18

08/02/2023

recovery and regional security and stability, as well
as to conflict prevention efforts in other regions. In
accordance with international norms, any transfers of
arms and ammunition should involve pre-transfer risk
assessments and post-shipment controls such as on-site
inspection and end-user verifications. Preventing
diversion also requires cooperation and information
exchange between importing, transit and exporting
States and appropriate accounting and safeguarding of
arms and ammunition, as well as customs and bordercontrol measures. Transparency in armaments is a
crucial confidence-building measure that can serve
to reduce tensions and ambiguities between Member
States. The United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms and the Arms Trade Treaty remain key
instruments in that regard. I call on Member States to
participate in those transparency mechanisms, because
predictable and transparent State behaviour can build
mutual confidence and help prevent conflict.
I also want to reiterate the responsibility of all
the parties to the armed conflict to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure. Since the beginning of
the current military offensive, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights has recorded 18,657
civilian casualties, a total that includes 7,110 killed and
11,547 injured. The actual figures are likely considerably
higher. Most of the civilian deaths and injuries are
caused by explosive weapons with wide-area effects,
including heavy artillery, multiple-launch rocket
systems and missiles.
In addition to the thousands of civilians killed
and injured, we are witnessing widespread effects on
critical civilian infrastructure and services with direct
humanitarian consequences for civilians. Aside from
the homes, schools, roads and bridges that have been
destroyed, hospitals and health facilities have also
been attacked. The disruption of water, gas, heating
and electricity created by Russia’s attacks on energy
infrastructure is causing the humanitarian crisis in
Ukraine to reach even more dire dimensions. Those
attacks constitute an unacceptable escalation of the
war, and civilians are paying the highest price.
Humanitarian principles must be upheld. Any
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure are
unacceptable. All feasible measures must be taken to
avoid and at the very least minimize civilian casualties
and damage to civilian infrastructure. The SecretaryGeneral has unambiguously urged the parties to the
conflict to refrain from the use of explosive weapons
23-03878

08/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

in populated areas due to the high likelihood of
indiscriminate harm. In November of last year, more
than 80 States adopted the Political Declaration on
Strengthening the Protection of Civilians from the
Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the Use of
Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas. It marked a
milestone in our efforts to better protect civilians from
the consequences of armed conflict. I therefore reiterate
my call on Member States to implement it. Attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure must stop.
With the one-year anniversary of the invasion of
Ukraine looming ahead, I want to renew the call of
the United Nations for peace. The past 12 months have
seen immense loss and devastation. The SecretaryGeneral warned on Monday that the prospects for
peace keep diminishing (see A/77/PV.58). Regrettably,
at the moment the prospects for a negotiated settlement
of the conflict would seem to be slim as long as the
current military logic continues to prevail. The further
escalation and prolongation of the conflict will only
bring more intolerable suffering. The transfer of
military equipment in support of Ukraine must not
derail the aspiration for peace. I reiterate the General
Assembly’s call to support the de-escalation of the
situation and a peaceful resolution of the conflict, with
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders
and in accordance with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. The United Nations stands ready to
support all genuine efforts to that end.

S/PV.9256

soldiers facing another deadly day at the front. They
may be mothers or fathers, facing the awful question
of “How can I feed my child today?” They may be
civilians, knowing that today the lights will surely go
out, as they always do in war zones; that there is no
fresh water, no fuel for the stove, no blankets — just
barbed wire and watchtowers and walls and enmity.
Or they might be over here, in a big, rich city like
New York. Here, our brothers and sisters can still find
themselves in dire straits. Somehow, however hard
they may have worked all their lives, they may have
lost their footing on the slippery, tilting deck of the
neoliberal capitalist ship we call life in the city, falling
overboard to end up drowning. Maybe they got sick,
maybe they took out a student loan, maybe they missed
a payment — the margins are slim. Who knows? But
now they live on the street in a pile of cardboard, maybe
even within sight of United Nations Headquarters. In
any case, wherever they are in the world, war zone or
not, together they make up a voiceless majority, and
today I shall endeavour to speak for them.
We the peoples wish to live. We wish to live in
peace and in conditions of parity that give us a real
opportunity to look after ourselves and our loved ones.
We are hard workers, and we are ready to work hard.
All we need is a fair crack of the whip. Maybe that
is an unfortunate choice of idiom, after 500 years of
imperialism, colonialism and slavery.

Mr. Waters: I feel profoundly honoured to be
afforded this singular opportunity to brief the Council
today. With members’ forbearance, I shall endeavour to
express what I believe to be the feelings of countless of
our brothers and sisters all over the world, both here in
New York and across the seas. I shall invite them into
this Chamber to have their say.

I ask the Council to please help us. In order to help
us, members may have to consider our predicament and,
in doing so, take their eye off the ball for a moment.
They may have to put their own goals momentarily
to one side. What are their goals, by the way? Here I
would direct my inquiries more to the five permanent
members of the Council. What are their goals? What is
the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow? Is it bigger
profits for war industries, more power globally, a bigger
share of the global cake? Is Mother Earth a cake to be
gobbled up? Does not a bigger share of the cake mean
less for everyone else?

We are here to consider the possibilities for peace
in war-torn Ukraine, especially in the light of the
increasing volume of weapons arriving in that unhappy
country, as has already been mentioned. Every morning
when I sit down at my laptop, I think of our brothers and
sisters in Ukraine and elsewhere who, through no fault
of their own, find themselves in dire and often deadly
circumstances. Over there, in Ukraine, they may be

What if today, in this place of safety, we were to
look in another direction, to look at our capacity for
empathy, for instance, and to put ourselves in others’
shoes, such as — right now, for instance — the shoes of
that chap on the other side of the Chamber, or even the
shoes of the voiceless majority, if they have any shoes,
that is? The voiceless majority is concerned that your
wars — yes, your wars, for these perpetual wars are not

The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Waters.

23-038783/18

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

of our choosing — will destroy the planet that is our
home. Along with every other living thing, we would
then be sacrificed on the altar of two things — profits
from the war to line the pockets of the very, very few and
the hegemonic march of some empire or other towards
unipolar world domination. Please reassure us that that
is not your vision, for there is no good outcome down
that road. That road leads only to disaster. Everyone
on that road has a red button in their briefcase. And
the further we go down that road, the closer the itchy
fingers get to that red button, and the closer we all get
to Armageddon. Look across the Chamber. At this
level, we are all wearing the same shoes.
Let me get back to Ukraine. The invasion of
Ukraine by the Russian Federation was illegal. I
condemn it in the strongest possible terms. However,
the Russian invasion of Ukraine was not unprovoked,
so I also condemn the provocateurs in the strongest
possible terms. I now got that out of the way.
When I wrote this speech yesterday, I included
an observation that the power of veto in the Council
lies only in the hands of its permanent members,
and that I was concerned that this was undemocratic
and rendered the Council somewhat toothless. This
morning, however, I had a revelation upon waking.
Maybe toothless, in some ways, is a good thing. If this
is a toothless Chamber, I can open my big mouth on
behalf of the voiceless without fear of getting my head
bitten off. How cool is that?
I read in the paper this morning some anonymous
diplomat quoted as saying: “Roger Waters to address
the Security Council — what next, Mr. Bean?” For
those who do not know, Mr. Bean is an ineffectual
character in an English comedy show on television. So
it is a penny to a pound — the anonymous diplomat is
an Englishman.
I think it is time to introduce my mother — Mary
Duncan Waters. She was a big influence on me. She
was a schoolteacher. I say was because she has been
dead for 15 years. My father, Eric Fletcher Waters, was
a big influence on me too. He too is dead. He was killed
on 18 February 1944, near Aprilia, near the Anzio
bridgehead in Italy. I was only five months old. So I
know something about war and loss. Anyway, back
to my mum. When I was about 13, I was struggling
with some knotty adolescent problem or other, trying
to decide what to do. It does not matter what it was. I
4/18

08/02/2023

cannot remember anyway, but my mum sat me down
and said:
“Now listen, you are going to be faced with many
knotty problems during your life, Roger, and when
you are, here is my advice — read, read, read.
Find out everything you can about whatever it is.
Look at it from all sides and all angles. Listen to
all opinions, especially ones you do not agree with.
Research it thoroughly. When you have done that,
then you will have done all the heavy lifting and
the next bit is easy.”
“Is it? OK, mum, well, what is the easy bit?” I
asked. “The easy bit is you just do the right thing,”
she responded.
Speaking of doing the right thing brings me to
human rights. We the people want universal human
rights for all our brothers and sisters all over the world,
irrespective of their ethnicity, religion or nationality.
To be clear, that would include, but not be limited to
the right to life and property under the law. That would
apply, for instance, to Ukrainians and Palestinians. Let
that sink in. Obviously, that would apply to the rest of
us as well.
One of the problems with wars is that in a war
zone — or anywhere where people live under military
occupation — there is no recourse to the law; there
are no human rights. Today our topic is the possibility
of peace in the Ukraine, with special reference to
the arming of the Kyiv regime by third parties. I am
running out of time. So what do the voiceless millions
have to say? They thank the Council for hearing us
today. We are many who do not share in the profits of
the war industry. We do not willingly raise our sons
and daughters to provide fodder for your cannons. In
our opinion, the only sensible course of action today is
to call for an immediate ceasefire in Ukraine — no ifs,
ands or buts. Not one more Ukrainian or Russian life is
to be spent, not one; they are all precious in our eyes.
The time has come to speak truth to power. I recall
the story of the emperor’s new clothes. Well, the leaders
of the Council members’ respective empires stand — to
one degree or another — naked before us. We have a
message for them. It is a message from all the refugees
in all the camps, a message from all the slums and
favelas, a message from all the homeless on all the cold
streets, from all the earthquakes and floods on Earth. It
is also a message from all the people not quite starving
but wondering how on Earth to make the pittance they
23-03878

08/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

earn meet the cost of a roof over their head and food for
their families.
My mother country, England, is — thank God — an
empire no more. But in that country there is now a new
catch phrase — eat or heat. One cannot do both. It is a
cry echoing round the whole of Europe. Apparently, the
only thing the Powers that be think we can all afford is
perpetual war. How crazy is that?
So, from the 4 billion or so brothers and sisters in
this voiceless majority, who, together with the millions
in the international anti-war movement, represent
a huge constituency, we say: enough is enough. We
demand change.
I call out to President Biden, President Putin,
President Zelenskyy, the United States of America,
NATO, Russia and the European Union, one and all:
please change course now and agree to a ceasefire in
Ukraine today. That, of course, will be only the starting
point, but everything extends from that starting
point. Imagine the collective global sigh of relief, the
outpouring of joy, the international joining of voices
in harmony, singing an anthem to peace, John Lennon
pumping the air with his fist from the grave, saying: we
have finally been heard in the corridors of power. The
bullies in the schoolyard have agreed to stop playing
nuclear chicken. We are not all going to die in a nuclear
holocaust, after all — at least not today. The Powers
that be have been persuaded to drop the arms race and
perpetual war as their accepted modus operandum. We
can stop squandering all our precious resources on war.
We can feed our children. We can keep them warm. We
may even learn to cooperate with all our brothers and
sisters, and even save our beautiful planet home from
destruction. Would that not be nice?
The President: I thank Mr. Waters for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I think that it would not be an exaggeration
to say that, since our most recent meeting on the
topic of deliveries of Western weapons to Ukraine in
December (see S/PV.9216), the demand for a peaceful
solution to the Ukrainian crisis among States Members
of the United Nations, and, indeed, the international
community in general, has significantly increased,
although that is not evident in the Chamber today. For
some reason, the countries of the European Union.

S/PV.9256

which usually do not miss an opportunity to shine on
their domestic television screens, did not request to
participate in this meeting. Apparently, the explanation
for that is that they are not at all interested in the pursuit
of peace.
We just heard a poignant analysis of what is
happening from Roger Waters, one of the most
prominent activists of the modern anti-war movement.
Mr. Waters has consistently spoken out against wars and
violence for several decades. That theme permeates his
world-famous songs. The fact that he wanted to speak to
us testifies to the extreme concern of the international
creative intelligentsia and people in general about
where our world is heading.
In our view, Mr. Waters and his colleagues have
every reason to be concerned. It is not even a matter of
politicians, such as German Minister for Foreign Affairs
Annalena Baerbock, admitting that NATO is waging a
proxy war with Russia. Indeed, it is. It is not about the
new calls by a number of Russophobic politicians to
inflict a strategic defeat on Russia, of which, as we all
understand, Ukraine itself is not capable. The problem
is that the leverage that could influence the search for
a peaceful solution to the conflict concerning Ukraine
has ended up in the hands of Western arms companies
and corporations. As the Council well understands,
they are the last to be interested in peace.
The invitation, which was leaked to the Internet,
from the Embassy of Ukraine in the United States of
America to a reception in December 2022 marking the
thirty-first anniversary of the founding of the Armed
Forces of Ukraine featured the logos of four American
defence industry companies sponsoring the reception:
Northrop Grumman, Raytheon, Pratt & Whitney and
Lockheed Martin.
How does the State of Ukraine owe so much to such
private arms companies? The answer is, first, artillery
ammunition; secondly, the Stinger man-portable air
defence system; and, thirdly, the infamous HIMARS.
Thanks to a continuous supply chain and new orders,
the shares of those corporations increased by more than
20 per cent in the last three months of 2022 alone.
In addition, American businessmen have a
veritable weapons testing ground, where, at the cost
of the lives of Russians and Ukrainians, new types of
weapons are tested, modified and improved. How can
arms manufacturers refuse such opportunities and
such profits?

23-038785/18

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

Moreover, the billions of dollars allocated by
the United States to Ukraine do not even leave the
United States, but are sent directly to contractors from
military companies. Lawyer and politician Robert
Kennedy — the nephew of the former head of the
White House, John F. Kennedy — recently said that.
The situation is more or less the same for other major
arms suppliers — in other words, Western countries
have found a pretext for a significant increase in their
defence budgets and the revenues of their own defence
companies. As a result, Ukraine generally receives
outdated weapons, which the Russian army pulverizes,
while the armies of NATO countries are modernized,
and Western defence enterprises make huge profits,
lulling taxpayers with the need to help Ukraine. Poland
and Czechia are becoming its military repair centres,
and, according to The Wall Street Journal, they are also
making huge profits from that.
The former neutral States are not far behind. In
that way, 2022 became one of the most profitable years
for the Swiss defence industry. In the first half of that
year alone, exports reached 517 million Swiss francs.
In order not to miss out on such profits, but to boost
them, the Parliament of that country is considering an
initiative to allow third countries to re-export Swissmade weapons five years after their purchase.
In that pursuit of profit, the modern Swiss clearly
do not lag behind their predecessors of 80 years
ago, when Swiss anti-aircraft systems and Oerlikon
cannons armed the air defence and air forces of the
Third Reich and militaristic Japan, and provided them
with a continuous supply of ammunition. Such is
pragmatic neutrality.
In short, a business scheme has taken shape, in
which Ukraine plays the role of a private military
company. The task of our former Western partners is
to ensure that that continues in that way for as long as
possible, regardless of the losses of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine.
I will leave out the moral aspect of that story.
Unfortunately, we know that the countries of the
collective West have long since lost their morality and
conscience. What is there to talk about if the current
Kyiv regime is the handiwork of a number of Western
countries, implemented since at least 2014, for specific
geopolitical purposes to weaken and undermine Russia?
I also do not want anyone to reduce our statement
today solely to a call to stop the flow of Western
6/18

08/02/2023

weapons before it is too late. Although that is important,
above all for Ukraine itself, we are well aware that,
until the Kyiv regime goes completely bankrupt on the
battlefield, that flow will not dry up. While we have
already destroyed more than 7,000 tanks, owned by, or
supplied to, Ukraine, since the beginning of the special
military operation a year ago, 100, 200 or 300 new
tanks will not make a difference, as they say.
I would like to once again note that the West is
directly involved in the Ukrainian conflict, not only by
providing weapons and intelligence, but also by sending
mercenaries and military personnel, without whom
Kyiv simply cannot operate some Western weapons.
In a number of the most Russophobic capitals, which
had lost their sense of reality long before our special
military operation, they even call for NATO troops
to be deployed there to save Ukraine or for the use of
NATO border military infrastructure for operations
against our country and its allies.
Today I will not go into detail regarding the
proliferation of resold Ukrainian weapons around the
world. We have already discussed that at length. Now
we see attempts to sweep those stories under the carpet
so as not to alarm the public in Western States. But
that does not mean that the problem has been resolved.
On the contrary, it is only growing and becoming
increasingly ugly. Suffice it to recall the President of
Nigeria’s admission that weapons from Ukraine have
begun to fall into the hands of terrorist groups in the
Sahel on a regular basis.
I will just mention the responsibility of the
countries supplying long-range artillery and missile
systems for the deaths of the civilians of Donbas, living
in places which the gunners of the Armed Forces of
Ukraine could not previously reach. All those facts
are recorded by us, and all those involved will not
escape punishment for those crimes. I would also like
to mention the overall responsibility of the Western
backers of the Kyiv regime for the inhumane methods
of warfare practised by their wards and the flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law, ranging
from torturing prisoners of war to deploying air defence
systems in residential areas.
Just the other day, for example, footage of the use of
chemical warfare agents by the Armed Forces of Ukraine
was disseminated on the Ukrainian news, complete
with blusterous commentary. Our relevant authorities
are currently reviewing that report. While, as recently
23-03878

08/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

as yesterday (see S/PV.9255) in this Chamber, our
former Western partners beat their chests and declared
that they would not allow the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, we have no doubt that they will ignore that
most recent war crime of the Zelenskyy regime. Those
are the double standards of today’s West.
Our Western colleagues will now begin to argue
that, according to them, they have no other choice
but to help Ukraine defend itself. They claim that,
otherwise, the country will allegedly be threatened
with destruction and de-Ukrainization, although we
have never set ourselves such goals. I hope that, given
the recent admissions by Mrs. Merkel, Mr. Hollande,
Mr. Johnson and Mr. Poroshenko saying that Western
countries, under the guise of the Minsk agreements,
have been arming Ukraine for eight years and
preparing it for war with Russia, such assertions will
not mislead anyone.
We will make sure that never again in the future will
there be a threat from Ukrainian territory to Russia or
its allies or to Russian culture or the Russian language.
And never again will there be the glorification of Hitler’s
accomplices, who murdered hundreds of thousands of
Jews, Russians, Poles and Ukrainians. That is what
should form the basis for any agreement. The so-called
“Zelenskyy formulas” are simply a mockery of the
concept of a peace plan.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing. We have also
taken note of the statement by Mr. Roger Waters.
As the Security Council heard two days ago (see
S/PV.9254) and again this morning, Russia’s military
aggression against Ukraine continues to cost lives
and increase the suffering of the civilian population
in the middle of winter. Moreover, the humanitarian
and economic repercussions of the war are felt beyond
Ukraine. It is therefore imperative to put an end to the
hostilities and to protect the civilian population.
In order to achieve a just and lasting peace
in accordance with international law, allow me to
underscore four key points.
First, we call on Russia to cease all combat
operations and to withdraw its troops from Ukrainian
territory without delay. Switzerland fully supports the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.

S/PV.9256

Secondly, Switzerland calls on all parties to
strictly respect international humanitarian law and
human rights. Even in times of war, there are rules to
be followed. According to the Geneva Conventions
and their Protocols Additional, distinguishing between
military targets and civilians, as well as civilian objects,
is an obligation.
Thirdly, it is important to move towards peaceful,
just and lasting solutions. To that end, we must draw upon
international law and diplomatic means. In that regard,
and if the parties so wish, Switzerland stands ready
to provide good offices and to support de-escalation.
Switzerland’s neutrality cannot be called into question.
There can be no neutrality when international law or
the Charter of the United Nations is being violated.
Fourthly, we recall that there can be no lasting peace
without accountability. Switzerland strongly condemns
any violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights committed in Ukraine. If impunity is
not addressed, it encourages further violations. In
Ukraine and elsewhere, Switzerland supports national
and international efforts to document and prosecute
war crimes. In particular, Switzerland has referred the
situation in Ukraine to the International Criminal Court,
together with some 40 other States, thereby enabling the
Prosecutor to immediately open an investigation. We
encourage all Member States to ratify the Rome Statute
and to cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Court. We are also closely following the discussions on
the creation of a special tribunal to investigate the crime
of aggression in Ukraine. Finally, we also welcome the
work of other multilateral mechanisms, such as the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine of the Human Rights Council and the factfinding mechanism on the situation in Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In order to end the war and the suffering of civilians,
Russia must immediately stop its military aggression
against Ukraine.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. I also
listened very carefully to the statement by Mr. Waters.
Just two days ago, the Security Council held an
open meeting on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine
during which all parties expressed their apprehension
about the humanitarian repercussions of the conflict
(see S/PV.9254). It should be seen that the large and
incessant flow of weapons and ammunition into the

23-038787/18

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

conflict region will cause greater civilian casualties,
more displaced persons and a heavier humanitarian toll
on innocent civilians.
More worrisome is the fact that some countries
keep sending weapons to the theatre of war and
expanding the categories and range of weapons used,
thereby engaging in a proxy war, which will further
stoke tensions, amplify the risk of triggering strategic
miscalculation and cause the fighting to escalate and
spread further, diminishing the already bleak prospect
for ending the war. One cannot help but worry about the
spectre of a protracted and expanded conflict.
High Representative Nakamitsu, in her briefings
to the Council, repeatedly indicates that the flow of
weapons and ammunition into the conflict region may
bring about proliferation risks. Similarly, INTERPOL
and some African leaders have also sounded the alarm.
Relevant parties should pay great attention thereto,
adopt strict control measures, prevent the proliferation
of weapons and ammunition and, in particular, stop
them from falling in the hands of terrorists and armed
groups, and avoid creating new instability in the greater
geographic region.
In that regard, the dire consequences of the
conflicts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria and Somalia
serve as sobering lessons. It is our hope that relevant
countries, especially European countries, will take
seriously the significant threat posed by weapons
and explosive remnants of war to post-war recovery
and reconstruction, as well as to regional peace and
stability, and revisit with a sense of responsibility and
a long-term perspective the complex impact and severe
consequences of the large influx of weapons on the
Ukrainian crisis and international peace and security.
The crisis in Ukraine is global and multifaceted
in nature to which there is no purely military solution.
In the past year, piling on sanctions and upgrading
weapons did not calm the situation, but instead made
the conflict more acute and issues more complicated,
pushing the situation to a more dangerous precipice.
As many other peace-aspiring countries, China has
repeatedly stressed that dialogue and negotiation are
the fundamental way to end the war and restore peace.
We call upon the international community to build
synergy for facilitating dialogue and peace, encourage
the parties to the conflict to return to negotiations at an
early date and resolve the crisis through political means.
8/18

08/02/2023

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu and Mr. Waters for their briefings.
Brazil shares the assessment that the obligation of
the parties to guarantee the security of the Ukrainian
civilian population must supersede any other
consideration. On Monday, at the most recent Security
Council meeting dedicated to the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine, we expressed our regret that the
public debate on the conflict is increasingly focused on
transfers of weapons and ammunition and not on what
seems most important to us: an immediate ceasefire and
the opening of peace negotiations (see S/PV.9254). The
emphasis on arms transfers is symptomatic of what we
see as a serious escalation in the conflict. On numerous
occasions, we have noted the right of States to selfdefence, a fundamental principle of international law.
Nevertheless, that right must never overshadow the
greater duty to restore international peace and security.
There is also a great risk that weapons transferred
to any of the parties to the conflict might fall into the
hands of unauthorized recipients, including militias
and criminal or terrorist groups. Those threats are real
and deserve the Council’s attention.
We urge the parties to immediately suspend
hostilities without preconditions and engage in dialogue.
At the same time, we encourage other Member States to
act in order to facilitate diplomatic negotiations. Faced
with persistent rumours about the launch of a new
military offensive, we have to remember once again
that our Organization was created with the mission of
ridding future generations of the scourge of war. We
must not evade that responsibility.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu and Mr. Waters for their briefings.
This is the second time this week that the Security
Council (see S/PV.9254) is discussing the situation in
Ukraine. Japan reiterates its condemnation of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine in the strongest terms.
Russia’s actions are a clear and flagrant violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
We underscore Ukraine’s right to defend itself against
aggression. The support of the international community
in stopping an act of aggression is entirely legitimate in
the context of the maintenance of international peace
and security. Indeed, no nation should support Russia’s
aggression, and Russia should not use the Security
Council to divert attention from its acts.
23-03878

08/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Waters asked about the goals of the Security
Council. For us, it is not about profiting from Russia’s
political appetite or from the military industry. It is,
however, about restoring the dignity of a people and
of individuals by putting a stop to Russia’s aggression
and achieving sustainable peace in accordance with
international law.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I also thank civil-society briefer Roger Waters for the
views he expressed on the matter at hand.
At the outset, I want to affirm the right of Ukraine to
self-defence and in that respect to taking all necessary
measures within the limits of international law to
protect its people and territory from the aggressive
acts of the Russian Federation. After a year of intense
fighting marked by suffering, death and destruction,
the war in Ukraine now appears to be heading in the
direction of an intractable conflict with no end in
sight. Secretary-General António Guterres, in his
statement to the General Assembly on his priorities
for 2023 (see A/77/PV.58), echoed our fears of a wider
war with devastating consequences for Ukraine and
for the rest of us, who have not been spared the war’s
effects where the international financial, energy and
food systems are concerned. We are deeply worried
about the possible threat of accidental or miscalculated
actions with catastrophic outcomes as the warring sides
mobilize massive military and other strategic resources
in anticipation of an escalation of the warfare in the
coming days. We find it alarming and unfortunate that
projections of a military win seem to be gaining the
upper hand over our collectively held values based on
the peaceful settlement of conflicts.
It is worth reminding ourselves, however, that
many past and present conflicts in various parts of the
world have shown that there is little or no chance of
establishing peace through military action. Indeed, the
United Nations was founded on that very realization and
on the importance of ensuring pacific settlements of the
disputes that are bound to occur as long as competing
interests prevail among States. Based on that wisdom,
the Charter of the United Nations expressly prohibits
the use of force among States and offers a wide range
of diplomatic tools to aid in the peaceful resolution of
disputes. We believe that a negotiated settlement would
guarantee a comprehensive, durable and just peace
between the Russian Federation and its neighbour

S/PV.9256

Ukraine. We therefore urge the Security Council to
intensify its work for peace, along with similar efforts
through the good offices of the Secretary-General to
help facilitate dialogue among the parties, their allies
and other relevant actors.
It is time for a pause by the parties and for the
wider international community to critically assess
the immediate and long-term implications of the war
and what that means for promoting and maintaining
international peace and security. For the international
community, especially countries with developing
economies, the sooner the war ends, the better the
chances of recovery for the ailing global economic
systems on which we are collectively dependent. We
encourage all actors to keep in focus the humanitarian
cost of the war and the compelling need to safeguard
and preserve innocent lives from harm. We reiterate
our call on the warring sides to refrain from further
missile attacks on residential facilities, as well as the
destruction of critical energy infrastructure, such as we
have seen in recent weeks. We call for level-headedness
and for a de-escalation of tensions as we approach
the one-year mark of this unjustifiable war. While we
remain supportive of international peace efforts, we
must emphasize the moral and legal obligation of the
Russian Federation, as the protagonist of the war, to
end all its operations in Ukraine, with the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of its forces from the
internationally recognized borders of Ukraine. Until
then, we fear that the prospects of a peaceful settlement
may continue to remain out of reach.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing, and I also thank Mr. Roger Waters, whose
account of his own life reminds us all that when we
speak of war, it is above all a matter of human lives
and deaths.
It will soon be one year to the day since the war
in Ukraine began, and there is still no prospect of
reaching a solution between the warring parties. The
recent announcements of the delivery of new and
advanced weaponry lead us to believe that the fighting
will not only continue but will likely escalate. We are
moving inexorably towards a war of attrition. We can
expect more deaths and further destruction of civilian
infrastructure. We must find a way to end the war in
order to stop the bloodshed and the cycle of fear and
trauma that the Ukrainian people have been trapped in
for almost a year.

23-038789/18

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

We have not ceased to condemn the use of weapons of
mass destruction and the bombing of innocent civilians,
homes, hospitals and nuclear power plants. Yet 12
months later, here we are anticipating that more names
will be added to the already long list of the victims of
the war. Secretary-General António Guterres expressed
his concern to the General Assembly two days ago (see
A/77/PV.58) when he presented his priorities for 2023,
saying, “The prospects for peace keep diminishing,
[and] the chances of further escalation and bloodshed
keep growing”.
The signing in July 2022 of the grain export
agreement, which was renewed on 17 November, has
been a source of hope. Taking place at the height
of the conflict, it showed that with willpower it is
always possible to seek a solution through diplomatic
channels. We continue to call on all the parties to seek
such mechanisms, as provided for in Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations, in order to end to the
war and begin negotiations to achieve lasting peace and
peaceful coexistence. We call on the parties to engage
in dialogue to silence the weapons in Ukraine. My
country will continue to call unceasingly for good-faith
negotiations to achieve a ceasefire and find a diplomatic
solution to the conflict in Ukraine.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Russia has not called this meeting to discuss the
prospects for peace. It has called this meeting to try
once again to deflect responsibility for its war. Let us
look at the facts. This time last year, Russia assembled
a military force of more than 100,000 troops and a
massive accumulation of weaponry and equipment
on three sides of Ukraine. On 24 February 2022,
Russia launched its all-out invasion. President Putin
claimed he was stopping a genocide in Donbas. The
International Court of Justice rejected that reasoning
and ordered Russia immediately to end its invasion.
Russia revealed its real objectives when it attempted
the illegal annexation of further Ukrainian territory,
a tactic from the same playbook it used in Crimea in
2014. The United Nations membership rejected that
decisively, and repeatedly demanded that Russia end its
invasion and withdraw. Yet Russia has continued. It has
done so with the assistance of Belarus, in addition to
being supplemented by weapons sourced from Iran and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in violation
of United Nations sanctions. Thus armed, Russia shows
10/18

08/02/2023

no sign of stopping and appears now to be preparing a
further offensive.
Russia is the reason that there is no peace in
Ukraine. In the face of that onslaught, Ukraine has had
no choice but to exercise its right under the Charter
of the United Nations to defend itself. It has done so
resolutely and successfully, but at massive cost to its
people and its resources. It is in that context that the
United Kingdom, alongside others, recently pledged
further and enduring defensive support to Ukraine.
That includes bolstering training for Ukrainian troops,
which was announced during President Zelenskyy’s
visit to London today. We are proud of that support to
help Ukraine defend its country, protect its sovereignty
and fight for its territory and freedom.
Russia still has hundreds of thousands of troops
within Ukraine’s borders attacking the country every
day. Surely none of us can object to Ukraine having the
means to protect itself from that aggression. But what
Ukraine wants — what we all want — is peace. We
welcome and support Ukraine’s proposals to that end.
For peace to be just and sustainable, it must be based on
the principles of the Charter, which we have all pledged
to uphold.
If Russia truly wanted peace, it would not be calling
spurious meetings of the Security Council. It would
immediately end its illegal invasion, withdraw from
Ukraine and return in good faith to the negotiating
table it overturned last February.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We listened carefully to the remarks of Mr. Roger
Waters, and there is a lot to take in there. He is lucky
to be in New York, in a free country and to speak his
mind and say whatever he likes, including about the
Russian aggression and how wrong it is. If he had been
in Russia, with what he said, he might have been in
custody by now.
Exactly one year ago, in this very Chamber, some of
us warned of the possibility of an unprovoked military
aggression by Russia in Ukraine. Russia repeatedly
vehemently denied those warnings, calling them
unfounded rumours and assuring the international
community that there would be no aggression. Only a
few weeks later, aggression there was, in its purest form,
with a distorted name, but with the same consequences.
And it continues to this hour. Here we are, one year
23-03878

08/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

later, in a meeting to discuss the prospects for a peaceful
settlement and arms transfers. That curious mixture
compels us to make some key points.
My first point is on peace. It is indeed positive that
we talk of peace and that we have repeatedly called
for it, but things must be clear, and the call must be
sincere. What has been happening for a year in Ukraine
is a war of choice that was launched without a shred of
justification against a peaceful, sovereign nation that
posed no threat to Russia or anyone else. This calamity
was Russia’s doing — a breach of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations — and has
since been destroying Ukraine, killing its people,
demolishing its infrastructure and dismantling its
economy. This dangerous adventure has not only posed
a clear and direct danger to the security of Europe
but also, as everyone knows now, it has a much wider
impact worldwide.
Truth be told, these past 12 months have shown,
including to Russia itself, that despite the terrible pain
inflicted on Ukraine and its people, Russia has failed
to achieve any of its declared strategic, operational
and tactical objectives. Everything has gone wrong, as
the idea was wicked and its plans were botched. Only
Russia may correct it, and there is only one way to do
so: stop the war, withdraw its forces from Ukraine and
return to talks. But we see no signs — none — that
Russia is seriously and genuinely seeking any sort of
peaceful settlement, or that it will cease its brutal attack
on Ukraine. We are now used to hearing one thing and
seeing exactly the contrary materialize. What we are
calling for today is no different since what we are seeing
is the opposite of what we are asking: an obstinacy to
go ahead, persist with the crimes and inflict more pain.
And it is difficult for anyone to take missiles that kill
for olive branches.
My second point is on arms transfers. A Member
of the United Nations was viciously attacked by its
neighbour. The world did not choose to look away.
It chose to stand up, condemn Russia and to rise up
to show solidarity with the victims and in defence of
commonly agreed rules. It chose to face the illegal
action of Russia through legal means and actions. There
is no article in the Charter of the United Nations or
anywhere else in international law that gives the right
to any country to wage an illegal war against another.
That is one of the benefits of the lessons learned from
the past, namely, to work in peace, cooperation and
friendship for shared benefits. In return, there is a clear

S/PV.9256

provision agreed by everyone on how to help victims,
and Article 51 of the Charter provides the legal basis
for individual States to offer whatever assistance to a
country exercising its inherent right to self-defence,
in defence of its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Every country would do that. It could not be clearer.
That is what several countries on different
continents have been doing. They have been standing
for Ukraine and its army — in a country where ordinary
people have been obliged to abandon their studies,
musical instruments and sportswear to put on military
fatigues and rush to the front to defend their children,
land and freedom. And with their outstanding courage
and military brilliance, they have justified every penny
spent. The weapons supplied to Ukraine have helped
show Russia and anyone who may attempt to use force
instead of peaceful means the limits to such adventures.
The community of nations must continue to stand with
Ukraine and continue to provide everything that helps
Ukraine help itself push back the aggression until the
war leaves a place for talks and diplomacy.
Speaking of weapons, what should have our
attention is the issue of the illegal transfer of weapons
from Iran and North Korea, two countries under
Security Council sanctions, which are being used in the
war of aggression against Ukraine, in blatant violation
of the resolutions of the Council.
In conclusion, we will always support peace efforts,
talks, dialogue and peace settlements. But those should
not be empty words to be used for putting something
on the record. What is needed is concrete action, and
that starts in the Kremlin, where the war was decided.
Peace is always made by the brave, with clear vision
and strong leadership, and with shared benefits for all,
not to the detriment of some. Russia started this war.
Russia is responsible for its consequences. And Russia
can decide to put an end. Because — and I will end with
this — as the famous rock band Pink Floyd sung last
year in their uplifting iconic song “Hey Hey Rise Up”,
“our beautiful Ukraine is in sorrow ... and we will raise
it up. And we shall cheer for our glorious Ukraine”. The
sooner the war stops and the soon this madness is over,
the better off we all will be — the glorious Ukraine,
Russia and the world.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates): We too
thank
Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu
for
her informative briefing. We listened carefully to

23-0387811/18

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Waters, and I welcome Ukraine’s participation in
today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its longstanding position that it is vital to safeguard weapons
during their transfer, storage and deployment. That is
particularly urgent in a context of ongoing military
hostilities. We therefore encourage continued vigilance
and transparency regarding the measures in place to
mitigate any unintended risks that may be associated
with arms transfers in the context under discussion. To
that end, we welcome all ongoing efforts and initiatives
to strengthen arms control in Ukraine and across the
region, especially those aimed at addressing potential
diversion. It is crucial that the weapons in question do
not fall into the wrong hands.
In the course of the past year we have discussed
many of the effects of the war in Ukraine. Most recently,
the Council was briefed on the humanitarian situation
and the international response aimed at alleviating
the suffering of Ukrainian civilians (see S/PV.9254).
Similarly, the topic today highlights the importance
of addressing the conflict’s potential impact on the
proliferation of weapons. In that context, the United
Arab Emirates firmly maintains its long-standing
position that the Council must ensure consistent
compliance with all its resolutions.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
the High Representative for an informative and
thoughtful briefing for us today. As for our other
briefer, Mr. Waters, while I certainly acknowledge
his impressive credentials as a recording artist, his
qualifications to speak to us as an expert briefer on arms
control or European security issues are less evident to
me. I will leave it to my Ukrainian colleague to address
Mr. Waters’ credibility in speaking on behalf of his socalled brothers and sisters in Ukraine. If I may, I will
just say that Mr. Waters asked about our vision, and I
can say what it is quite quickly.
The vision of the United States is of a world in which
Europe is whole, at peace and free. It is a world in which
the goal of the Cold War, which we achieved — where
every country could choose its own orientation and
foreign-policy direction and spheres of influence were
a thing of the past — is our goal. Looking at what is
happening in Ukraine, I think that members can draw
their own conclusions as to what Russia’s goal is for the
end of it.
12/18

08/02/2023

We have been brought together today once again to
hear another version of why Russia’s brutal invasion of
Ukraine is actually the fault of Ukraine and Ukraine’s
partners, or, in the words of Mr. Waters, friends who
are provocateurs. Of course, in the past we have even
had weaponized bats brought up as a reason for this
war. The reality is that the disinformation is intense,
but we cannot let it distract our focus. The key fact,
which many of my colleagues around the table have
pointed out, is that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is
illegal. It is a flagrant violation of Ukraine’s territorial
integrity and of the Charter of the United Nations. As
Ambassador Woodward mentioned, that fact has been
underscored repeatedly by members of the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Secretary-General,
the International Court of Justice and across the United
Nations system.
Defending the Charter is not just about words
written on paper, but about the principles at the heart
of the Charter and actions to back them up. For some,
that has meant standing up for Ukraine diplomatically
during votes in the General Assembly. For others it
has meant supporting Ukraine’s efforts to defend itself
against a brutal, unprovoked war of aggression.
As others have said, the inherent right to individual
and collective self-defence is reflected in Article 51
of the Charter. Those are inconvenient realities for
Russia, desperate to find a narrative, any narrative,
other than the one that it is stuck in. The security
assistance, including weapons, that the United States
and more than 50 other countries are providing, and
will continue to provide, is for Ukraine’s self-defence.
That distinction could not be more important. Ukraine
is using those weapons to repel the invading Russian
forces that are committing war crimes on Ukraine’s
territory. They are designed to stop Russia’s relentless
shelling of cities and destroy incoming missiles aimed
at the electrical grid and other targets of no military
value. We unequivocally reject the victim-blaming
notion that Ukraine’s self-defence is the obstacle to
ending the war. No one wants peace in Ukraine more
than Ukrainians themselves. It is Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity that have been violated, not
Russia’s. The Kremlin and its mouthpieces are using
the terms “peace settlement” and “peace negotiations”.
But actions speak louder than words, and Russia has
consistently failed to take any action that would give
substance to its vaunted talk of peace, such as silencing
its guns or withdrawing its forces from Ukraine.
23-03878

08/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Russia has tried again and again to use the Security
Council to distract the international community from
the fact of its own armed aggression against a State
Member of the United Nations. Today’s Security
Council meeting is taking place amid reports that we
have all seen that Russia is preparing for a further
large-scale offensive action against Ukraine.
If Russia wants to talk about dangerous arms
transfers in the Council, let it come clean about the
hundreds of Iranian drones that Tehran has transferred
to Russia, in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). Russia
is using those drones to attack Ukraine’s critical
infrastructure, depriving the people of Ukraine of
access to light, heat and water in the dead of winter. If
Russia wants to talk about dangerous arms transfers in
the Council, what does it have to say about the rockets
and missiles that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea delivered to Russia in November for use by
the vicious Russia-backed Wagner Group, which has
deployed thousands of fighters in Ukraine, including
convicts recruited straight from Russia’s prisons?
Procuring weapons from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, as Ambassador Woodward pointed
out, also constitutes a violation of Security Council
resolutions, and Russia is giving us every reason to
expect that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
supply of weapons for the Wagner Group will continue.
As I have said before in the Council, President
Putin’s playbook is transparent — wreak death and
destruction, target civilian infrastructure, freeze and
brutalize Ukrainian civilians, force them from their
homes and drive up energy and food costs across Europe
and around the world. Russia is doing this not only to
wear down Ukraine, but to convince the rest of the
world that it would be so much easier and more peaceful
to turn our backs on Ukraine and ignore the most basic
principles of the Charter — respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States. That might be easier for Russia, but caving
to Russia’s aggression against a sovereign country,
enabling Russia’s unconscionable killing and injuring
of civilians and accepting its brazen attempts to redraw
borders by force would tear up the rulebook that has
made all of us more secure and lead to dangerous
repercussions around the world.
In conclusion, the United States hopes for a just and
secure peace in Ukraine. True peace must be durable, and
it cannot and will not come at the expense of Ukraine’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence. It is

S/PV.9256

preposterous beyond words to try to equate the violence
that Russia has inflicted on Ukraine with Ukraine’s
efforts to defend itself. Anyone serious about peace in
Ukraine should call on Russia to abide by the United
Nations Charter, stop its relentless bombardments and
withdraw its forces from Ukraine’s territory.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): We
meet today at Russia’s request. Russia is concerned
about the lack of prospects for a peaceful settlement
of the war of aggression that it decided to start nearly
a year ago in Ukraine. That situation would be almost
laughable were the suffering of Ukrainians not so grave
and the atrocities committed by the Russian armed
forces not continuing to mount.
I would like to recall one simple truth. A peaceful
settlement of the war depends on Russia, which is solely
and entirely responsible for it. All it has to do is to
cease its aggression and withdraw all of its troops from
the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine’s
territory, as ordered by the International Court of
Justice in its decision of 16 March 2022.
As has been said in this Chamber on several
occasions, if Russia stops fighting, peace will be
restored immediately. If Ukraine stops fighting, it will
be annihilated. There are Russian troops in Ukraine
today, but there are no Ukrainian troops in Russia.
Allow me, therefore, to once again recall that there is
an aggressor and a victim in this war. Let us not allow
Russia to reverse responsibilities.
France is providing, and will continue to provide,
the Ukrainian people with all the support they need to
exercise their right to self-defence and preserve their
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations. That includes military support,
both bilaterally and through the European Union, which
is aimed at restoring the balance of power in order to
create the conditions for a just and lasting settlement
of the conflict. We all know that negotiations will
succeed only if Ukraine’s sovereignty is respected
and its territory is liberated. Helping a sovereign State
under attack to resist the invasion of another State is
a quest for peace and a defence of the principles of
international law.
As Russia’s stockpile of weapons dwindles, it
seeks to obtain them by any means, including by
violating Security Council resolutions. Indeed, it is
well documented that Russia has used combat drones

23-0387813/18

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

supplied by Iran in its war of aggression. We call on the
United Nations to investigate and report to the Council
on those transfers, which violate resolution 2231 (2015).
It is also documented that, on several occasions, North
Korea has delivered missiles and ammunition to Russia
in flagrant violation of Security Council resolutions.
Those weapons were intended for use by the troops of
the private military company Wagner Group, which
Russia does not hesitate to mobilize by the tens of
thousands, including criminals, to compensate for its
many losses on the ground.
Russia continues to use all of those weapons in
its strategy of systematically targeting the Ukrainian
civilian population and infrastructure, in flagrant
violation of the principles of international humanitarian
law. The United Nations and all of its Members States
cannot — and should not — look the other way.
Ukraine is fighting to defend the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations: territorial integrity;
the inviolability of borders; the independence and
sovereignty of States; the rejection of the conquest
of territories by force; and the condemnation of wars
of aggression. Defending those principles is a task
that concerns all of us States Members of the United
Nations. With the 10-point peace plan proposed by
President Zelenskyy, Ukraine has shown its willingness
to make peace and has mapped out a path towards a just
and lasting peace. As since 24 February 2022, we will
continue to support Ukraine in achieving that peace.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): We wish to thank
the Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her valuable briefing. We also express our sincere
appreciation for the testimony of Mr. Roger Waters — a
passionate advocate for peace throughout his illustrious
and iconic career.
After one year of the conflict in Ukraine, our wishes
for peace are yet to come true. Let me emphatically
reiterate Mozambique’s strict adherence to, and defence
of, the internationally agreed provisions on the use of
force in the conduct of nations, as clearly spelled out in
Articles 2 and 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Those provisions are central and foundational to rulesbased international law and order, as they constitute the
best defence of the weak against arbitrary attacks by
the strong.
As stated by the briefers and reiterated by our
delegation on several occasions, the trajectory of the
14/18

08/02/2023

conflict between the Russian Federation and Ukraine is
pointing towards a prolonged war of attrition and away
from any compromise at the negotiating table. We are
witnessing, inter alia, first, the expansion of directly
and indirectly involved actors in the conflict; secondly,
the continued erosion of long-held notions of restraint
in the conduct of matters related to the maintenance
of international peace, including, to a certain extent,
in the Council; and thirdly, open disregard for hard
and long-negotiated global agreements regulating and
controlling the trade and transfer of arms, leading to
arms build-ups and the accumulation and proliferation
of illicit arms on all sides.
As we have seen in our part of the world, the massive
transfer of arms and weapons into an already raging
military confrontation is akin to adding fuel to fire. My
country is deeply concerned by the increasing prospect
of unregulated flows of arms, including weapons of
mass destruction. As the war continues and intensifies,
the unrestrained supply of arms by numerous countries
to both sides is fuelling an already escalating trajectory.
We are all losers in this war, except those selling
weapons for profit. For the military-industrial complex,
intermediaries and arms traders, wars are simply
opportunities to increase their profits, irrespective of
the global implications of conflict.
Given the fact that vast transfers of armaments to
the conflict zone are taking place without the oversight
of the agreed United Nations arms control and
disarmament structure, it is but a matter of time until
some of those weapons end up in our parts of the world,
which are already awash with deadly illegal arms. It is
estimated that every year more than $5 billion worth
of armaments and ammunition is illegally sold on the
black market to terrorists, violent extremists, rebel
groups, criminal networks and a whole host of illegal
arms clientele.
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations
acknowledges the inherent right of all States to
individual or collective self-defence and the right
to manufacture, import, export, transfer and retain
conventional arms to that end. However, the nature
of the present conflict and the staggering amounts of
sophisticated weapons systems being considered by
both sides and the ever-present spectre of the use of
weapons of mass destruction are cause for alarm. We
therefore urge those countries providing assistance to
the conflicting parties to act in a manner consistent with
international arms control agreements and multilateral
23-03878

08/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

pacts in the areas of disarmament, arms control and
non-proliferation.
In conclusion, the prospects for a peaceful settlement
of the conflict on one side and the increasing supply
of arms on the other are not compatible. Mozambique
reiterates its call on all parties to adhere to Article 2 of
the Charter and settle their disputes “by peaceful means
in such a manner that international peace and security,
and justice, are not endangered”. To paraphrase from
Sun Tzu, in The Art of War, “there is no instance of a
nation benefiting from prolonged war”.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing, and
Mr. Roger Waters for his opinions.
I would like to raise five points that I consider central.
First, I wish to reiterate Ecuador’s historical
position of rejecting armed violence, militarization
and the arms race. That position has also always been
accompanied by our recognition of the right of peoples
to self-defence, in accordance with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, including Article
51. Ecuador therefore recognizes the inviolability
of territorial integrity and the right of peoples to
political independence.
Secondly, we defend the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Under that principle, as recalled in the
Council’s presidential statement of 6 May 2022
(S/PRST/2022/3), all Member States have assumed
the obligation to settle their international disputes
by peaceful means, in accordance with the Charter.
Therefore, carrying out military aggression against
another country is in violation of that principle.
Thirdly, as High Representative Nakamitsu has
stated, Ecuador will always be concerned about the
challenges to peace and security posed by the large-scale
inflow of arms and ammunition in any situation of
armed conflict. In all such cases, we are concerned
about the risks of diversion, spread and escalation, and
we recognize that measures to counter those risks are
central to post-conflict recovery, to regional security
and stability and even to the prevention of conflicts on
other continents. We therefore deplore the fact that the
protracted invasion of Ukraine’s territory causes and
fuels such risks, and we are furthermore concerned
about reports of the involvement of non-State actors in
the occupation activities, as they exacerbate those risks.

S/PV.9256

Fourthly, as Ecuador has always stated, we are
concerned about the humanitarian impact of any
military aggression and of the use of weapons as a tool
of domination of one people over another. We therefore
reject the constant escalation of attacks and bombings
against critical civilian infrastructure in Ukraine,
which further undermines access to basic services and
the functioning of hospitals and schools and increases
the risks of nuclear disaster.
Finally, how can a peaceful solution be achieved
under the continued shelling and military aggression
against Ukraine? It is clear that prospects for a peaceful
solution depend on the immediate cessation of hostilities
and the withdrawal of the occupying troops.
Ecuador urges this to happen, with a view to
re-establishing dialogue for a lasting peace and to
preventing the world from being led into a wider war,
as warned by Secretary-General António Guterres.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu and Mr. Roger
Waters for their briefings.
On Monday the Council discussed, once again,
the dire humanitarian consequences of Russia’s illegal
aggression against Ukraine (see S/PV.9254). We spoke
of the severe civilian casualties caused by the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area impacts in populated
areas, such as towns and cities. We emphasized, once
again, that international humanitarian law and human
rights law must be always unconditionally respected,
and that those responsible for violations must be
held accountable.
Just this past week, missile strikes on Ukraine
continued unabated, including in the regions of Kharkiv
and Chernihiv. Millions of Ukrainians remain without
electricity, heating and water as the Russian Federation
destroys critical civilian infrastructure. Thousands
of children have been killed or injured, millions have
had their schooling disrupted or are dealing with the
legacy of conflict-induced trauma. The war has not
spared women and girls either, and millions of them
were forced to flee within or across Ukraine’s borders
in search of safety from Russian attacks.
Those dynamics underline the vital importance of
access to humanitarian assistance for all those in need
across Ukraine and in the areas not currently under
Ukrainian control. Equally, we reiterate our calls for

23-0387815/18

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

the immediate removal of all obstacles to the safe, rapid
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance
throughout the country.
In addittion, we underscore, once again, that the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
must have unconditional, unimpeded and repeated
access to all prisoners of war in this international
armed conflict. The third Geneva Convention grants
prisoners of war the right to receive regular visits from
ICRC representatives. It is therefore cardinal that this
obligation be respected and facilitated.
In conclusion, we reiterate our insistence that the
Russian Federation withdraw its military forces from
the entire territory of Ukraine. Any call for a ceasefire
must be coupled with such an unconditional withdrawal.
This war has to stop. The Charter of the United Nations
outlines clearly the duties and responsibilities of each
United Nations Member State. It is never too late to
uphold the United Nations Charter and its provisions
on the peaceful settlement of disputes and return to
dialogue and diplomacy. It is never too late to return to
the international rules-based order.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Since we spoke first, I would just like to make
a few remarks by way of reaction.
I would like to correct my Albanian colleague: Roger
Waters has not been threatened in any way in Russia.
We respect freedom of speech, unlike the countries
of the West, which prohibit alternative points of view
and pretend this is what freedom of speech should look
like. I would like to recall that we were the ones who
invited Roger Waters to speak to the Council today. In
a fuss, the Albanian representative probably confused
Russia and Ukraine, because in Ukraine, Mr. Waters is
on the Myrotvorets, or “Peacemaker”, website, which is
infamous and is used as a database of all those whom
Ukrainian nationalists perceive as targets.
My American colleague just spoke about victory in
the Cold War. I would like to remind him that this was
our common victory, both ours and theirs. For some
reason, the United States likes to cunningly attribute it
to itself. The root of the majority of the problems facing
our present-day world probably lies therein.
16/18

08/02/2023

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): As one novelist said:
“some cause happiness wherever they go, others
whenever they go”. I recognize the representative of
Putin’s regime occupying the permanent seat of the
Soviet Union. In fact, he has just left.
I am grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu for her comprehensive briefing. I would
also like to thank our partners, who made it clear that
restoring respect for the Charter of the United Nations
is the only viable option to deal with the ongoing
aggression, and that its principles shall serve as the
only basis both for our actions to exercise the inherent
right to self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter
and for the post-war settlement following the military
defeat of Russia on the territory of Ukraine.
Military defeat is imminent if the Russian criminal
regime does not implement the demands of the General
Assembly and the International Court of Justice and
does not withdraw its troops from the territory of
Ukraine within our internationally recognized borders.
The Charter of the United Nations and international
law will also be the framework for our further work to
hold Russia accountable for its war crimes and crimes
against humanity, as well as the crime of aggression.
Meanwhile, let me quote from Article 51:
“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair
the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a
Member of the United Nations, until the Security
Council has taken measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security.”
The Security Council still tolerates the presence
of war criminals in the Soviet seat. It is therefore the
problem of the Council itself that the second part of
Article 51, envisaging the Council’s authority and
responsibility “to take at any time such action as
it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore
international peace and security”, cannot be, and has
not yet been, implemented.
The resolute contribution of all responsible nations
to restoring respect for the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations will be the only way to ensure a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
23-03878

08/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

It is a war of choice. “Non-violence is infinitely
superior to violence”, said Gandhi on many occasions.
However, Putin has chosen violence. He has also
emasculated his nation and continues to treat his
country as an animal farm to produce more and more
cannon fodder.
Let me now respond to those who call for a stop
to war at any cost, including at the cost of Ukraine’s
territory and forgiveness for the lost Ukrainian lives
and lands. The guru of non-violence, Mahatma Gandhi,
said:
“[A]bstinence is forgiveness only when there is
power to punish; it is meaningless when it pretends
to proceed from a helpless creature.”
Let me ask those who make such calls, as well as all
those present here, if they are ready and fit to show that
power to punish the evildoer.
If the Security Council remains immobilized
by the evildoer and cannot punish him, let us and all
responsible nations do that work for the Council and for
our common good, as the first lines of the Charter of the
United Nations read, “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”. Let me provide another quote:
“I would rather have [my country] resort to arms
in order to defend her honour than that she should,
in a cowardly manner, become or remain a helpless
witness to her own dishonour.”
It is not me who was the first one to say that; it
was Mahatma Gandhi, who said that about India. When
people quote, and cherry-pick from, Gandhi, they
should therefore be very careful. Today it is a reply to
those who do not mind seeing an unarmed Ukraine torn
to pieces, helpless and dishonoured.
We hear again and again that Russia is surrounded
by enemies. That could be dismissed as mere paranoia
if it was not a clear sign of the narrative of a totalitarian
State. Or was it not Mr. Waters himself who said:
“The method for taking over the State and for it
becoming a totalitarian police State is always the
same, and it is always the identification of the other
as the enemy.”
When I hear the Russian representative speaking
about yet another newly invented version of the goals
of the so-called special military operation to be
accomplished, all I can tell him is that pigs might fly.
I hope he understands what that means in English. I

S/PV.9256

am sure that Mr. Waters, an Englishman, does, even
if he hated every second of school, apart from games.
In Mr. Waters’s own words, his “grammar school was
pretty dreadful”. The original version of the phrase was
“pigs in the air with their tails forward”. I am surprised
that he has not inflated a giant pig-shaped balloon in
the Security Council Chamber today, as was the case at
many of his shows in the past.
I ask Mr. Waters what it could have been this time:
pigs with swastikas and a hammer and sickle, as at some
of his performances, decried for their antisemitism?
Or probably the faces of Putin and Hitler? After all,
was it not Mr. Waters who called Vladimir Putin “the
new Hitler” in one of his interviews in September last
year? Let me make it clear. On 30 September 2022, in
an interview with Chris Hedges, Mr. Waters asked:
“How can we stop this war?” He himself replied: “Well,
obviously, you have to talk to Vladimir Putin, who is
the new Hitler”.
Earlier this month, was it not Mr. Waters who said
that he would play in Moscow “given that Moscow does
not run an apartheid State based on the genocide of the
indigenous inhabitants”? Mr. Waters knows so little,
but he seems to know it so fluently.
In 1979, Pink Floyd came up with the song
“Another Brick in the Wall”. The same year, the Soviet
Union invaded Afghanistan. After the invasion was
condemned by Pink Floyd, the band was banned in
the Soviet Union. It is ironic, if not hypocritical, that
Mr. Waters now attempts to whitewash another invasion.
How sad for his former fans to see him accepting the
role of just another brick in the wall — the wall of
Russian disinformation and propaganda.
This pop star can easily ignore the alleged episodes
of war crimes and crimes against humanity. He can
totally ignore the crime of aggression; the opinion
of 143 members of the General Assembly; numerous
reports by United Nations agencies, the International
Criminal Court, the International Court of Justice,
Governments and citizens; and he can go and entertain
the crowd in Moscow because the dictator there, whom
Mr. Waters identified as a new Hitler, is not committing
the genocide of the indigenous people of Russia. It is no
wonder that in a video address in September, a former
President of Mongolia, President Elbegdorj, called on
Putin to stop the war. “I know that since the start of this
bloody war,”, he said, “it is ethnic minorities who live in
Russia have suffered the most”. He added, “The Buryat

23-0387817/18

S/PV.9256

Threats to international peace and security

Mongols, Tuvan Mongols and Kalmyk Mongols have
suffered a lot. They have been used as nothing more
than cannon fodder.” Of course, who gives a monkey’s
about tens of thousands of Buryats, Tuvans, Mordvins
and other ethnic soldiers sent by Russia’s Hitler to the
front as cannon fodder from Putin’s farm? Pigs might
fly, Mr. Waters. I am not sure if they can fly with Hitler’s
and Putin’s names at the concert in Moscow, even with
swastikas and a hammer and sickle, and especially if
you once again put on a Nazi-like long leather jacket, as
you have done in your previous concerts.
Let me finish with a quote from the last lines of
Orwell’s Animal Farm. Remember when, standing
outside the farmhouse where pigs and men were
drinking together, the creatures

18/18

08/02/2023

“looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and
from pig to man again; but already it was impossible
to say which was which.”
Mr. Waters should keep strumming his guitar. It suits
him better than lecturing the Security Council on how
to do its job. There should be no flying pigs here, even
if Putin, whom Mr. Waters called the new Hitler, were
to be put on them.
We had a taste of pop culture today from the
Russian delegation, but how about preparing something
more classic for the Security Council? How about
Swan Lake, on 17 February, the full-length four-act,
three-hour expanse, which Russians are so accustomed
to enduring when their dictator dies? We have seen
it with Brezhnev, Andropov and Chernenko, and we
know the name of the next one.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-03878
