S/2005/79

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 February 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 9 February 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1565 (2004) of
1 October 2004, regarding the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). In operative paragraph 25, the
Council expressed grave concern at the allegations of sexual exploitation and
misconduct by civilian and military personnel and requested that it be kept informed
of developments. I note that Council members join me in recognizing the
tremendous contributions and sacrifices of United Nations peacekeepers, who, for
decades, have brought relief to millions of people emerging from the scourge of war.
It is important for these men and women to know that we stand together in honour
of their heroic efforts under arduous and often dangerous circumstances.
As members of the Security Council and troop-contributing countries are
aware, however, the unconscionable conduct of a small number of peacekeepers
now clouds this distinguished record of collective achievement and individual
sacrifice. I have stated publicly my personal outrage at the revelations of sexual
exploitation and abuse of Congolese children and women by some United Nations
personnel assigned to MONUC. I reiterate my stance — one which I know the
members of the Council share — that we cannot tolerate even one instance of a
United Nations peacekeeper victimizing the most vulnerable among us. Such
behaviour does great harm to the distinguished tradition of United Nations
peacekeeping, to the Member States that contribute troops to peacekeeping missions
and to the reputation and honour of fellow peacekeepers who have served selflessly
and to high purpose for decades. Most important, however, such behaviour violates
the fundamental “duty of care” that United Nations peacekeepers owe to the very
peoples they are sent to protect and serve.
Sexual exploitation and abuse are prohibited by the United Nations Staff Rules
and Regulations. These rules are reinforced by administrative instructions, including
my bulletin (ST/SGB/2003/13) entitled “Special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse”, released on 9 October 2003. In addition, each
military peacekeeper receives a copy of Ten Rules — Code of Conduct for Blue
Helmets, a card promulgated by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations that
presents in plain language the standards of behaviour expected of every military
person assigned to a peacekeeping mission. The basic policy is clear: zero tolerance
of sexual exploitation and abuse of any kind.

05-23327 (E) 100205

*0523327*

S/2005/79

As Council members and troop-contributing countries will know, the
Organization has pursued an active dialogue with the Member States on this issue.
Through the efforts of Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein, my Adviser on
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse committed by all categories of personnel
in peacekeeping contexts, we are working to prioritize concrete ways by which
troop-contributing countries can assist in the elimination of sexual exploitation and
abuse.
As the Council is also aware, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had
undertaken to reinforce disciplinary procedures in 2002 when it issued the
Compilation of Guidance and Directives on Disciplinary Issues of Personnel
Serving in United Nations Peacekeeping and Other Field Missions as a
comprehensive reference for field use. A 2003 training programme by the
Department revealed weaknesses in discipline in several missions, including
MONUC, and in response, the Department intensified training in this area. In April
2004 a full-time Personnel Conduct Officer was assigned to MONUC to provide the
Mission with the capacity to strengthen its practice.
Despite these efforts, in early 2004 media reports began to circulate alleging
widespread sexual exploitation and abuse by MONUC personnel in Bunia. At the
request of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of Internal
Oversight Services launched an investigation into these allegations, and a number of
the allegations were substantiated. Council members will recall that the Office of
Internal Oversight Services report on the investigation, released on 7 January 2005,
identified 72 allegations, of which 20 warranted follow-up action. Of these 20,
seven individual cases (all military personnel) were fully substantiated. While most
of the individuals concerned have since rotated out of the Mission or been
repatriated, their cases were forwarded to relevant Member States for action with a
request that they advise the Organization of follow-up measures taken. Six
additional investigations into allegations against other military personnel carried out
by MONUC have been completed, and of these, four individuals were repatriated,
one was exonerated, and one rotated home before the investigation was concluded.
In addition, a joint team from the Office of Human Resources Management
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations undertook to investigate another
five cases (all civilians) that had come to light. Of these, one individual is in
custody and awaiting trial in his home country, one has resigned, one has been
cleared, disciplinary action has been initiated against another, and a fifth
investigation remains ongoing.
As the Council is aware, some contingent members have been credibly
identified as committing sexual exploitation and abuse over extended periods and
others as condoning a permissive environment for such abuses. The behaviour of a
few undermines the contributions of many, and I know troop-contributing countries
are committed to working with me to eradicate such misconduct. We will not refrain
from holding accountable those in the entire chain of command who fail to act
decisively to enforce the zero-tolerance standard, and stern measures are under way
to deal with those who violate the trust they have been given as United Nations
peacekeepers.
To follow up on this work and to lay the groundwork for sustained efforts by
the Mission, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has dispatched to MONUC
a multidisciplinary team led by Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane to conduct

2

S/2005/79

further investigations and support MONUC in developing an effective and
sustainable response to the sexual exploitation and abuse issue. This team has
focused to date on actively collecting information, conducting investigations where
credible allegations exist of wrongdoing and building capacity in the Mission for
effective, long-term prevention and enforcement. Ms. Kane’s team has, to date,
completed nine investigations, has ten ongoing and has closed several files.
The Mission has itself taken a number of firm measures to eliminate this
unacceptable behaviour. These measures include the establishment of a strict nonfraternization policy, the installation of a curfew for military contingents,
comprehensive training and awareness-raising for all mission personnel and
proposals for improving contingent welfare facilities. Additional measures are under
consideration in coordination with appropriate offices of the Organization.
Further, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has organized a
multidisciplinary Task Force at Headquarters to undertake a series of initiatives in
the areas of conduct and discipline, policy guidance, management responsibility and
accountability, training, investigation and enforcement, organizational culture and
communication. Such initiatives include:
• Forceful promulgation of the standards of conduct expected of all civilian and
uniformed peacekeepers, combined with vigorous exercise of the rules for
enforcing these standards. Special emphasis is placed on the personal
responsibilities of leaders and managers both in the field and at Headquarters
• Renewed emphasis on training at all levels — with a dual focus on
predeployment awareness training and in-mission induction training — to
impress upon all new staff their moral, ethical and professional responsibilities
within the context of each mission’s particular cultural and political setting
• The activation of a network of mission focal points to develop and implement
reliable complaint and follow-up mechanisms
• The timely development of recreation and welfare opportunities to provide
appropriate outlets to alleviate the concentrated stress present in field missions
• The creation of an effective communication strategy tied to the overarching
goals and objectives of peacekeeping to remind us all of why we serve
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations Task Force is supporting and
actively promoting these and other initiatives, recommending additional concrete
reforms and helping change the perception that perpetrators of sexual exploitation
and abuse act with impunity. In addition, the Department’s efforts are reinforced by
a broader initiative under the auspices of the Joint Executive Committee (Peace and
Security-Humanitarian Affairs) to stamp out sexual exploitation and abuse. This
joint effort will generate policy recommendations that seek, first, to establish a
common level of understanding among members of senior management regarding
their individual responsibilities in this area; and, second, to create a stronger support
environment for dealing with sexual exploitation and abuse, both at Headquarters
and in the field.
I should like to alert Council members to our expectation that the success of
these efforts in the short term will be measured not by a decrease in allegations, but
to the contrary, by a likely increase. As the Organization actively works to root out

3

S/2005/79

this problem, we must leave no stone unturned. Reform in this area will not be
without pain, but we are presented with an opportunity we cannot afford to miss.
To assist these and other efforts under way, I strongly appeal to members of
the Council to assist in strengthening the capacity of MONUC to conduct selfmonitoring and enforcement programmes. Specifically, the Mission still requires at
least 100 military police under the ceiling established by Security Council resolution
1565 (2004). In addition, the Mission has an urgent need for French-speaking
qualified investigators with special skills in sexual exploitation and abuse cases. I
underscore the importance we attach to the Council’s role in helping to fill these
gaps.
In outlining the measures that have already been taken and in making the above
recommendations, I appeal strongly to the members of the Council not to lose sight of
the contributions made by MONUC since its establishment to assist the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in recovering from years of devastating conflict. The
Mission has a central role to play in supporting the transitional process during this
critical period leading up to the elections. Numerous tasks lie ahead that require the
concerted and sustained assistance of the international community.
I wish to take this opportunity to reaffirm my personal commitment to the
members of the Council to remain vigilant and firm on this matter. I can also assure
the members of the Council, the troop-contributing countries, Member States and,
perhaps most important, the peoples of the countries that host United Nations
peacekeeping missions that we will work tirelessly to rejustify their faith and to
restore United Nations peacekeeping to its rightful place among the world’s most
noble callings.
I should be grateful if you would bring this information to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

4
