General A1111embly -

18

sistance afforded to the Governments concerned by the
Secretariat of the United Nations, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the International Labour Organisation,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,

1. Approves the fttrther report, -prepared in 1955, on
social conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories as
a supplement to the report approved in 1952;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to communicate the
1955 report, for their consideration, to the Members of
the United Nations responsible for the administration
of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the Economie and
Social Council, to the Trusteeship Council and to the
specialized agencies concerned ;

3. Expresses its satisfaction at the increasing cooperation between the Members of the United Nations
administering N on-Self-Governing Terri tories· and
the international bodies concerned, and requests the
latter in the work undertaken by them to take full account of the views expressed in the report on social
conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. • Draws the attention in particular of the International Labour Organisation to section V of the report
on social conditions concerning labour and to section
VII concerning race relations; of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to section IX
concerning nutrition and public health; of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to section VII concerning race relations ; and of the
World Health Organization to sections VIII, IX and X
concerning various aspects of public health;
5. Trusts that collaboration between the SecretaryGeneral and the specialized agencies and between the
Administering Members and the international bodies
concerned will be maintained and extended in the interest of the co·ordinated development of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories in all fields.

541st plenary meeting;
8 November 1955.
930 (X). Information on community development
in Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that social and economic progress can be
accelerated by the implementation of comprehensive development plans affecting all aspects of community life,
and that the application of principles of community
development and other similar measures of co-operation
is an important method of development that has produced noteworthy results in many countries,
Considering further that in Non-Self-Governing Territories the application of such methods of development
and the utilization of the potential abilities and energies
of the people in all forms of self-help activity can contribute to bat.i.nced social and economic progress,
N oting that programmes" of community development
are already being implemented in a number of these
Territories, and that in others similar programmes are
being studied,
Considering that it would be useful to examine information regarding programmes and progress in the

Tenth Seuion

field of community development in Non-Self-Governing
Territories in connexion with the other information
transmitted to the Secretary-General under Article 73 e
of the Charter,

Considering further that the Standard Form concerning information transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter, as approved by resolution 551 (VI) adopted
by the General Assembly on 7 December 1951, contains
no section on community development,
l. Decides that the Standard Form annexed to resolution 551 (VI) shall be modified by the addition of the
annexed text;
2. Invites the Members responsible for the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter to
render information as complete and up-to-date as possible on programmes and progress in the field of community development, and for this purpose to take into
account the annexed text.
541st plenary meeting,
8 N ovember 1955.
ANNEX

Part III, K (new text)
K. Community development
1. Description of basic programmes and progress in the field
of community development.
2. Description of the administrative organizatim1 at the territorial level primarily responsible for encouraging and supporting these programmes.
3. Description of methods used in this field with particular
emphasis on new methods and techniques evolved in the Territory and of a few selected projects, at the local level, which have
served as experimental pilot projects and demonstration centres.
4. Training of community development officers, local leaders
and community workers and measures for obtaining the cooperation of ail officers of the government in the use of community development methods.

931 (X). Educational advancement in Non-SelfGoverning Territories: offers of study and
training facilities under General Assembly
resolution 845 (IX)
The General Assembly,
Having regard toits resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954 by which the Secretary-General was requested, after consultation with the Administering Members, to prepare a report for the information of the
General Assembly giving details of the offers made and
the extent to w:hich they had been taken up,
1. Takes note of the report 3 presented by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its tenth session
on the offers of study and training facilities under resolution 845 (IX), showing the progress achieved so far in
the implementation of that resolution;

2. Invites the Secretary-General to prepare for the
information of the General Assembly at its future sessions reports giving further details relating to the oflers
made and the use made of them.

541st plenary meeting,
8 November 1955.
3
Ibid., Teuth Session, Annexes, agenda item 31. documents
A/2937 and Add.l, 2, 3/Rev.1 and 4.
