S/2000/904

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2000
English
Original: French

Letter dated 26 September 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I am transmitting to you herewith for consideration, and for consideration by
the members of the Security Council, a letter dated 19 September 2000 addressed to
me by Judge Claude Jorda, President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
In his letter, Judge Jorda indicates that, according to the Judges of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the Tribunal should be able, in
certain situations, to compensate persons who may have been wrongfully detained,
prosecuted or convicted by the Tribunal.
Judge Jorda notes that, according to the Judges, there are three situations in
which the Tribunal should be able to award such compensation.
The first situation arises when a person has suffered punishment as a result of a
final decision of the International Tribunal and that decision is subsequently
reversed by the Tribunal or a pardon is granted, because a new or newly discovered
fact proves that there has been a miscarriage of justice.
The second situation arises when a person who has been detained under the
Tribunal’s authority is subsequently acquitted by a final decision of the Tribunal or
is subsequently released following a decision to terminate the proceedings against
him/her in circumstances which show conclusively that there has been a grave and
manifest miscarriage of justice.
The third situation in which, according to the Judges, the Tribunal should be
able to award compensation arises when a person is arrested or detained under the
Tribunal’s authority in a manner or in circumstances which constitute a violation of
the right to liberty and security of person and when the conduct which gave rise to
the violation is legally imputed to the Tribunal and thus to the United Nations.
Judge Jorda observes that, in the first and third situations, the United Nations
is required, under generally accepted human rights norms, to compensate the
individual who has been unlawfully convicted, arrested or detained.
Judge Jorda also observes that in neither of these two situations could the
United Nations fulfil its legal obligations simply by paying a sum of money as
compensation to the individual concerned. Legal provisions must be enacted which
would give the individual a specific right to compensation, determine how the

00-65995 (E) 270900
`````````

270900

S/2000/904

compensation to be paid must be calculated and establish a procedure for this
purpose which meets the essential requirements of legality and respect for law.
Judge Jorda observes that, in the second situation described in his letter, the
United Nations could not be held bound under existing international law to
compensate an individual who may have been unlawfully detained or prosecuted as
described. He states that the Judges nevertheless believe that, given the particular
circumstances in which the Tribunal operates, it is desirable that the Tribunal should
be able to award compensation in such situations.
Judge Jorda notes that, for the Tribunal to be able to award compensation in
each of the three situations described in his letter, the Security Council would have
to amend the Statute of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to
empower it to deal with questions of compensation.
Should the Security Council adopt such amendments, the General Assembly
would subsequently have to approve the necessary appropriation to the Tribunal’s
budget.
I should be grateful if you would bring the text of this letter and its annexes to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2000/904

Annex
Letter dated 19 September 2000 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
addressed to the Secretary-General
I am writing to you today to request your assistance on a matter of very great
importance to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
namely, compensation for persons who have been wrongfully prosecuted or
convicted.
During recent months, the Judges have expressed concern at the plight of
individuals who, after having been prosecuted and tried according to the applicable
rules, have been acquitted by the Tribunal. Although the best way of clearing an
accused person is to acquit him or her, under the legislation of a number of
countries, anyone who has been wrongfully convicted or prosecuted can be
compensated for the deprivation of liberty suffered and for the economic losses
sustained due to the proceedings instituted against him or her. Persons who have
been unjustly arrested or detained can also receive compensation. Such
compensation — which is also codified in various international human rights
instruments — is not provided for in the Statute of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, nor in its Rules of Procedure and Evidence.
Since the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia wishes, by
definition, to abide fully by the internationally recognized norms relating to the
rights of suspects and accused persons, the absence of any provision which would
allow for awarding compensation in such situations is a cause for concern.
Moreover, during the first six years of its existence, a number of people have been
deprived of their liberty by the Tribunal only to be later acquitted or to have the
proceedings against them terminated. It is possible that these people may file a
complaint against the Tribunal on the grounds that they were deprived of their
liberty and sustained direct economic losses as a result of these proceedings.
Accordingly, the issue of compensation needs to be addressed as soon as
possible.
As mentioned above, the issue of compensation arises in three situations.
When an individual is wrongfully convicted, when an individual is unjustly
prosecuted and when an individual is unlawfully arrested or detained. These
situations are dealt with below in detail.
Compensation for wrongfully convicted persons
The right to compensation of wrongfully convicted persons is provided for in
several international human rights instruments, including, in particular, article 14,
paragraph 6, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Article 85,
paragraph 2, of the Statute of the International Criminal Court, adopted in Rome on
17 July 1998, contains a provision that is virtually identical.
Since it is a subsidiary body of the Security Council, the actions of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia can be imputed to the United
Nations. Consequently, since it considers itself bound by generally accepted human
rights norms such as article 14, paragraph 6, of the International Covenant on Civil

3

S/2000/904

and Political Rights, the United Nations will be legally bound to compensate
persons whose conviction by the Tribunal is subsequently overturned.
Compensation for unjustly prosecuted persons
Although article 85, paragraph 3, of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court gives the latter the power, in exceptional circumstances, to award
compensation to persons who have been accused and subsequently acquitted,
following the termination of proceedings due to a grave and manifest miscarriage of
justice, there is no equivalent provision in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights nor in any other international human rights instrument. It cannot,
therefore, be said that a right of this nature is currently part of international
customary law. Accordingly, the United Nations could not be held legally bound to
compensate the victims of grave and manifest miscarriages of justice in such
circumstances.
However, some national systems do provide for the compensation of
wrongfully prosecuted persons.
Because of the particular circumstances in which the Tribunal operates,
including the fact that the accused are detained for long periods pending trial, it is in
the interest of the Tribunal, and of the United Nations in general, to award
compensation, at the discretion of the Tribunal, to accused persons who are
acquitted or against whom proceedings are terminated. It should, however, be noted
that this discretion should be exercised only in exceptional circumstances, following
a “grave and manifest” miscarriage of justice.
Compensation for unlawfully detained persons
International human rights instruments guarantee the right to compensation of
persons who have been deprived of their liberty in circumstances involving a
violation of their rights, as may be seen in article 9, paragraph 5, of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Thus, if a person is arrested or detained
under the authority of the Tribunal in circumstances that constitute a violation of the
rights recognized in article 9, paragraphs 1 to 4, of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and if the conduct giving rise to this violation is legally
imputed to the Tribunal and thus to the United Nations, the latter would be legally
bound to award compensation to the victim of this violation.
Since the Statute contains no provision conferring on the Judges the power to
take the necessary measures to fulfil the above-mentioned obligations, several
possible mechanisms have been studied, in consultation with the Office of Legal
Affairs, that would offer the possibility of compensation to the persons concerned.
These mechanisms include, among other things, arbitration, exceptional ruling,
General Assembly resolutions recognizing limited responsibility and amendment of
the Tribunal’s Statute.
In this context, it must be noted that the United Nations may not evade its
international obligations simply by paying a sum of money as compensation to the
persons concerned. The obligations set forth in article 9, paragraph 5, and article 14,
paragraph 6, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights are not
designed solely to provide for summary compensation to persons who are protected
by these provisions, but rather to ensure that these persons have a “right to

4

S/2000/904

compensation” (in the case of article 9, paragraph 5) and compensation “according
to law” (in the case of article 14, paragraph 6). It is therefore necessary, in order to
fulfil this obligation, to enact legal provisions that meet the essential requirements
of legality and respect for law, conferring on persons wrongfully prosecuted or
convicted by the Tribunal, and on those who have been unlawfully arrested or
detained, a specific right to compensation.
Consequently, since the Tribunal and, in particular, the Chambers are in the
best position to determine whether persons who have been wrongfully prosecuted or
convicted and those who have been unlawfully arrested or detained should be
compensated, the Judges consider that the Security Council should study the
possibility of widening the jurisdiction of the Tribunal by amending its Statute to
empower it to deal with questions of compensation.
Since any step taken in this respect must closely reflect recent developments in
international human rights law, we suggest that a new article should be added to the
International Tribunal’s Statute, inspired by the precedent contained in article 85 of
the Statute of the International Criminal Court, the text of which is also attached
herewith.
Lastly, in order to adopt the best possible amendment to the International
Tribunal’s Statute, I should be grateful if you would draw this letter to the attention
of the President and members of the Security Council for their consideration.
In addition, since the International Tribunal and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) ought to take a similar approach to this issue, I have
discussed it with Judge Navanethem Pillay, President of ICTR. She told me that the
ICTR judges also envisaged using the same approach to seeking an amendment to
the Statute of that Tribunal, and that a separate letter prepared with that intention
would shortly be addressed to you.
Of course, the envisaged amendments will have administrative and budgetary
implications for the United Nations. In this context, the Tribunal has already
requested the opinion of Mr. Joseph Connor, Under-Secretary-General for
Management, and expects to receive his reply soon.
If you have any other questions regarding this request, or if you wish to obtain
additional information on the right to compensation of persons who have been
wrongfully prosecuted or convicted or persons who have been unlawfully arrested or
detained, I remain at your disposal to discuss them.
In that regard, I should like to draw to your attention a detailed document
prepared by the Registry on the question of compensation, which is attached to the
letter addressed to Mr. Connor.
(Signed) Claude Jorda
President

5

S/2000/904

Enclosure
Article 85 of the Statute of the International Criminal Court
Compensation to an arrested or convicted person
1.
Anyone who has been the victim of unlawful arrest or detention shall have an
enforceable right to compensation.
2.
When a person has by a final decision been convicted of a criminal offence,
and when subsequently his or her conviction has been reversed on the ground that a
new or newly discovered fact shows conclusively that there has been a miscarriage
of justice, the person who has suffered punishment as a result of such conviction
shall be compensated according to law, unless it is proved that the non-disclosure of
the unknown fact in time is wholly or partly attributable to him or her.
3.
In exceptional circumstances, where the Court finds conclusive facts showing
that there has been a grave and manifest miscarriage of justice, it may in its
discretion award compensation, according to the criteria provided in the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence, to a person who has been released from detention
following a final decision of acquittal or a termination of the proceedings for that
reason.

6
