S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6900th meeting
Tuesday, 15 January 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Khar/Mr. Masood Khan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Squeff
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Huseynli
Mr. Wei Zonglei
Ms. Jaraud-Darnault
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Maes
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Lim Sang Beom
Mr. Zmeevsky
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Wachtel

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
Letter dated 1 January 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/3)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-20637 (E)

*1320637*

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to advise all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The acceding country Croatia;
the candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
We are grateful to Pakistan, as President of
the Security Council, for organizing today’s timely
and important debate looking at counter-terrorism
measures from a comprehensive perspective. I would
like to thank you, Madam, for chairing this important
meeting in person.
International terrorism poses a very significant
threat to peace and security, as Pakistan only recently
had to experience once again, sadly. I would like to
express my heartfelt condolences on that terrible event.
That is why the fight against international terrorism
remains one of our highest priorities and should
continue to be a priority for the United Nations. We
are convinced that an integrated approach, combining
prevention of terrorist threats and attacks with the
response to them, is essential.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is central to the European Union and its
member States in both their national efforts and their
worldwide partnerships. In accordance with the relevant
international legal framework as it evolves, we work
hand in hand with the United Nations on implementing
the Strategy, and we attach great importance to the its
global counter-terrorism framework, which prescribes
a holistic approach to tackling terrorism that includes
not only law enforcement and other security measures
but also respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Preventing terrorism by addressing and stopping
terrorist radicalization and recruitment is a priority
for the European Union and its member States. We

2

agree that more emphasis must be placed on preventing
terrorism by examining and addressing the conditions
conducive to its spread. In order to achieve that goal, we
must consider new approaches with a variety of tools
and look beyond traditional actors at the governmental
and law-enforcement levels, while engaging with,
among others, civil society, social networks, journalists,
women, youth organizations and media. In addition,
assistance to victims of terrorism and their families
should also be an element of counter-terrorism efforts.
We believe that victims and their associations can
contribute to preventing terrorist radicalization and
sending messages of non-violence and reconciliation.
Countering the financing of terrorism is a core
component of the EU’s strategy. As terrorists and their
supporters constantly modify their ways to raise, move
and gain access to funds, we must adapt instruments and
measures to deprive them of the possibility of engaging
in criminal activity. The EU has developed a range
of measures aimed at cutting off terrorists’ access to
funding, and we are committed to the implementation
of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). We
contribute actively to the Task Force’s work, as well
as to the implementation of its recommendations in
the European Union. In addition, we highlight the
fact that the relevant United Nations resolutions and
Council of Europe instruments play an important role
in countering terrorist financing.
The active involvement of civil society is a key
element in effectively countering terrorism and
violent extremism. Non-governmental organizations
represent a valuable resource in that context. With a
view to safeguarding the integrity of non-governmental
organizations against abuse by, for instance, terrorist
networks, including in the field of terrorist financing,
the sharing of relevant best practices among Member
States and with civil society could be of great value and
should be encouraged.
We take this opportunity to stress yet again that
counter-terrorism measures can only be effective when
consistent with a judicial approach and within the law.
Counter-terrorism measures need to be carried out
in full accord with fundamental democratic values,
human rights and the rule of law.
In the framework of the pledges made at the
General Assembly High-level Meeting on the Rule
of Law on 24 September 2012, the European Union
pledged to develop operational guidance to ensure the

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

consideration of human rights and, where applicable,
international humanitarian law in planning and
implementing counter-terrorism assistance projects
with third countries.
The European Union will continue to support the
consolidation of State institutions, justice, police and
customs in order to strengthen security and the rule of
law with a view to reducing the threat from terrorism,
kidnapping and cross-border criminal activity, such as
the trafficking of drugs and human beings. It is therefore
important to strengthen international cooperation
and the criminal justice systems of United Nations
Members in order to enable them to prosecute terrorist
suspects effectively. In this context, the European Union
welcomes the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum rule of
law group and will actively take part in establishment
of the institute for justice and the rule of law in Tunis.
Although the core of the action on counterradicalization and recruitment is and should remain at
the national level, regional and international cooperation
is needed to help coordinate national policies and
share good practice. In this context, we welcome the
establishment of the International Center of Excellence
for Countering Violent Extremism in Abu Dhabi.
We also take this opportunity to welcome, as other
have done, the recent adoption of resolutions 2082
(2012) and 2083 (2012), introducing some important
changes to the Al-Qaida and Afghanistan sanctions
regimes, in particular extending the mandate of the
Monitoring Team and the Ombudsperson in order to
make their work more effective and transparent.
I would like to conclude my intervention by
stressing that we have no doubt that no act of terrorism
can be justified or sanctioned by any religion, belief,
ideology or culture, and that none of these should be
associated with terrorism. We must continue efforts
to foster understanding among people of all cultures,
religions and beliefs, and in this regard we stress our
commitment to the aims and work of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations. As a counter to extremism
and terrorism, we must stand firmly behind the values
that unite us, underline the shared profound respect for
people of all religions and beliefs, and discourage the
language of prejudice, hatred and intolerance, as well
as violence.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of New Zealand.

13-20637

Ms. Hay (New Zealand): The theme of today’s open
debate is apposite. Comprehensive measures by States
and the international community as a whole continue
to be required if progress is to be made in reducing
the threat posed by international terrorism. Terrorism
is a complex and multidimensional challenge. Each
State must of course adopt an approach suited to its
individual needs and circumstances. One size does
not fit all. Nevertheless, the enduring threat posed
by international terrorism means that the prevention
of terrorist acts must remain a key national security
priority.
I will focus my comments on the approaches that
New Zealand has taken domestically to reduce the
risk of terrorist acts occurring by countering violent
extremism at the grass roots.
While the threat from terrorism in New Zealand
remains very low and levels of social cohesion are high,
the Government remains vigilant to possible terrorist
threats from disaffected or alienated members of the
community. New Zealand’s approach is based on a
coordinated, whole-of-Government response at the
national level, in close cooperation and consultation
with the community.
Prevention lies at the heart of the operational ethos
of the New Zealand Police in meeting this challenge.
With this in mind, New Zealand has treated the threat
from violent extremists as a social as well as a criminal
issue. While we have strengthened our legal framework
to criminalize involvement in terrorism, we have
also developed innovative social approaches aimed at
diverting young people from involvement in violent
extremism at the earliest stage possible.
Community policing, tailored strategies for
engaging minority and religious groups, a strong
emphasis on inter-faith dialogue, and initiatives fostering
community trust in the Police have all been effective
tools for addressing and combating radicalisation
and violent extremism. They have helped to keep
New Zealand relatively unaffected by religious and
ethnicity-related violent extremism. These efforts are
deeply rooted in the philosophy of community policing
and grounded in high levels of trust between society
and the police. They also rely on accurate assessments
regarding those communities most vulnerable to
recruitment by extremists or to self-radicalization, as
well as strong national and international partnerships.

3

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

New Zealand exercises zero tolerance for
violence and other serious crime. When police
become aware of individuals involved in low-level
extremist activity, priority is given to using social
support measures to divert them from any antisocial
behaviour. Communities are engaged in a manner
that addresses the underlying causes and ultimately
reduces offending and victimization. Authorities also
constructively engage communities in situations where
no crime has been committed but where evidence
exists that individuals may be vulnerable to terrorist
recruitment. This strategy has met with considerable
success in preventing terrorist acts at the earliest stage
possible, while also maintaining excellent relationships
with ethnic and religious communities upon whose
cooperation and goodwill law enforcement efforts
ultimately depend.
Given our own experience of the success of
community policing, New Zealand is pleased to
support a new programme of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on the practical
utilization of community policing in countering violent
extremism. Beginning in 2013, the programme will
seek to enhance the capacity of police officers in South
and South-East Asia to recognize possible indications
of violent extremism at an early stage and to strengthen
the emphasis on developing cultural understanding
and human rights-compliant practices in detecting and
addressing it.
This initiative is one of the ways in which New
Zealand has sought to draw on its own domestic
experience to support our regional and international
partners in their efforts to implement the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We will continue
to partner with United Nations counter-terrorism
entities, including in areas such as preventing terrorist
financing and by strengthening criminal justice and
law enforcement capacities and cooperation.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Malaysia.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): First and foremost,
I wish to congratulate you, Madam, and Pakistan on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish to welcome you back to New York
to attend to this open debate on a subject that is truly
important to all Member States, especially Pakistan,
which witnessed horrific terrorist attacks last week.
Our condolences go to the families of the victims.

4

At this juncture, I wish to align my statement with
that to be delivered by the representatives of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Egypt on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Like all nations represented here today, Malaysia
hopes to see a world free from terrorism. In order
for that day to become a reality, terrorism must be
addressed and countered in all its hideous forms and
manifestations, as well as at all levels. Therefore,
Malaysia cannot agree enough that terrorism must be
countered in a comprehensive manner.
In the wake of 11 September, 2001 and subsequent
terrorist attacks across the world, the international
community reinvigorated its resolve and efforts to
counter terrorism. The international community
introduced innovative measures to target the financing
of terrorism. However, as demonstrated by terrorist
attacks and bombings thereafter, only minimal
sums are required to cause disproportional harm
to people. Furthermore, terrorists have managed
to leverage lower-risk, higher-margin sources of
revenue through kidnapping and hostage-taking
for ransom. Thus, measures to curb the financing of
terrorism have managed to achieve only qualified
success. In fact, despite all the outreach and capacitybuilding programmes proffered, despite enforcement
and legislative measures that have led to countless
prosecutions around the world, and despite resorting to
the use of armed force, we continue to face this deadly
scourge, which shows no sign of abating.
Our efforts to prevent individuals or groups that
are intent on committing terrorist attacks from slipping
through the cracks are simply not enough. In reality,
if we are sincere in eradicating terrorism, we must
nip the problem in the bud. For one thing, there is a
need to undertake inclusive political and economic
development efforts that address social and economic
needs. In short, we need to win the hearts and minds of
the people to counter terrorism effectively.
Malaysia also strongly believes in the need to
maintain human rights standards when countering
terrorism, which is why Malaysia repealed the Internal
Security Act of 1960 last year and introduced the Security
Offences Act of 2012. That decision demonstrates that,
while the Government remains committed to ensuring
that security is constantly safeguarded, the rights of the
people also need to be upheld.

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

It is also equally, if not more, important to make
efforts to resolve conflicts and repression. Those
living under occupation must be accorded their most
fundamental right to life and liberty with dignity and
hope. The failure to acknowledge and take measures
to address that is simply to turn a blind eye to a
fundamental cause of terrorism.
Malaysia is supportive of interfaith and
intercivilizational initiatives such as the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations. Without a doubt,
such initiatives promote greater understanding among
all religions and civilizations in the world. However,
while greater interaction and understanding is pivotal
in building trust, we believe that the real problem
that exists today is not between peoples of different
faiths and cultures. Rather, it is between moderates
and extremists of all faiths and cultures. It is due to
that that Malaysia calls for the establishment of a
Global Movement of Moderates. That is essentially
a call on the majority of moderate people, who have
remained relatively silent despite being appalled by the
despicable acts of extremists and terrorists, to drown
out the voices of extremism. Malaysia believes that
moderates must be the only dominant voice to occupy
the mainstream. That would strongly contribute to our
effort to eradicate terrorism. Likewise, moderation
is also the best response in countering incitement
to violence and extremism. We must not let extreme
voices dominate world headlines and instil fear in the
peoples of the world, but must speak out to ensure that
the voices of moderation prevail.
Overcoming terrorism requires clear thinking
based on an objective assessment of the situation. It
also requires comprehensive action based on common
effort. Certainly, there will remain places and issues
that provide a wellspring of support for terrorism. We
must therefore constantly remain vigilant. But let us not
overstate the case of the dangers posed by terrorism, nor
underestimate the length and breadth of the challenge.
Let us take on the threat head-on so that we may usher
in a renewed period of global peace and prosperity for
all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Let me start by joining
other delegations in congratulating Pakistan on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We are pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over today’s
meeting.
13-20637

It is noteworthy that the Security Council has
devoted its first open debate in the year 2013 to the
issue of terrorism. That reflects not only an expression
of determination on the part of the Security Council to
counter the scourge of terrorism, but also underlines
the continued threat that terrorism poses for all of us.
Terrorist attacks are being perpetrated around
the world on an almost daily basis, claiming the lives
of innocent civilians. Recent months have been no
exception. Due to unabated terrorist acts, many people
have been killed or wounded in different parts of the
world, causing immense pain and suffering to the
families of the victims, their nations and humankind
as a whole.
Most recently, we learned with deep sorrow and
concern that three different terrorist attacks had taken
place in Pakistan, killing or injuring scores of people.
We strongly condemn all kinds of terrorist acts, convey
our condolences to the grieving families and wish a
speedy recovery to the wounded. We also would like
to express our solidarity with all victims of terrorism
around the world.
Numerous social, economic, political and other
factors exist that engender the conditions that terrorist
organizations exploit for recruitment and support.
Since it is a complex and multifaceted phenomenon,
countering terrorism can be effective only if efforts
and measures address a wide spectrum of activities,
ranging from international cooperation to national
action. In that sense, we need to redouble our efforts
to enhance cooperation and coordination, both at the
United Nations and among Member States, as well as
at the relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations. For that very reason, we consider today’s
debate extremely useful and we look forward to its
outcome in an effort to contributing to a comprehensive
approach to countering terrorism.
Terrorism and violent extremism continue to pose
serious threats and impediments to global security,
stability and prosperity. In the face of increased
efforts to counter terrorism, terrorists simply change
their methods and means, adapting themselves to
circumstances while in most instances abusing
legislative and implementation loopholes. The threat
perceptions and national interests of Member States
may vary, but we should make no mistake: no country
is immune from terrorism, and we cannot win this fight
unless we join hands and hearts.

5

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

We cannot counter terrorism solely through lawenforcement measures. We have to preserve the critical
balance between security requirements, on the one
hand, and democratic freedoms and basic human rights,
on the other. However, while protecting fundamental
rights and freedoms, acts of incitement to terrorism,
violence, racial or ethnic hatred and discrimination,
or glorifying such acts, should not be tolerated. We
have to bear in mind that no counter-terrorism strategy,
regardless of how successful on its own merits, can
lead to tangible results in the absence of international
cooperation and true support from other nations.
The lack of capacity, in particular the lack of
expertise and resources, constitutes the greatest
challenge for many countries. Enhancing capacitybuilding and law enforcement in all Member States
requires specific attention. Cooperation at the regional
and subregional levels is particularly significant to
countering terrorism. In that context, it is important to
build new partnerships, enhance institutional capacities
and develop cooperative networks. That will have an
enduring impact on our collective efforts. The effective
implementation of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Strategy and of Security Council resolutions
remains essential to succeed in our endeavour to combat
terrorism. In that regard, it is also crucial to create
public awareness about United Nations resolutions.
The United Nations has been the linchpin in
counter-terrorism efforts. Through the adoption of
the Global Counter-terrorism Strategy, the General
Assembly created a sound framework in which to fight
this challenge. Today, Turkey strongly supports the
promotion and implementation of the Strategy at the
global level.
We are of the opinion that continuing international
efforts to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding
among civilizations, in an effort to prevent the
indiscriminate targeting of different religions and
cultures, can help to counter the forces that fuel
polarization and extremism, and will contribute to
strengthening the international fight against terrorism.
In that respect, the Alliance of Civilizations, which
was launched by Turkey and Spain under the auspices
of the Secretary-General, aims to facilitate harmony
and dialogue by emphasizing the common values of
different cultures and religions.
Before I conclude, I would like to emphasize
Turkey’s full commitment in this regard. Turkey,

6

as a victim of terrorism and staunch ally of counterterrorism initiatives, shall continue its efforts at all
levels, with the aim of mitigating the effects of terrorist
acts and eradicating the scourge of terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to welcome the presence
of the Foreign Minister of Pakistan during the morning
part of this meeting. We are grateful to the sisterly State
of Pakistan for the initiative to convene and preside over
this important debate devoted to a discussion of the issue
of counter-terrorism efforts Terrorism is a scourge that
all Member States have pledged to eliminate. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Mission of Pakistan
for the concept note circulated in connection with this
meeting (S/2012/3, annex).
I take this opportunity to express the deepest
condolences of my Government to the Government
and people of Pakistan in connection with the act of
terrorism carried out in Quetta, which claimed dozens
of innocent lives. We extend our sympathy to Pakistan’s
Government and people based on a principled belief in
the need to combat all aspects of terrorism collectively
and comprehensively and from the painful reality that
just today struck the University of Aleppo, where a
cowardly terrorist attack targeting university students
as they sat for their mid-term examinations killed 82
and wounded 162 others.
We have always said that the terrorist armed groups
in my country are taking advantage of Security Council
meetings to perpetrate acts of terrorism inside Syria.
That is exactly what happened today, perhaps for the
tenth or twentieth time since the crisis in my country
began.
The President quite rightly chose “Comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism” as the theme for our
meeting. We fully share and endorse the merit of that
choice, as today we are in greater need than ever of such a
comprehensive approach to combating terrorism. There
are broad similarities between the tools and techniques
that continue to be used by terrorists in many Member
States and those seen today in Syria. The question is
one of how many of the trans-border foreign terrorists
currently active in Syria played a role earlier in the
killing and injuring of civilians in other countries. How
many of the terrorists at work in Syria today will move

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

on to other areas in the future, just as happened in the
recent past and, indeed, as is happening today?
Anyone who believes that they are able to let the
terrorism genie out of the bottle and then manipulate it
in such a way as to make it go back in is misguided and
deluded. Those who toy with terrorism will one day fall
victim to it.
Despite the late international recognition of the
existence of armed terrorist groups, some of which are
affiliated with Al-Qaida and are committing the most
horrific crimes in Syria, some States still continue
to pursue policies of public support for such terrorist
organizations by providing financing, weapons,
training and safe haven and by issuing fatwahs and
offering them political and media support. Today, I will
give a practical example of such media coverage.
Armed terrorist groups attacked the homes and
dormitories of Syrian army units in the southern Syrian
city of Dar’a, where only women and children were
present. Those armed groups perpetrated a terrorist
attack, killing, wounding and humiliating whomever
they could. In that connection, it is important to note the
ironic fact that the Arabiya television network, which is
considered the operations room directing such terrorist
actions, actually broadcast news of the terrorist act
before it had even been carried out, considering it as
a blow by the terrorist groups inside Syria against the
regime. That is what we mean by media coverage and
support to terrorist and armed groups within Syria.
Al-Qaida-affiliated
terrorist
organizations
publicly claimed responsibility for the terrorist attacks
perpetrated in Syria in response to orders issued by
leaders of the Al-Qaida organization. Among those
organizations affiliated with Al-Qaida is Jebhat
Al-Nusra, which has claimed responsibility for
numerous terrorist attacks in Syria. The American
news channel CNN — not Syrian television — recently
confirmed, in cooperation with many specialized
Western think-tanks, that Jebhat Al-Nusra was solely
responsible for more than 600 terrorist attacks in Syria
over the past two years.
We have repeatedly warned the Council and called
on it to apply a greater measure of logic and wisdom. We
have issued warnings through hundreds of statements,
meetings and official communications to the United
Nations and its agencies throughout the crisis in Syria.
We have warned of the dangers of terrorists flowing
into Syria under subversive slogans such as “doctrinal

13-20637

and sectarian Jihad” and “holy war” against the diverse
social fabric that characterizes the Syrian people. We
have demanded that the countries supporting those
terrorist groups stop doing so. We also called upon
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
various counter-terrorism committees to assume their
responsibilities in that regard.
However, countries with influence have prevented
any concrete action to combat the acts of terrorism
being carried out in Syria. Those influential countries
in the Security Council have even prevented the Council
from issuing seven statements to the press condemning
terrorist attacks that claimed the lives of hundreds of
innocent Syrians. Moreover, influential countries have
blocked the issuing of a number of urgent letters that
I sent on behalf of my Government to the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, including a letter
dated 21 November 2012 that included the names of
143 foreign terrorists killed in Syria. That letter has not
yet been issued as an official document, although two
months have passed since we made such a request and
despite the fact that reports from the United Nations
itself have recently indicated the presence of foreign
fighters from more than 29 States inside Syria.
The terrorist activities being carried out by groups
in Syria have reached dangerous levels in terms of
both quantity and quality. Those groups have targeted
vital facilities and infrastructure in several areas in
order to bring about the comprehensive destruction of
society and to exhaust the resources and undermine
the livelihoods of citizens, including in terms of food,
medicine, energy resources, petroleum derivatives,
roads and transporation and means of communications.
Not one single Syrian is convinced that the actions of
these armed groups — supported by black petro-dollars,
huge amounts of hatred and a lack of patriotism, and
aimed at imposing hunger on the citizens, depriving
them of their homes and security, leaving them in the
cold suffering from disease, and pushing them into
refugee camps — represent a Spring revolution aimed
at serving them and at establishing reform and freedom.
How can we explain why these terrorist groups
target international humanitarian aid provided by the
United Nations and other agencies, assassinate Syrian
volunteers of the Red Crescent Society, and make
threats against international workers and diplomatic
missions accredited in Syria? What is the humanitarian
significance of targeting civilian aircrafts? It is certain
that the goal of the blind, vindictive terrorism practiced
in Syria is to destroy the State and society, and not to
7

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

spread democracy, reform governance mechanisms,
protect and promote human rights or combat corruption,
all of which are popular demands in Syria and enjoy
consensus among the various sectors of Syrian society.
The suspect goals of some countries in supporting
terrorism and extremism in my country have started
to rise to the surface. We now see Israel pointing to
certain extremist terrorist groups as justification for
building a wall along the disengagement ceasefire line
that would be 42 kilometers long in the buffer zone
on the territories of the occupied Syrian Golan. Any
political novice would wonder about a party that has
supported the actions of these terrorists, enabling them
to reach that zone to begin with, and that has helped to
establish such a movement and is dictating conditions
for it. That is particularly true since high level officials
at the Department of Peacekeeping Operations have
ignored the documented information that we provided
on the facilities that Israel, the occupying Power in the
Golan, is offering to these terrorists.
Is not the first suspect in any crime usually the
person who stands to profit from the crime? We are
witnessing targeted terrorism wearing the mask
of those merchandising in religion and media, and
embodied in the takfiri jihadist extremist fatwas issued
by fake clerics on satellite television channels that
promote ignorance and terrorism. The mass incitement
of terrorism and so-called jihad in Syria and other Arab
and Western countries that is rampant on the Internet,
and especially on online social networks, must lead us
to reflect carefully on the seriousness of United Nations
efforts to address the use by terrorists of the Internet
and its means of communication to spread their ideas
and mislead innocent youth.
One wonders for whose sake certain Western
nations have mounted the wave of demands for
legitimate reform in the Arab world, diverting them and
forging alliances with extremist Islamist organizations
that, having come to power, remove their masks and
start searching for bases in countries that have not
yet known such organizations. In whose interest are
prisoners and detainees from Al-Qaida smuggled from
prisons and sent to Syria with the funding and support
of well-known countries and parties such as Turkey,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and a specific political group in
Lebanon? Between the dreams of an Islamist caliphate
that some aspire to and the dreams of reviving the
Ottoman Sultanate entertained by others, as well as
the theory of creative chaos popular with a third party,

8

nations are suffering, monuments are destroyed and
wisdom is slaughtered on the altar of extremism.
The Turkish Government has exploited the suffering
of the Syrian people to practice piracy and economic
terrorism, in collusion with armed groups, represented
in the theft of nearly 1,500 pharmaceutical and industrial
facilities, their dismantlement and transhipment from
the city of Aleppo to Turkey. Such criminal acts
targeting Syrian livelihoods and means of development
should be condemned in the same way we condemn
acts of conventional terrorism that lead to immediate
death and destruction. Such behaviour calls for a firm
response from the Security Council, demanding that
the Turkish Government return all stolen property to
its Syrian owners and provide compensation to those
affected. Just as the Turkish Prime Minister a few days
ago called on what he described as “the imperialist
States” to return the fortunes looted from Africa, he
should call on his Government to return the material
it looted from Syria and to end practices that harm the
brotherly Turkish people and neighbourly relations
between our two countries.
This is only the tip of the iceberg. Regional and
international interference in our internal affairs has
become rampant and shameless, and overlooks the
violations committed by some States of the most basic
principles upon which so-called international legitimacy
is based. Furthermore, the exploitation of Syrian blood
to carry out destructive evil terrorist political agendas
has become flagrant. How can we move to combat
terrorism in Mali while some States encourage, sponsor
and arm the same brand of terrorism in my country,
Syria?
In closing, I would like to express my regards to
the representatives of the new members of the Security
Council, Australia, Argentina, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda and Luxembourg. I congratulate them on their
membership in the Security Council and I wish them
success and good luck in pushing forward the way this
Council deals decisively with the issue of countering
terrorism throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
joining other delegations in congratulating Pakistan on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. We thank the delegation of Pakistan for
scheduling this very important open debate. This

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

initiative reflects the commitment and resolve of that
country on the subject. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement this morning.
Terrorism, both in its magnitude and diversity, is
one of the gravest challenges of today. It is a threat
not only to national security and stability, but also to
international peace and security. Indeed, no country is
immune from the scourge.
The adoption of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in 2006 was a watershed moment
in the global fight against terrorism. We fully support
the Strategy. Bangladesh made a humble contribution
as the facilitator of General Assembly resolution
64/297, on the review of the Strategy in 2010. We
call for the Strategy’s transparent and comprehensive
implementation.
Bangladesh condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Our Government has been following
and will continue to follow a zero-tolerance policy
towards terrorism and extremism. We feel that the four
pillars of the Strategy and the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
to support its implementation were important steps. In
line with our commitment to counter terrorism, we have
taken some notable initiatives in our national context.
A party to all 14 universal anti-terrorism
instruments, Bangladesh also ratified the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. Our Government is currently implementing a
national counter-radicalization strategy by promoting
education, women’s empowerment and the propagation
of secular and moderate cultural values, and creating
a mindset of tolerance, friendliness and compassion in
line with our flagship resolution, “Culture of peace”.
Our Government supports the work of the United
Nations in the effective implementation of resolution
1267 (1999). We have banned all terrorist groups
blacklisted by the Committee established pursuant
to that resolution and are keeping a close eye on any
suspicious activity. The Government enacted the
country’s first-ever Money-Laundering Prevention
Act in 2009, which was updated in 2012 to make it
more stringent and to include suspicious transactions
and predicate offences as a way to address terrorist
financing.
Bangladesh feels privileged to have partnered with
the CTITF last year in presenting a regional workshop

13-20637

on the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in South Asia in Dhaka.
There should be a clear distinction between
terrorism, on the one hand, and the legitimate struggle
against foreign occupation and the right to selfdetermination as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, on the other. Attempts to wrongfully associate
terrorism with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group are unjustifiable and therefore should be
avoided. It is essential that, while countering terrorism,
human rights standards be respected and protected.
If the global strategy against terrorism is to
succeed, its root causes — such as economic disparity
and deprivation, political subjugation and exclusion,
prolonged and unresolved conflicts, unfair treatment
and absence of fairness — must be addressed, as
appropriate. In that regard, socioeconomic interventions
for the deprived in a society — such as social safety nets,
microcredit-based livelihoods for women, women’s
empowerment, education and job creation, and a strong
legal institutional regime — are of pivotal importance.
Let me emphasize that the United Nations should be
leading the global conversation and action on counterterrorism, with the support of all stakeholders. National
capacity-building and the training of counter-terrorism
personnel in developing countries, particularly the
least developed, must remain high on the agenda of the
United Nations for assisting all States in combating
terrorism.
Let us today renew once again our vows to unite
against terrorism and save innocent lives and protect
succeeding generations from the unacceptable scourge
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would like to thank
Pakistan for taking the initiative to organize this debate
on counter-terrorism. I would also like to thank Foreign
Minister Khar for her presence and for presiding over
today’s meeting. We hope that today’s open debate will
help us to direct the discussions at the United Nations
and in the Security Council towards finding more
effective measures for the global fight against terrorism,
in accordance with the desires and expectations of the
general membership of the United Nations.

9

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Terrorism is a common threat faced by the entire
international community. The NAM has always
supported decisive combat against all forms of terrorism,
wherever and whenever they occur, and believes that
counter-terrorism efforts should be immune to any form
of politicization or double standards. Otherwise, such
efforts would be off-track, run counter to the original
intent of the fight against terrorism, or even give rise
to impunity for perpetrators. Counter-terrorism efforts
should be based on international cooperation, with
strengthened coordination and synergy, and the United
Nations should play the central coordinating role.
Over the past few years, the Security Council
has adopted a series of counter-terrorism resolutions,
and the General Assembly has adopted the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
latter document, with its three subsequent revisions,
provides necessary guidance for international counterterrorism cooperation. NAM calls for a transparent,
comprehensive and balanced implementation of the
Strategy and agrees to actively engage in future meetings
on its implementation. In that regard, NAM also calls
for the enhanced engagement of Member States in the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force.
We recall the third biennial review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy held on
29 June 2012, where it was decided, inter alia, that the
Task Force would interact with Member States on a
quarterly basis, providing briefings and comprehensive
reports on its current and future work, as well as
a periodic workplan of its activities. In that way,
transparency would be assured and Member States
would be able to assess the work being done by the
Task Force and offer policy guidance and feedback on
Counter-Terrorism Strategy implementation efforts, as
reflected in General Assembly resolution 66/282. We
welcome the briefings held so far by the Task Force and
hope that such interactions will help it streamline its
activities in accordance with the wishes of the Member
States. In that regard, we emphasize once again that
counter-terrorism efforts should adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and fully respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
NAM is of the view that terrorism should not be
equated with the legitimate struggle of peoples under
colonial or alien domination and foreign occupation
for self-determination and national liberation. The

10

brutalization of people under foreign occupation
should continue to be denounced as the gravest form
of terrorism. We continue to condemn the use of State
power to suppress peoples’ exercise of their inalienable
right to self-determination and to struggle to dispel
foreign occupation.
We note the recognized and growing potential
links between international organized crime and the
financing of terrorism, including money-laundering,
and stress the need to promote cooperation and
coordinate efforts in fighting those menaces. The
financing of terrorism is a matter of grave concern that
must be fought with determination. In that regard, we
strongly condemn criminal hostage-taking incidents
that have led to demands for ransom and/or other
political concessions by terrorist groups, and call upon
all States to cooperate actively in addressing that issue
in all its aspects, including its legal aspects.
It is the firm conviction of NAM that multilateral
cooperation under United Nations auspices is the most
effective means to combat international terrorism. NAM
reiterates its call for an international summit conference
to be held under the auspices of the United Nations in
order to formulate a joint, organized response by the
international community to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including by identifying its root causes.
It further reiterates the importance of the conclusion of a
comprehensive convention for combating international
terrorism and, in this respect, notes the negotiations
in the Ad Hoc Committee on terrorism, established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 51/210, for
the elaboration of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism and the continuing efforts to
that end.
NAM has always underlined the important role of
regional and international organizations in creating
frameworks of cooperation and for the sharing of best
practices in the fight against terrorism. In this regard,
we support national, regional and international efforts
and arrangements that seek to implement, where
appropriate, the pertinent international legally binding
instruments and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
including General Assembly resolution 46/51 and
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), and regional
arrangements and instruments relating to combating
terrorism. We emphasize the need to strengthen
cooperation with all States in this regard, and underline
that such cooperation should be in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and the

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

relevant international conventions. In this context, we
urge the relevant United Nations organs to promote ways
and means to support and strengthen such cooperation.
Finally, the Movement believes that more steps
are needed, along with the necessary political will of
Member States, to improve the existing approaches,
procedures and mechanisms of both the General
Assembly and the Security Council in the fight
against terrorism so that international measures to
counter terrorism can be undertaken in a coordinated,
transparent, accountable and consistent manner.
In this way, the United Nations as a whole and the
Security Council, in maintaining international peace
and security, can deal more efficiently and effectively
with the ever-more complicated and growing threat of
terrorism. The Non-Aligned Movement stands ready to
contribute to the achievement of this goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank you, Sir, for the
leadership of Pakistan in convening this open debate.
This meeting today, which tackles the question of a
comprehensive response to terrorism, is of the utmost
importance because no country can stand alone in the
face of terrorist attacks.
As a country that has suffered the devastating impact
of terrorism, Indonesia fully recognizes the imperative
need for concerted national counter-terrorism efforts to
have a robust global counter-terrorism framework that
is versatile and cooperative and addresses terrorism in
a comprehensive manner so as to ensure that the results
are sustainable. We hope that, through this initiative
of Pakistan, the work of the United Nations, including
through the Security Council, will lead to more effective
steps in the global response to terrorism.

Strategy, we still need to see the imperative to balance
the implementation of the four pillars.
Indonesia therefore calls for an intensified
engagement of Member States in the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF),
as decided at the third review of the Strategy. Such an
approach will enable countries to better follow and
assess the work of the Task Force and provide guidance
on its work, including by identifying elements of the
main pillars that need strengthening.
The United Nations effort against terrorism has
increased significantly through the involvement of
various United Nations organs and their subsidiaries.
With this positive trend in mind, Indonesia supports
further deliberation of the idea of establishing the post
of counter-terrorism coordinator to see how it fits with
the need to boost synergy in the overall global counterterrorism efforts.
We fully support the idea that the comprehensive
counter-terrorism approach should be undertaken
at both the policy and the implementation levels.
Furthermore, it is essential that such a comprehensive
approach be without prejudice to human rights and the
rule of law.
At the national level, Indonesia has taken law
enforcement measures and established several important
legislative frameworks on counter-terrorism. Since
the enactment of Law No. 15 in 2003 on countering
terrorism, Indonesia has arrested and brought to justice
over 600 terrorists. Of those, more than 400 have been
convicted by the courts.

Before I continue, allow me to associate myself
with the statements of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement, delivered
by the representatives of Egypt and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, respectively.

Building on its steady progress against terrorism,
Indonesia has continued to strengthen its law
enforcement institutions in order to enhance their
capacity to deliver timely and effective results. Through
the establishment of the Indonesian National CounterTerrorism Agency in 2010, Indonesia is not only
addressing the legal and technical aspects of counterterrorism, but also engaging with the equally important
social aspects.

Indonesia welcomes the third biennial review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which took place in June 2012. The four-pillar Strategy
is a strong key for enhancing and coordinating
international counter-terrorism efforts and assisting
Member States in taking a similarly integrated
approach. After the sixth year and third review of the

Indonesia also welcomes the third ministerial
meeting of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum
(GCTF), held in Abu Dhabi last year. That meeting
stressed the need to do more on institutional capacitybuilding and the sharing of best practices. Together
with Australia, as co-chairs of the Southeast Asia
Capacity-Building Working Group of the GCTF,

13-20637

11

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Indonesia has convened two productive meetings of
the Working Group in the past year. The most recent
meeting, held in Manila, addressed the issue of youth
radicalization and de-radicalization. It took stock of
possible future activities to facilitate coordination on
technical assistance programmes in Southeast Asia.

In order to prevent and eliminate international
terrorism, the enforcement of more comprehensive
responses is crucial. It is necessary that not only the
States where terrorism threats are real, but also the
international community as a whole tackle international
terrorism.

In a similar vein, Indonesia calls for stronger
cooperation among counter-terrorism centres, including
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of the
CTITF, the Hedayah Center, and the Jakarta Centre for
Law Enforcement Cooperation (JCLEC) in Indonesia.
I am delighted to inform the Council, as stated earlier
by the representative of Australia, that JCLEC, which
was established in 2004 through cooperation between
Indonesia and Australia, has to date trained more than
10,000 law enforcement and counter-terrorism officials
from 47 countries in the Asia-Pacific region.

Although individual State circumstances with
regard to terrorism conditions, counter-terrorism
capacities and the available capacity for international
contributions differ, each State should take actions as
a responsible member of the international community.

Indonesia believes that, in order to prevent
incitement to terrorism, it is essential that the root
causes of terrorism be addressed. The nature of those
root causes entail a need to promote dialogue, tolerance
and mutual understanding, as well as to empower
moderates. We would further like to reiterate that
terrorism must not be associated with any religion,
culture or group. No religion or religious doctrine
encourages or inspires acts of terrorism. None should
be portrayed as such.
In that regard, the international community must
work harder to reject the profiling of a particular
group, religion or civilization. We must promote mutual
tolerance, coexistence and respect for each other’s
cultures and faiths. To that end, we should all help to
strengthen the practice of dialogue, consultation and
cooperation.
Finally, Indonesia pledges its commitment to
continue sharing experiences and thoughts on how
counter-terrorism should be effectively carried out for
the sake of our future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Pakistan on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January.
I would also like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for your leadership in convening this
debate. I would also like to express our gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
informative presentation this morning.
12

What measures are available to States facing
difficulty in raising resources and in enhancing capacity
to take meaningful action? We believe that even those
States can make efforts, such as by tackling outstanding
socioeconomic issues that can promote extremism and
by conducting dialogues with neighbouring countries
and civil society. On the other hand, States that have
been successful in achieving advanced results can share
their experiences widely with other States to contribute
to enhancing their capacity.
In addition to enhancing our own capacity,
Japan has been conducting bilateral and multilateral
dialogues and consultations. We have been making full
use of our own know-how and lessons learned through
such activities. We have also been making international
contributions by dispatching experts and holding
seminars, especially in South-East Asia, focusing
on areas such as immigration control, aviation and
maritime security, law enforcement cooperation and
the counter-financing of terrorism. It is our firm belief
that each State must embrace counter-terrorism as its
own policy agenda if we are to succeed in implementing
international counter-terrorism efforts.
Let me now touch on our ongoing effort to address
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. At the
debate on the situation in Afghanistan in the Security
Council last month (see S/PV.6896), we agreed on
the importance of international cooperation with
Afghanistan for the purpose of establishing its selfreliance and of not again allowing the conditions that
spread terrorism. We can interpret such a commitment
not to allow those conditions to continue any longer
as an important part of our international counterterrorism efforts. I believe that all Member States
should participate in such efforts more actively.
In that regard, Japan hosted the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan last July in order to commit to international

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

efforts not to make Afghanistan a hotbed for terrorism
again. We are conducting follow-up support. We have
also been engaged for a long time in efforts to move
closer to a final agreement in the Mindanao peace
process, where a framework agreement was signed last
October. In that way, we have contributed to several
measures to eliminate the conditions that spread
terrorism in several regions.
Since one of the priorities with regard to
international counter-terrorism must be the issue of
terrorist financing, it is necessary for the international
community to make more efforts to address the issue.
Japan welcomes the fact that a special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on preventing and
suppressing terrorist financing was held last November
in order for all United Nations States Members and the
relevant organizations to have an opportunity to engage
and to exchange experiences and challenges. Japan
is making positive progress, especially in its efforts
to update the measures against terrorist financing
discussed at the meeting.
January starts the beginning of a new year. In
order to make 2013 truly meaningful in terms of
international counter-terrorism, this open debate is a
good opportunity to review past efforts and to reaffirm
the international counter-terrorism objectives and
measures in the future. I hope that today’s debate may
provide a springboard for all Member States to reaffirm
the importance of a comprehensive approach and to
take further positive steps on international counterterrorism.
Japan will continue to take all possible measures
in support of international counter-terrorism, as well
as to cooperate positively in the efforts of the Security
Council and the relevant United Nations entities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We would also like to express our appreciation
to you for organizing today’s meeting on this important
subject.
Terrorism today constitutes the most pressing
challenge to international peace and security. It is a
scourge that undermines peace, democracy and freedom
and that endangers the foundations of democratic
societies. It is a global threat that recognizes no border,
13-20637

nationality, ethnicity or religion. There is hardly
any region of the world that has not been scarred by
terrorism.
My own country, India, has faced the scourge of
terrorism for over two-and-a-half decades. Indeed,
our entire region, South Asia, has been wracked
by the activities of the biggest terrorist actors in the
world, be they Al-Qaida, Lashkar e Toiba, Jamaat-udDawa, elements of the Taliban and others. Terrorism,
extremism and radicalization continue to pose a serious
challenge to peace, progress and prosperity in the
region.
Over the years, the visible landscape of
international terrorism has vastly changed. In our
globalized world, terrorists are also globalized in their
outreach and activities. They recruit in one country,
raise funds in another and operate in others and are
waging an asymmetric warfare against the international
community.
The veritable nexus of terrorists with transnational
organized crime and drug and arms trafficking is now
well established. Terrorist financing, illicit money
laundering, drug trafficking, piracy and the illicit arms
trade remain intertwined in a complex web of toxic
relationships. There is also the growing risk of weapons
of mass destruction of different kinds falling into the
hands of terrorists. The misuse of cyberspace and
related technologies by terrorists and their supporters
is also a matter of increasing concern.
India condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. No cause or grievance can justify taking
recourse to terrorism. India has been at the forefront of
global counter-terrorism efforts and is part of all major
initiatives against international terrorism, including the
Financial Action Task Force.
I had the privilege to chair the Counter-Terrorism
Committee during the past two years. We endeavoured
to provide renewed momentum to global counterterrorism efforts and to promote a culture of zero
tolerance towards terrorism.
During that period, three special meetings of the
Committee were held, with the participation of the
wider United Nations membership and international,
regional and subregional organizations. The Committee
held a special meeting in New York in September 2011
to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the
Committee, and at that meeting it unanimously endorsed
13

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

a zero-tolerance approach towards terrorism in its
outcome document. The Committee organized another
special meeting in New York last November that focused
on prevention and suppression of terrorist financing,
with the participation of expert bodies — the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), FATF-style regional bodies,
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The meeting was immensely helpful in putting a
spotlight on the issue of terrorist financing, which lies
at the heart of resolution 1373 (2001).
We fully support all efforts that strengthen
international and regional cooperation and, most
importantly, help ensure the effective implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions, including
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We also support the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in an integrated manner in all its
four pillars. We believe that apart from law enforcement
measures, the preventive aspect is equally important.
Development, education, social integration, tolerance,
the rule of law and respect for human rights are the
integral components of such an approach.
The United Nations has played a seminal role in
combating terrorism, facilitating technical assistance
and capacity-building for Member States. Success in the
fight against terrorism goes hand in hand with progress
in strengthening counter-terrorism cooperation and the
exchange of information at the international, regional
and subregional levels. A large number of terrorist plots
can be neutralized by the sharing of information and
effective international cooperation.
We have witnessed important progress at the
international and regional levels, including the recently
established Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. We
will need a scaling-up of some of the concrete ideas
emerging from those processes.
Despite the progress achieved so far, the efforts
of the international community continue to face many
challenges. Foremost is the need to remove the moral
and legal ambiguities that allow terrorists to gain
succour and legitimacy. Progress under mutual legal
assistance and extradition cases is still sketchy and is
yet to be fully mainstreamed as part of regional and
international counter-terrorism efforts. We need to
strengthen enforcement efforts to destroy terrorists’
safe havens, financial flows and support networks.
The mechanisms that have been developed to pool
the resources and the knowledge of the international

14

community need to be augmented and made more
effective.
India has long held the belief that the United Nations
also needs to strengthen the normative framework for
its counter-terrorism strategy through the adoption of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
I could not agree more with my friend Gert Rosenthal,
Permanent Representative of Guatemala, on his
emphasis earlier today on the need for such a convention
and the added value through its early adoption. I can
only echo the Secretary-General’s words earlier today
that the time has come for a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism to be adopted.
The fight against terrorism has to be unrelenting and
fought across all fronts. The international community
cannot afford selective approaches in dealing with
terrorist groups or in dismantling the infrastructure of
terrorism. Terrorism is a Frankenstein monster. Resort
to the use of terrorism as an instrument of State policy
is short-sighted. Indeed, those who have taken recourse
to it have invariably themselves suffered immensely
from it, proving the age-old dictum that those who live
by the sword will also perish by it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate on counterterrorism.
There is a specific kind of ecosystem that creates
terrorism. Terrorism is rooted in hatred, watered with
instability and State support, and then planted in the
next generation. Every roadside bombing, every suicide
attack and every act of terrorism begins with words and
thoughts of hatred. It begins with Al-Qaida websites
that turn suicide bombers into jihadi celebrities. It
begins with Hizbullah summer camps that use arts and
crafts to glorify martyrdom and teach bomb-making
skills to children. It begins with statements by Hamas
leaders like Atallah Abu Al-Subh, who recently said on
public Palestinian television, “The Jews are the most
despicable and contemptible nation to crawl upon the
face of the Earth”. That is the poison that is being fed to
people across the Middle East day after day.
So I want to take the opportunity of this debate
to ask the simple question: How do we truly counter
terrorism?

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Yes, we must combat terrorists wherever they seek
to strike. Yes, we must attack terrorist infrastructure
and go after those who support and finance terrorism.
However, true counter-terrorism must also begin by
disrupting the ecosystem of extremism in which terror
thrives. It means advancing education and teaching
peace, not hatred, and mutual understanding, not
martyrdom. It means speaking out against incitement
and all forms of terrorism, even when it is politically
inconvenient.
We are far, far away from that reality. In too many
corners of the planet, extremists have had the tools
to grow the next generation of terrorists. In this very
Council, some States offer justification for certain
terrorists while condemning others.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) all remain essential parts of
the global effort to isolate terrorists and deny them the
means to inflict harm. Israel appreciates the work of the
United Nations counter-terrorism agencies. The United
Nations has expanded its counter-terrorism efforts over
the past decade — in particular by coordinating and
facilitating technical assistance to Member States.
Israel is proud to be an active partner and donor
in those efforts. We continue to share the knowledge
and experience that come through years of combating
terrorism. We remain committed to implementing the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and to that end,
we recently submitted our periodic report, in accordance
with resolution 1540 (2004). We also support the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. All four
pillars of the strategy must be treated as a whole.
Israel is working closely with many States and
regional organizations to advance counter-terrorism
cooperation in areas from aviation security to border
protection to terrorist financing. Those activities reflect
our fundamental belief that terrorism can effectively be
confronted only through international cooperation. No
State should stand alone in this effort.
It takes a network to beat a network. The challenges
we face are growing as a result of an increasingly linked
network of smuggling rings, transnational criminals
and terrorists. Ayman Juma was recently indicted in a
United States court for smuggling 85 tons of cocaine
into the United States and for laundering $850 million

13-20637

for a Mexican drug cartel. He took a 14 per cent
commission for his efforts on behalf of his bosses, the
Hizbullah terrorist organization. Juma is one of many
thousands of Hizbullah operatives in a network that
spans from West Africa to the Middle East to Latin
America to Europe. That global criminal network
funds Hizbullah’s terrorist activities and provides the
logistical support to carry them out.
Make no mistake. There is a direct connection
between powder cocaine smuggled from Latin America
and the gunpowder of Hizbullah weaponry in Lebanon.
Criminals are not the only supporters of terrorists.
Many States — including some in this Chamber — work
hand in hand with them as well. Iran stands chief among
those nations. Across the African continent, Iranian
weaponry has become the tool of choice for some of the
region’s bloodiest insurgencies and terrorists.
In Gaza, Iran is funding, training and arming
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and other terrorists, giving them
the capabilities to strike Israel’s largest cities. Iran’s
politicians and military commanders boast about
providing terrorists with that assistance. The head of
the Islamic Jihad in Gaza said last November that “the
entire world knows that Iran is the main source of our
weapons”.
Iran has also helped Hizbullah to build its arsenal
to unprecedented levels in Lebanon, amassing 50,000
deadly missiles, in flagrant breach of resolution 1701
(2006). Those weapons can reach all of Israel and well
beyond.
Hizbullah intentionally stores its weapons in
civilian areas. Just last month, a large Hizbullah
weapons-storage facility exploded in the Lebanese
village of Tair Harfa, just 300 metres from a school.
The people of Lebanon are more valuable to Hizbullah
and Iran as human shields than as human beings.
We face the frightening possibility that Hizbullah
could soon get its hands on Al-Assad’s vast stockpiles
of chemical weapons. The Council must act today,
not tomorrow. We have a responsibility to prevent the
world’s most dangerous weapons from falling into the
hands of the world’s most dangerous actors.
The Council cannot turn a blind eye to those
States that sponsor, support and arm terrorists. The
international community must hold them accountable
for the violence that they spread and the lives that they
have taken.

15

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

We have adopted many, many resolutions in this
Chamber in the global fight against terrorism. Our
collective efforts cannot end there. The voices of the
victims of terrorism call to us; they demand our united
action.
We must take the words from the printed page and
breathe life into them every day. We must be steadfast;
we must be strong. We must, as Churchill said, seek
“victory, however long and hard the road may be”. We
cannot rest until the evil ideologies that fuel terrorism
become nothing more than relics of the past.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): We extend our
appreciation to Pakistan for having convened this open
debate on this very important global issue, which has an
impact on international peace and security. It is a timely
reflection and an added contribution to enhancing the
visibility of the United Nations in the international
campaign against terrorism.
My delegation continues to support the approach
that places the United Nations at the centre of
multilateral efforts to counter terrorism, as we are firm
in our belief that no country can address this challenge
on its own and that terrorism cannot be defeated by
military means.
South Africa is of the view that international
efforts aimed at countering terrorism should be
comprehensive in addressing collateral concerns,
including development. We have always maintained that
the four pillars of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy must be implemented in a balanced
and integrated manner. The Strategy, as affirmed in
the high-level Symposium on International CounterTerrorism Cooperation hosted by the SecretaryGeneral in 2011, remains the most credible and relevant
international mechanism that enjoys the widespread
political support of all Member States to counter the
scourge of terrorism globally.
In addition to the strides that have been made
in preventing and combating terrorism, as well as
measures to build States’ capacity in that regard,
a balanced approach would mean renewed efforts
and commitment by the international community to
addressing the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism. There is an urgent need for the international
community and the United Nations to step up efforts
to resolve long-standing conflicts in accordance with
16

international law and international human rights law,
and to adopt strategies that limit political exclusion and
reject socioeconomic marginalization.
A balanced approach to counter-terrorism efforts
would imply that the international community remains
steadfast in its commitment to ensure the timely
and full realization of the development goals and
objectives so as to eradicate poverty and promote
sustained economic growth as well as sustainable
development and global prosperity for all. In the
prevailing international economic and financial
climate, the international community must reinforce
development and social-inclusion agendas, especially
on youth unemployment, as such efforts can contribute
to the reduction of marginalization and to countering
the potential appeal of extremism and recruitment by
terrorists.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s view that
human rights protection should not be viewed as an
obstacle to effectively countering terrorism, but as an
essential element of any sustainable counter-terrorism
strategy. The strengthening of the international legal
architecture, the rule of law and the criminal justice
system constitute the fundamental basis of our common
approach to counter-terrorism. In that context, the
promotion and protection of human rights for all
is essential to all components of the Strategy. This
approach is complementary and reinforcing.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights should continue to play a leading
role in examining the question of protecting human
rights while countering terrorism. That area requires
renewed attention given the concerns expressed by the
High Commissioner regarding the erosion of respect for
due-process guarantees, including those related to the
Security Council’s individual sanctions regimes and
other practices that impede the right to a fair trial in the
context of counter-terrorism.
In that regard, South Africa welcomes the
enhancement of the Ombudsperson’s mandate and the
institutionalization of the sunset clause as a step towards
due-process standards, and remains fully supportive
of the work of that Office. The Office of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism complements all counter-terrorism efforts
and must be fully supported. It contributes to an
integrated and balanced approach by interacting with
all the relevant stakeholders.
13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

The joint initiatives of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force that are
already under way should be further strengthened in
order to synchronize and make effective the United
Nations agenda to implement global counter-terrorism
measures. Such an approach contributes substantively
to the optimal use of resources and capacities. The
international community must maintain its unity of
purpose in the global fight against terrorism, upholding
the centrality of the United Nations in the process.
Duplicating United Nations initiatives or drawing focus
and resources away from multilateral efforts should be
avoided.
Additionally, countering the financing of terrorism
is a key component of a comprehensive strategy to
combat terrorism. While that requires collective action
by all States, it is also an area where there is a dire
need for capacity-building among States. Against that
background, we welcome the recent collaboration
aimed at leveraging the expertise and the reach of
United Nations structures and other regional and
subregional bodies, so as to enhance States’ ability
to protect their financial systems from exploitation as
sources or conduits for material and financial support
for the perpetrators of terrorist acts.
The commendable counter-terrorism efforts of the
international community should be carried out with
due care, planning and foresight. We remain mindful
of the fact that the lack of an appropriate response or of
the political will to address longstanding and complex
conflicts will have a negative impact on our collective
efforts to root out terrorism. We have witnessed the
unintended consequences of weapons proliferation
in the Sahel, following actions by the international
community in the subregion recently. That has given
rise to the resurgence of terrorism networks, rendering
the countries in the region unstable and more vulnerable
to the threat of terrorism. Similar situations must be
avoided in future.
It is important for the international community
and the United Nations in particular to place emphasis
on the root causes of terrorism as well as on those
factors that contribute to the inflaming of passions and
resentment, which promote incitement and the spread
of this scourge in different parts of the world. Such a
reflection would additionally indicate the necessity of
addressing the political situation of people living under

13-20637

occupation and the need for political will to address
long-standing conflicts.
Let me say in conclusion that in the action plan that
we collectively adopted in 2006, we undertook to make
every effort to conclude a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism that would also address
the current gaps in the international legal arena that
might exist, while also encouraging Member States to
become parties to existing international conventions
and protocols. We believe that the adoption of a
comprehensive convention should not be delayed any
further.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, Mr. President,
to congratulate Pakistan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. We wish you every success during your tenure.
Venezuela endorses the statement made earlier by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is firmly
committed to combating terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, no matter who engages in it and
for whatever reason. In that context, we reiterate our
categorical condemnation of the commission of acts of
terrorism, given their negative impact on international
peace and security and on human rights.
Venezuela has been at the vanguard of efforts to
counter that terrible scourge, as demonstrated by the
countless treaties and conventions that our country
has adhered to as well as the many successful policies
adopted by our Government.
Venezuela has approved a series of influential legal
instruments that establish measures to control, prevent
and oversee efforts to combat the financing of terrorism
and money laundering. In May 2012 the Organic
Law against Organized Crime and the Financing of
Terrorism was enacted. Its objective is to prevent,
investigate, prosecute, criminalize and punish crimes
related to organized crime, with a particular emphasis
on the financing terrorism.
Venezuela has joined all the initiatives taken
within the context of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Consistent with the

17

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Charter of the United Nations and international treaties
and agreements, that important political instrument
recognizes that efforts to counter that serious scourge
is the primary responsibility of Member States. The
Strategy likewise states that combating terrorism
should be undertaken in the context of cooperation
and governed by existing international and regional
instruments and the norms of international law, human
rights and international humanitarian law. Venezuela
endorses such a holistic approach.
Terrorism takes on many forms and manifestations,
with State terrorism being among the most
reprehensible. In that regard, it should be underscored
that all States must strictly and unflaggingly comply
with the international responsibilities they assume.
Terrorism is practiced not only by non-State actors
behind the scenes, but also by States who act in the full
light of day. Some imperial Powers are engaged in State
terrorism, and they justify doing so with arguments
related to national security. State terrorism should be
condemned because it is contrary to the principle of
the sovereign equality of all nations, denies the rule
of international law and is a mass violation of human
rights.
The Palestinian case reveals the double standard
of some countries in their so-called efforts to
combat terrorism. Israel’s military aggression as an
occupying Power deprives the Palestinian people of
their lives, their land, their freedom, their history,
their identity and, most important, their dignity. The
blockade, the acts of aggression and military threats
against Palestinians living in the Gaza Strip and the
construction of settlements in the West Bank by the
occupying Power are contrary not only to international
law and resolutions adopted by the United Nations, but
they are also a concrete expression of State terrorism.
The Security Council’s silence and inaction in the face
of such practices are deplorable.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy calls upon States to discourage groups from
engaging in terrorism, to deny terrorists the means to
carry out their activities, to urge them not to support
terrorist groups and to respect human rights within
the context of combating terrorism. Consistent with
the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the plan of
action annexed to General Assembly resolution 60/288,
entitled “The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy”, the Government of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela reiterates its request filed with the

18

Government of the United States for the extradition of the
well-known terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, for his direct
responsibility in planning the bombing of the Cubana de
Aviación aircraft in October 1976. As will be recalled,
that terrorist attack resulted in the deaths of 73 Cuban
citizens, most of them athletes who had participated
in a competition in the territory of Venezuela. The
request for extradition by the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela Government has been repeatedly supported
by the Non-Aligned Movement, as noted in paragraph
380 of the final document (NAM 2012/Doc.1/Rev.2) of
the sixteenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, from 26 to
31 August 2012.
Venezuela also emphasizes the importance of
paragraph 382 of that document, in which Non-Aligned
Movement leaders reject the protection provided
by United States authorities to Raúl Díaz Peña, José
Antonio Colina and Germán Rodolfo Valera, all
Venezuelan citizens who have been accused, and
indeed convicted, of terrorist acts in Venezuela against
the diplomatic headquarters of Colombia and Spain
in 2003. That conduct violates current international
instruments and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and General Assembly relating to measures to
eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
In General Assembly resolution 60/288, of
8 September 2006, and Security Council resolution
1373 (2001), of 28 September 2001, among others,
States express their commitment to fully cooperate in
combating this scourge with a view to locating, denying
refuge to and bringing to justice through extradition
and trial any person who is involved in the execution,
financing or planning of acts of terrorism or offering
refuge to such persons.
Allow me to conclude by saying that there is a need
to act with transparency in combating terrorism, with a
view to to maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation, I
wish to congratulate Pakistan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, as
well as to thank it for choosing this important subject
for today’s debate.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Movement and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.
The fight against terrorism, especially the Boko
Haram menace, remains a very high priority for Nigeria.
The complexity and evolving nature of the threat and
the diversity of conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism will require a comprehensive, multifaceted
and sustainable response at the national, regional and
global levels. Terrorists are exploiting instability in
some parts of the world and taking advantage of new
technologies, including using mobile telephones and
the Internet to expand their networks, raise funds,
recruit new members and propagate their ideals. The
world must rise to the challenge.
Nigeria has taken certain measures aimed at
effectively countering the Boko Haram menace and
other terrorist-related threats in our country. The 2011
Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Money-laundering
Prohibition Act of the same year were introduced not
only to stem the tide, but also to neutralize terrorist
threats in Nigeria. The laws establish measures for the
prevention, prohibition and combating of terrorism,
including terrorism funding. The terrorism prevention
amendment bill of December 2012 strengthened the
sanctions regime and the legal framework and provided
useful tools for defending human rights while fighting
the menace.
We also adopted a three-pronged counter-terrorism
strategy that involves the following. First, it addresses
social and economic grievances, promotes political and
religious dialogue and enhances the capacity of law
enforcement agencies to combat all terrorist threats.
Secondly, it restructures the banking sector and
strengthens institutional bodies, including the office
of the national coordinator for counter-terrorism and
the national intelligence unit, as front-line agencies
in combating terrorism. It also involves the signing of
regional counter-terrorism treaties.
Against that background, in March, Nigeria
will host a regional workshop of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) on the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in West Africa and the Sahel. That
subregional project is expected to galvanize Member
States, international organizations, civil society
organizations and other regional stakeholders to work
in concert towards the attainment of the common
objective of tackling the threat of terrorism. We are
also a member of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
13-20637

as well as the CTITF. We will work within those
frameworks to reach the common objective of blunting
the dangers and threats caused by terrorist movements
and organizations.
It is evident that close cooperation is required among
Member States as a prerequisite and effective strategy
in tackling terrorism. The overarching challenge is to
find ways to sustain international cooperation, despite
the divergence in the perception of threat by various
countries. My delegation recognizes the unique and
invaluable contributions of the United Nations to the
global efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism.
At the same time, we would like to highlight the
nexus between terrorism and extremism, illiteracy,
poverty, maladministration and human rights
violations, and to emphasize that those factors should
always be taken into consideration when formulating
counter-terrorism strategies. My delegation therefore
calls for the formulation and adoption of longterm strategies based on subregional, regional and
international cooperation to support national measures
and to assist individual Governments facing threats of
terrorism to deal with the scourge effectively, while
observing established best practices, including respect
for fundamental human rights. We therefore believe
that the fight against terrorism should, as much as
possible, take into account the peculiar contexts and
environments in which such struggles are being waged.
Nigeria will continue to collaborate with the United
Nations with respect to the terrorist challenge in our
country. In that regard, we will work with the relevant
United Nations agencies and the Security Council
to coordinate activities and ensure that, in the end,
a successful campaign to eradicate extremism and
terrorist violence is achieved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): First of all, let me
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Pakistan
for his stewardship of the work of the Security Council
for this month and to thank him for convening today’s
important meeting.
I take this opportunity to welcome Australia,
Argentina, the Republic of Korea, Luxembourg and
Rwanda as incoming members of the Council. I am
confident that they will make significant contributions
to its agenda.

19

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Kazakhstan
consistently
advocates
the
strengthening of global security through the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community to
fight international terrorism.
No terrorist activity has any justification; nor
is it tied to any nationality or religion. It does cause
serious damage to international peace and security
and to global sustainable development. Terrorism has
a criminal undertaking. Behind the rhetoric of terrorist
groups lies criminal activity that undermines the
foundations of society.
We are convinced that no country in the world can
sufficiently address contemporary challenges alone,
especially terrorism. We therefore attach great value to
the development of cooperation on counter-terrorism,
and we support in practice all international and regional
efforts in that direction.
We advocate the further implementation of the
main provisions of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy at the national and regional levels.
A concrete step in that direction was the adoption of
the Joint Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
Strategy in Central Asia, which took place in the city
of Ashgabat in 2011. The Plan is the fruitful outcome of
the joint efforts of countries of the region, the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, the European
Union and the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia. In 2012, a
consultative meeting was held in Almaty, with the
support of the Government of my country, to discuss
how to implement the Plan in conjunction with the
major regional organizations.
Kazakhstan is an active participant in the
anti-terrorist centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the regional anti-terrorist structure
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
efforts of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
in the fight against terrorism and extremism. My
country is also undertaking counter-terrorism measures
in accordance with its individual partnership action
plan with NATO. In addition, it is currently engaged in
ongoing dialogue and collaboration with the European
Union.
The Astana Declaration on the Prevention of
Terrorism, adopted at a conference, reaffirmed
the commitment of participating countries of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

20

and State partners to the fight against the scourge of
terrorism.
We support the international community’s efforts
to combat the threat of nuclear terrorism. We attach
great importance to international cooperation and to
the implementation of measures to prevent the spread
of weapons of mass destruction and to avoid having
them all into the hands of terrorists. My Government
therefore organized a conference on the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, with special focus on
countering the financing of terrorism, and held the first
meeting of the Implementation and Assessment Group.
At the national level, within the framework of the
Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy, adopted this year, we have
started to develop a new State programme to combat
religious extremism and terrorism, an important part
of which will be devoted to regional and international
cooperation,
improving
national
antiterrorism
legislation, including questions on providing assistance
to victims of terrorist attacks, and preventing terrorism.
Terrorism, as experience proves, cannot be
completely eliminated by methods of force alone.
We
therefore consider it necessary to promote
sustainable economic development and education. We
wish to promote the elimination, as far as possible, of
preconditions for conflict situations in every region
and to create new, reliable mechanisms for overcoming
social, ethnic and religious tensions. In that context, my
country intends to use the advantages of the interactive
platform of the Congress of Leaders of World and
Traditional Religions to create a new platform for the
resolution of conflicts on religious grounds.
A ministerial meeting of the Istanbul Process on
Afghanistan will be held in Astana in April, with a view
to developing concrete proposals for reducing the threat
of terrorism to the region as a whole. We are confident
that that forum will make an important contribution to
the process of the political settlement, reconstruction
and regional integration of Afghanistan.
We live in the age of the Internet and advanced
technology, where the flow of information is enormous.
It is regrettable that those new information capabilities
are used by terrorist and extremist organizations to
spread their destructive ideology. In that regard, we
support the efforts of the Russian Federation and China
to develop a mechanism for ensuring international
information security.

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Before
beginning my statement, I would like to congratulate
Pakistan on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January and to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank Pakistan, as President of the
Security Council, for initiating this debate on the need
for a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism.
May I also express Canada’s strong condemnation of
the deadly attacks of 10 January in Pakistan, which
have killed scores of innocent people. On behalf of all
Canadians, we extend our deepest sympathies to the
families and friends of those killed.
(spoke in French)
Canada stresses the continuing obligation of
every State to prevent terrorist groups from receiving
training on their territory or crossing international
borders to conduct terrorist operations in other States.
That applies equally to the countries of the Sahel and
the Horn of Africa, to Iran, Lebanon, the West Bank
and Gaza, and Pakistan.
(spoke in English)
Canada recently added the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps Quds Force to our list of terrorist entities,
in response to their provision of arms, funding and
paramilitary training to terrorist groups that include the
Taliban, Lebanese Hizbullah, Hamas, the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine–General Command, and networks inside
Iraq. Indeed, dubious networks thriving in ungoverned
spaces, at the confluence of State and non-State actors,
must be confronted for what they are, wherever they
aspire to fulfil their hegemonic ambitions.
This debate is particularly timely in view of the
destabilizing developments in Mali. Armed groups,
including terrorist organizations listed by this body,
are collaborating to control an increasing amount of
territory, with disastrous humanitarian and humandignity consequences for the people of Mali.
It is indisputable that terrorism is a global
scourge that has targeted all our nations, undermining
civilization and subverting popular sovereignty across
the face of the Earth. We are compelled to work more

13-20637

closely together, united in purpose and coordinated
in practice, to combat the radical sectarianism that
manifests itself in the lives of the innocent through acts
of unmitigated terror.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is a valuable supporting mechanism for
international cooperation against terrorism. The
Strategy emphasizes our shared condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms. It commits us to urgent
and comprehensive action to prevent and combat
terrorism around the world. Canada was very pleased
to play a role in the Strategy’s renewal during the
last review period, and we look forward to further
consideration of the Secretary-General’s proposal
concerning the establishment of the post of a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator, as provided for
in the Strategy renewal resolution (General Assembly
resolution 66/282). We also continue to serve in our
role as facilitator on behalf of the bureau of the annual
General Assembly resolution on measures to eliminate
international terrorism.
Canada launched its own national road map against
terrorism last year. Our strategy aims to prevent
individuals from engaging in terrorism, detect the
activities of individuals who may pose a terrorist threat,
deny terrorists the means and opportunity to carry
out their activities and respond proportionately and
rapidly to terrorist activities in order to mitigate their
effects. Combating the financing of terrorism is a key
aspect of our approach. Canada is a founding member
of the Financial Action Task Force, the global leader
in standard-setting for combating money laundering
and terrorist financing. Canada has worked hard to
establish a robust domestic anti-money laundering and
anti-terrorist-financing regime and continues to adjust
it so as to fully implement the Task Force’s international
standards.
(spoke in French)
Helping to build the capacity of Member States
to fight terrorism is another important part of our
approach. Canada’s counter-terrorism capacity-building
programme provides significant training, equipment
and technical and legal support, as well as assistance
in matters of security, to help our partners prevent and
respond to terrorist activities. In that context, Canada is
pleased to be a founding member of the Global CounterTerrorism Forum (GCTF) and to co-chair its working
group on the Sahel. The GCTF provides members

21

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

with an action-oriented forum to enable them to work
together to identify gaps and mobilize the resources
necessary to build States’ capacity to combat terrorism.
(spoke in English)
Responding to the needs of victims is also crucial
to Canada’s overall approach to countering terrorism.
Our recently adopted Justice for Victims of Terrorism
Act provides victims with the means to seek justice by
holding the perpetrators of terrorism and those who
support them, including States, accountable for their
actions. Respect for human rights and the rule of law
frames Canada’s entire approach and underpins each
and every one of our counter-terrorism efforts.
The Council can rest assured that Canada is
committed to building on our shared successes and
contributing to our collective duty to combat the global
terror threat in all its manifestations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): At the outset, I would like
to convey Uganda’s deep sympathy and condolences to
the Government and people of Pakistan following the
recent terrorist attacks.
I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of Pakistan on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I also thank you
for organizing this important debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing this
morning.
Terrorism is a global threat to international peace
and security. This debate is an affirmation of the
significance of the Security Council and of its important
contribution to the global efforts to counter that threat.
The indiscriminate and callous acts of terrorism around
the world are a reminder of the vulnerability of all
States.
On 11 July 2010, Uganda was the target of a cowardly
attack by Al-Shabaab terrorists. That attack resulted in
the deaths of 78 innocent people and the injury of 200
others. Uganda continues to face threats from that group
and others, such as the Lord’s Resistance Army and the
Allied Democratic Forces which, like Al-Shabaab, is
linked with Al-Qaida.
Uganda strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We reaffirm that all terrorist

22

acts are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation or of who commits them.
Uganda strongly supports the full implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy as an effective framework in the fight against
terrorism. Since 1998, the Government of Uganda has
adopted several measures at the national, regional and
international levels aimed at preventing and combating
both local and international terrorism.
At the international level, we continue to support
the full implementation of relevant United Nations
resolutions, conventions and international agreements
to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
At the regional level, Uganda has strengthened
cooperation through frameworks such as the East
African Community, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the African Union.
At the national level, Uganda adopted an
anti-terrorism act in 2002 that established the legal
framework within which counter-terrorism efforts
are regulated. Uganda has also taken the necessary
measures to prevent its territory from being used for
cross-border terrorist acts. We have swiftly brought to
justice persons or entities participating in terrorist acts,
including prosecuting those involved in the July 2010
attacks in Kampala.
Uganda formulated and has been implementing
a strategy of public awareness and sensitization
through a police-led security education and training
programme since 2007. Tenets of the programme
include raising security awareness among the public to
enable them to appreciate, cooperate with and support
law enforcement agencies’ efforts to ensure safety
and security in their neighbourhoods. We continue
to organize counter-terrorism dialogues with various
communities, including in schools, shopping malls and
faith-based organizations, whereby those communities
are given a platform to discuss issues of concern,
including terrorism. Our experience has shown that
such meetings are very important in ensuring good
community relations and acceptance by the public
that law enforcement measures are appropriate and
proportionate. Those counter terrorism efforts are
conducted under an inter-agency body, which is
important for the synergy of efforts, coordination,

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

creating team spirit and ensuring effective resource
mobilization and utilization.
We have seen increasing levels of sophistication in
terrorist networks through their ability to exploit the
benefits of information and communication technology,
such as social media, and linkages with transnational
criminal networks to finance and promote their
activities. The strong links between terrorism and such
transnational organized crime as money laundering,
human trafficking and drug trafficking have become
a threat to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
some States.
Since terrorism and transnational criminal
activities thrive on the same vulnerabilities and utilize
similar actors, it is necessary for the United Nations
to support the implementation of counter-terrorism
measures that will sever the mutually reinforcing and
symbiotic relationships that exist or may emerge.
Our collective efforts should aim at denying
terrorists any safe haven, eradicating sources of terrorist
financing, reducing States’ vulnerability and enhancing
States’ preparedness and response capabilities.
Priority attention in the fight against terrorism
should be given to prevention. A comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism should support
addressing fundamental vulnerabilities such as
economic deprivation and weak State structures, in
order to effectively deprive terrorists of safe havens and
recruiting grounds and, in turn, strengthen the ability
of States to effectively counter terrorist threats.
Our collective approach should also place emphasis
to building national and regional capacity and facilitating
cooperation among States. That requires an effective
system to be put in place to provide technical assistance
for capacity-building that is responsive to the needs
of States. In that regard, it is essential to put greater
emphasis on fostering better information-sharing,
operational planning and initiatives that strengthen
regional counter-terrorism capabilities and cooperation.
Closer cooperation between the United Nations
and such regional and subregional organizations
as the African Union, IGAD, the Southern African
Development Community and the Economic
Community of West African States in counter-terrorism
activities is crucial. Such cooperation is an essential and
a necessary approach towards more effective counterterrorism measures.

13-20637

Finally, countering terrorism goes beyond the
individual abilities of any State. By working together,
we can counter and combat those threats. I would
like to reaffirm Uganda’s resolve and support to
contribute constructively to international efforts in the
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
represenative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate
and for the opportunity it provides Armenia to present
its views and reaffirm our united efforts to strengthen
dialogue and mutual understanding among States,
the United Nations and civil society in combating the
scourge of terrorism.
Let me join previous speakers by expressing our
deepest condolences to the Pakistani people with regard
to the horrific acts of terrorism of last week, which
claimed so many innocent lives.
The enormity of the threat of terrorism around the
world and its implications necessitate a multilayered
approach. Moreover, the strategy adopted to address
the problem can only be implemented successfully
with the coordinated action and support of various
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations that deal with
transnational crime.
At the national level, Armenia has developed
effective multilateral cooperation over the past decade
in the fight against transnational organized crime and
international terrorism. We work closely with various
international and regional partners, such as the Council
of Europe, the European Union, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and NATO, in such areas as legal
reform, improving national law enforcement capacities,
border control and intelligence systems. A network of
bilateral agreements has also been established with
many countries.
Unilaterally, we have adopted practical and
effective border control measures and demonstrated
our strong interest in acquiring the technology and
equipment needed to further enhance the existing
border security regime. However, closed borders with
some of our neighbours discourage regional border
security cooperation in this very sensitive geostrategic
area.

23

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Secure borders are particularly important in
volatile regions such as the South Caucuses, where stillunresolved conflicts have become a convenient excuse
for the accumulation of enormous amounts of weaponry,
very often in violation of existing international treaties
and instruments. Illicit flows of armaments, drugs,
terrorist groups and terrorist activities remain a matter
of concern in a very global sense.
Because of the transnational nature of the crime of
terrorism and the lack of regional cooperation, we have
to be vigilant not to allow the situation to be exploited
again in our region by radical elements for the purposes
of terrorist recruitment or provocation. Armenia also
believes that terrorism should not be equated with the
legitimate struggle of peoples for self-determination.
We condemn the use of State power and mercenaries
to suppress the exercise of the inalienable right to selfdetermination.
As we focus on a comprehensive approach to counter
the scourge of terrorism, given the fact that conditions
conducive to the spread of this international crime
include, among other things, prolonged unresolved
conflicts, we have to encourage public education
and awareness-raising programmes in conflict-prone
societies. The broadcast and dissimination of hate speech
on a State level, which we sadly continue to witness in
our neighbourhood, is a preludeto the incitement and
ignition of terrorism. That behaviour has to be replaced
by the promotion of tolerance and inclusive dialogue.
Such engagement and confidence-building measures
play a key role in the prevention of extremism and
the radicalization of societies and are a way forward
to advance long-term development and security goals,
which we all are committed to achieving.
In conclusion, I cannot but agree with the statements
of previous speakers that countering terrorism and
violent extremism is a shared mission, and we have the
tools and the political will to do that. The scope and
magnitude of this assault require an even greater level
of innovation and enhanced coordination of our joined
efforts in this critical area.
I would also like to take this opportunity once again
to congratulate the incoming members and to wish the
Council a productive year ahead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.

24

Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on Pakistan’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and by expressing our appreciation for the convening of
today’s important meeting to address an issue of special
importance and relevance to my country, Afghanistan.
I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate our
condemnation of the terrorist attacks that took place in
Quetta and the Swat Valley, which left more than 100
innocent people dead and many more wounded. Such
horrific incidents reaffirm the fact that terrorism is still
a formidable threat. That is why we all must redouble
our efforts to defeat this menace.
My delegation is pleased to know that the Security
Council continues to pay serious attention to the fight
against terrorism. In May of last year, the Council
held a high-level meeting on threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts (see
S/PV.6765). The outcome of that meeting underscored
the changing nature of the terrorist threat and the need
for a strengthened global response in dealing with the
problem (see S/PRST/2012/17). Today, more than ever
before, the fight against terrorism is being conducted
in a more results-oriented, balanced and integrated
manner.
Afghanistan has lived with, and suffered from,
terrorism for more than two decades. It was not too long
ago when Afghanistan’s territory was used by Al-Qaida
and affiliate groups not only as a site for brutal attacks
against the Afghan people, but as a staging ground for
terrorist attacks around the world. Over the past 11
years, since the fall of the Taliban, Afghanistan has
made important headway in its fight against terrorism
and in transforming itself into a more peaceful, stable
and democratic society.
Despite the progress made thus far, terrorism and
insecurity remain serious challenges facing the Afghan
people. The effects of terrorism resulting from attacks
on innocent civilians, including women and men,
tribal and religious elders, members of civil society
and even young school children, are felt throughout
Afghan society. Just last month, in another cowardly
attack, a terrorist posing as a peace negotiator carried
out a suicide bombing against our chief of intelligence,
Mr. Asadullah Khalid. Gratefully, the assassination plot
failed and Mr. Khalid is now recovering successfully.
Such acts will in no way weaken the determination
of Afghans to defeat terrorism and succeed in their
journey towards peace and prosperity.
13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Our comprehensive counter-terrorism approach,
which is central to our national security strategy, is
being carried out by our national security institutions.
At the operational level, scores of terrorists and
enemy combatants have been captured and brought
to justice. Through intelligence-gathering, we have
subverted hundreds of terrorist plots in various parts
of the country. Operating with increased capability,
our security forces are increasingly taking charge of
combat operations nationwide, including in counterterrorism operations.
Insecurity and terrorism are not only a threat
for Afghanistan, but for our wider region, which we
hope will be dealt with fully and effectively within
the framework of our joint efforts with regional
partner countries. We therefore cannot overstate the
importance of regional cooperation. Over the past year,
we have stepped up efforts to defeat terrorism, improve
security and ensure prosperity in our part of the world.
To that end, we are making important progress through
bilateral, trilateral and quadrilateral mechanisms, as
well as through regional efforts such as the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for
a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. We have enhanced
our cooperation with Pakistan in a number of areas,
including counter-terrorism efforts, in order to bring
about lasting peace, security and stability to both of
our countries.
Consistent with our struggle against terrorism, we
attach great importance to the body of legal instruments
concerning this problem. Afghanistan is party to
13 international counter-terrorism conventions and
protocols. In that regard, the relevant ministries and
governmental agencies are working closely towards
the implementation of national legislation. I would be
remiss if I failed to commend the respective important
work being done by the counter-terrorism subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council — the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities; the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). Afghanistan will continue to present
national reports with regard to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, conducted last June in the General Assembly,
marks another milestone in strengthening United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts and has generated
new impetus in the efforts of States against that global
threat. Furthermore, we believe that greater synergy
and coordination among the relevant United Nations
bodies and agencies will enable the Organization to
enhance cooperation as efficiently as possible, both
internationally and regionally. In that regard, we look
forward to further discussions on the topic of the
appointment of a United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator.
We also commend the important work being done
by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
Through various initiatives, such as workshops in
different regions, including Central Asia, the Task
Force is playing an important role in helping States
to build their counter-terrorism capacities. Another
important development was the establishment of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, in November
2012. We are confident that the Centre will go a long
way towards enhancing coordination efforts.
The Global Counter-Terrorism strategy underscores
a holistic approach in the fight against terrorism. Our
success is dependent upon the extent to which we are
able to make further progress in a number of areas. The
dangerous link between terrorism and transnational
organized crime must be broken. The problem of
terrorist safe havens, alongside the outstanding issue
of financial and logistical resources made available to
terrorists, has yet to be resolved. Those are real problems
that require real solutions. Moreover, we believe that
conflict prevention and resolution are essential facets
of the counter-terrorism effort. The United Nations role
is of particular importance in that regard.
In addition, ensuring job opportunities for
youth and poverty eradication will help curtail the
recruitment of new individuals to terrorist networks.
In that connection, we would like to highlight the
activities of the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs in promoting development for all. It goes
without saying that terrorism is a common enemy that
does not discriminate against any particular religion,
nationality or culture. Everyone is a target. We call for
increased measures to strengthen interreligious and
cultural dialogue and understanding.

The role of the United Nations lies at the core of
an effective fight against terrorism. The third biennial

13-20637

25

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, I would like to underscore
Afghanistan’s long-standing commitment to the fight
against international terrorism. As a prime victim of the
threat, we are well aware of its devastating effects on
societies, yet we are also well aware of the progress that
can be made in that regard through joint and concerted
efforts. We greatly value the support we have received
from our international partners over the past 11 years in
our struggle against the global threat, and look forward
to our continuing partnership with the international
community on the way forward.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Security Council for this opportunity to participate in
today’s open debate on a subject that is very important
to the international community and which Spain
considers to be an undeniable priority. I thank Pakistan
for organizing this debate and I wish it luck and success
in its presidency of the Council during this difficult
month of January.
Terrorism is a crime that must be prosecuted solely
with the instruments that are granted by the rule of law.
Criminal justice must act in its fullest capacity, always
guaranteeing due process. Spain is fully convinced that
the fight against terrorism and the strict respect for
human rights not only are compatible but also reinforce
and complement each other. Terrorism is a threat to all
that must be combated with efficacy. To that end, we
need a strategy that guides the actions necessary at the
international, regional and national levels.
In 2006, the General Assembly adopted the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by consensus in
resolution 60/288. National and regional strategies
are also necessary to help avoid duplicating efforts
and eliminate existing dangerous gaps. In that regard,
I believe that the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force must intensify its work in order to facilitate
a better integration and coordination of national and
international actions.
Terrorism must be condemned firmly and
emphatically, and we must accept no justification
for it. That is compatible with undertaking a serious
analysis of the origins of violent radicalization and the
best way to combat it. Combating terrorism requires
the indispensable cooperation of the police and the
courts. However, we must keep in mind that the current
economic and social situation in different parts of the

26

world creates very fertile ground for the development of
violent radicalization. We must therefore develop new
strategies that conform to a concept in which security
and development are closely connected.
The events in Mali are a good example of what
happens when citizens do not have recourse to a
reliable security and development framework, because
terrorist groups can then take power, posing a serious
threat to the country in question and the international
community with their mafioso behaviour. For that
reason, and in the light of that preventive concept, it is
very important that the greatest possible effort be made
at the international level to use instruments, such as
the United Nations Development Programme, that can
provide better technical assistance on the ground.
Prevention is a very broad-based concept that
includes the development of intercultural dialogue
and brings civilizations closer together as a means of
combating fanaticism. It is important, therefore, to
highlight the value of the Alliance of Civilizations,
which in a short time has become a multidimensional
instrument of preventive diplomacy, encompassing the
political, social, economic, religious and legal spheres,
and, in addition, attaches great importance to the media
and other forms of communication.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy must
also develop a responsible interaction between local
communities and police forces. It must also give special
attention to social integration at the local level, to
dialogue with representatives of religious minorities,
and to the responsible education of religious leaders.
In the light of the foregoing, Spain is participating in
efforts to distribute educational material in schools that
will help develop pluralism, coexistence, tolerance and
respect towards others. In that area, organizations such
as UNESCO can make a major contribution.
One essential area is the Internet. Messages
must be spread throughout the Internet that discredit
terrorism, stripping it of the supposedly glorious
and generous image presented in many forums and
highlighting its religious doctrinal contradictions. With
that in mind, it is important to give a special role to
prestigious personalities, the victims of terrorism and
certain religious leaders. To that end, it is necessary
to work with the private sector in research to develop
databases, encourage the exchange of information,
and appropriately manage borders and procedures
in airports and train stations. The relationship with
the private sector is also of utmost importance in
13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

guaranteeing the protection of tourism, of certain
infrastructure and mass events.
The victims of terrorism must play a central role
in national, regional and international strategies
because their stories carry moral weight and they
can be an effective instrument against terrorism
through their testimony and experience. A policy of
acknowledgement, support and assistance to victims
will be a strong factor in discrediting terrorism even
further.
Spain thanks the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force for its work in collecting and issuing
recommendations and best practices of States in
connection with victims. That work goes hand in
hand with that of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime with regard to victims and the response of
criminal justice to their needs. Despite the suffering
caused by terrorism in the past few years, it is regrettable
that there is still no binding international standard of
a universal nature aimed at protecting the rights of
victims. Spain considers it to be of utmost importance
that we promote the drafting of an international statute
for the victims of terrorism that would embody their
rights.
I wish to restate Spain’s firm and active support
for the Working Group on Supporting and Highlighting
Victims of Terrorism, which is a part of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, with a view
to carrying out the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. The Plan of Action on Victims of
Terrorism that was approved by the Global CounterTerrorism Forum (GCTF) at the High-level Conference
on Victims of Terrorism held in Madrid in July 2012
is a good reference point because it collects proposals
addressed to the members of the GCTF and to any State
that wishes to participate.
In conclusion, Spain takes this opportunity to appeal
for consensus in the negotiation of an international
convention against terrorism, which would be an
essential building block in fighting the scourge.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Mr. President,
Botswana is pleased to see you personally presiding
over the business of the Council today. I wish to express
my delegation’s appreciation to your country for
including this item on the agenda of the Council, and
my delegation is pleased to share its views on it. Let me
13-20637

also express my condolences to you and your country,
Sir, for the loss of lives as a result of the terrorist attacks
that took place in your country on Friday.
My delegation also aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Despite the challenge of resource limitations,
Botswana remains committed to the full and effective
implementation of its international obligations in the
fight against terrorism. Botswana joins the international
community in condemning acts of terrorism in all
their forms and manifestations wherever, however
and whenever they occur. There can never be any
justification for the motive behind such dastardly acts.
Terrorism remains a serious threat to national,
regional and international peace and security. Acts of
terrorism have shown that this phenomenon knows no
boundaries and that its impact is indiscriminate and
deeply wounds the soul of every society. The fact that
it is a violent form of transnational crime that thrives
on the proceeds of crimes ranging from illegal trade
to money-laundering requires the common resolve of
the international community to offer an effective global
response and action.
My delegation strongly believes that the
international community should move a step further
in its concerted efforts against acts of terrorism and
consolidate all 13 existing multilateral conventions and
protocols in order to intensify and harmonize action
against this scourge. That is the united action that is
needed to send the strong message to perpetrators of
violence and potential terrorists that the international
community is unrelenting in its commitment to
fulfilling its obligation to stop countless numbers of
innocent lives from being claimed by terrorist activities.
Above all, we need to strengthen the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in order to
stop arbitrary killings, the destruction of property and
livelihoods, and the spread of terrorism. My delegation
therefore agrees that the international community
should scale up its cooperation and assistance in
support of counter-terrorism activities, programmes,
institutions and training, which are usually lacking in
developing countries.
Botswana believes that the development of strong
institutions of governance, the promotion of the rule
of law, and the promotion and protection of human
rights serve as a useful foundation for countering
terrorism. The sharing of knowledge, experience and
27

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

best practices, including through the establishment of
unified customs systems and border control facilities,
could facilitate a seamless flow of information
among neighbouring countries. That is also critical
for addressing the problem of the illicit trafficking
of drugs, small arms and light weapons, the proceeds
of which cannot be separated from the financing of
terrorism and terrorist activities.
At the national level, Botswana has established a
national counter-terrorism committee, with the mandate
of ensuring the implementation of counter-terrorism
strategies. There has been steady progress in the areas
of legislative reforms and strengthening the capability
of the security apparatus to combat terrorism. That
includes the drafting of comprehensive anti-terrorism
legislation to deal with the threat of terrorism and the
creation of new institutions, such as the Directorate on
Intelligence and Security, the Financial Intelligence
Agency and the Non-Bank Financial Institutions
Regulatory Authority.
On the multilateral front, Botswana continues to
intensify its cooperation in the fight against terrorism
at the subregional, regional and international levels.
Botswana’s participation in bodies such as the Southern
African Regional Police Chiefs Organization, the
Eastern and Southern African Anti-Money Laundering
Group, INTERPOL and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is an additional effort to enhance
the implementation capacity of our national counterterrorism strategy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would fi rst like to thank the Government of Pakistan
for organizing today’s open debate on a comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism and for the related concept
paper (S/2013/3, annex). I take this opportunity to
express Switzerland’s sincere condolences and deepest
sympathy to Pakistan for the losses it suffered as a
result of the horrific terrorist attacks that took place in
Quetta and the Swat Valley on Thursday.
Switzerland condemns terrorism in all its forms and
rejects any association of terrorist acts with a particular
race, ethnicity, civilization, nationality or religion. The
manifestations of terrorism are manifold. Terrorists
arbitrarily kill or injure people and kidnap targeted
individuals for ransom. They destroy property and hurt
our economies. They seek to undermine the security of

28

aircraft, ships and nuclear facilities. The preparations
for terrorist acts, their financing and the recruitment of
their perpetrators take place both in the real world and
in cyberspace.
Switzerland fully subscribes to a comprehensive
approach when dealing with the various aspects of
terrorism. At the multilateral level, this approach is
best reflected in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which is the foundation of the
United Nations counter-terrorism programme. The
Strategy integrates four different pillars into one
common vision: the use of non-military tools, capacitybuilding, law enforcement cooperation and addressing
the underlying societal and political conditions that
are conducive to the spread of terrorism. The Strategy
also asserts that counter-terrorism efforts must respect
human rights, due process and the rule of law. Success
in the fight against terrorism depends on the equal
implementation of all four pillars of the Strategy.
At the United Nations level, such a balanced
approach should be systematically reflected in the
resolutions adopted by its organs, in the composition
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) and in the subjects dealt with by its various
working groups. The appointment of a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator remains a priority for
Switzerland.
A holistic approach to counter-terrorism is also
needed at the domestic level. In Switzerland, the
Counter-Terrorism Coordinator at the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs chairs the Interdepartmental Group
on Counter-Terrorism, in which over 30 agencies from
across the Swiss federal administration take part.
Since its adoption in 2006, Switzerland has actively
supported the integrated implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Together
with other countries, and in close cooperation with the
United Nations, in 2007 we launched the International
Process on Global Counter-Terrorism Cooperation.
The Process seeks better coordination of the national,
regional and global counter-terrorism efforts towards
the implementation of all four pillars of the Strategy.
Since the establishment of the Strategy, several
meetings have taken place at the global and regional
levels. Together with the CTITF, we are preparing
another global counter-terrorism coordinators meeting,
to be held in Geneva in June. By specifically focusing on
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and
on regional cooperation, we seek to better understand
13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

the complex reasons that make people from different
regions of the world become terrorists in order to find
appropriate regional solutions to destroy the appeal of
terrorism at the local level.
For Switzerland, a global approach also means a
close and mutually beneficial relationship among States,
the United Nations and other international, regional
and subregional organizations and institutions, such as
the new Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.
However, we cannot content ourselves with
international efforts. With the threat of terrorism
becoming more widespread and networked, we
must better integrate civil society in our efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism. Non-governmental
organizations, academia, independent research centres,
religious organizations and other social networks play
an essential role in advancing global counter-terrorism
objectives, even without openly declaring it. That role
can also be assumed in terrorist kidnappings because, in
our view, paying a ransom is not an option. Civil society
actors have a constructive role to play in preventing and
countering kidnappings for ransom in order to rescue
hostages and to ensure their safe and sound release.
We are absolutely convinced that States will be able to
prevent terrorism only with the assistance of societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. I will
make six brief points.
First, no country is immune to terrorism. Norway
experienced it in July 2011. Preventing terrorism
requires a comprehensive approach, including political,
economic, legal and military means. It is also necessary
to take a long-term perspective, while still addressing
urgent issues without delay. That is the essence of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as
pointed out in the background document for today’s
meeting (see S/2013/3, annex).
Secondly, respect for human rights and the rule
of law is the starting point for all our efforts against
terrorism, at both the domestic and the international
levels. In that respect, the strengthening of correctional
capacities, such as the judiciary, police and border
control, remains important to be able to combat
transnational organized crime and terrorism.

13-20637

Thirdly, we are pleased to note that the mandate of
the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions system
was extended for 30 months in resolution 2083 (2012).
We commend Judge Prost for her impressive work, and
encourage all Member States to give their full support
to her Office and to provide her with all relevant
information.
Fourthly, it is the responsibility of Member States
to take all necessary steps to counter terrorism. The
Nordic countries have provided voluntary contributions
through the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other United Nations entities to assist Member States in
their counter-terrorism efforts and in implementing the
Strategy. The United Nations plays a vital coordinating
role. Important steps have been taken by the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
particular, but there is a continued need to increase
efficiency and avoid overlap or gaps. It is also important
to improve coordination with initiatives, such as
the Global Initiative to Counter Nuclear Terrorism.
Therefore, we welcome the proposal to appoint a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.
Fifthly, a key element in the Strategy is to prevent
the financing of terrorism. We support the close and
constructive cooperation that has been developed
between the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Executive Directorate and the Financial Action
Task Force. The Task Force has developed practical
recommendations to prevent the financing of terrorism,
and we urge all Member States to implement them.
The recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force are also useful in the fight against international
organized crime, which again plays a role in funding
terrorism. Furthermore, United Nations organizations
must strengthen their financial and other control
mechanisms, especially in complex emergencies, in
accordance with international standards in order to
prevent terrorist financing or other illegal practices.
My sixth and final point is that, in certain
situations, counter-terrorism measures and strategies
constrain humanitarian action and can even criminalize
humanitarian activities. As set out in the 2010 report
of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2010/579) and reiterated by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,

29

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

the restrictions imposed by State and non-State actors
on personnel and humanitarian supplies are indeed a
major concern. Such restrictions include those imposed
by donor Governments in relation to certain armed
actors in armed conflict. We need to ensure clarity on
the part of States regarding the scope and applicability
of counter-terrorism laws and measures so that they do
not undermine humanitarian commitments and in order
to fully ensure complete and unimpeded humanitarian
access.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would first of all like to say how happy my
delegation is to see you, Sir, assume the presidency of the
Council. We congratulate you and thank you for having
chosen the very important topic of a comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism.
My delegation welcomes the convening of this open
debate, which provides my country the opportunity
to reiterate its firm condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and to reaffirm its full
support for the efforts of the international community
in our fight against the threats of terrorism and its
causes.
The comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
is of particular importance because the terrorist threat
remains very real, given the tensions and risks that
characterize the international and regional geopolitical
context and the presence of terrorist groups and
criminal networks, whose activities gravely threaten
international peace and security.
The situation in the African Sahel is a cause of great
concern to the region and the international community.
The serious and many problems facing the countries of
that region, exacerbated by arms and drug trafficking
and the emergence of new terrorist groups, are a threat
to international peace and security. It requires urgently
establishing a comprehensive, concerted and holistic
approach that tackles the root causes of the lack of
stability, including in the African Sahel region.
Tunisia, for its part, has always shown a strong
commitment at the national, regional and international
levels to tackling terrorist threats. That commitment
can be seen nationally through the adoption of a
multidimensional national strategy to deal with the
causes that promote the spread of terrorism. The

30

strategy takes into account the right of all individuals
to enjoy the benefits of dignity, justice and prosperity.
At the regional level, Tunisia has acceded to almost
all initiatives and actions on the issue, in particular by
ratifying all regional counter-terrorism agreements.
Deeply convinced that counter-terrorism exceeds
the individual capacities of a State or any international
organization, my country has also acceded to most
international treaties and agreements to combat
terrorism and continues to strive to meet its obligations
under the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Post-revolution Tunisia places a high priority on
protecting human rights in the context of counterterrorism measures and is committed to ensuring that
all of our counter-terrorism measures are in conformity
with our obligations regarding human rights law and
humanitarian law.
Just as terrorism has neither race, religion or
nationality, it is also multiform and ever-changing in its
manifestations, methods and means. Moreover, today
terrorism is also electronic. It leans increasingly on
new communication and information technologies and
evolves in tandem with cybercrime.
We believe that purely security-oriented and
sometimes unilateral measures have shown their
limitations. The worldwide persistence of political
injustice, the continued non-resolution of certain
conflicts, notably that in Palestine, increasing economic
disparities, exclusionary policies and the defamation of
religions are all factors that fuel hatred and the rejection
of the other, to feed extremism and to encourage the
indoctrination and recruitment of terrorists.
On this subject, Tunisia wishes to reiterate its
proposal for a United Nations summit to be convened
in the near future renew the contract of peace among
members of the human family and to solidify common
plans to fight all attempts to turn civilizations against
one another.
Today, the global challenge of the growing terrorist
threat can be addressed only by strengthening the
United Nations anti-terrorist architecture and by a
balanced and comprehensive implementation of all
the pillars of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. In that context, Tunisia stresses the
importance of strengthening the capacities of Member
States and their security institutions to effectively fight
terrorism, money-laundering, the illicit movement of

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

funds and arms proliferation, as well as their ability to
contend with terrorists’ use of new communication and
information technologies.
A global response to the challenge of terrorism
requires that we mobilize genuine international
solidarity, based on effective regional and international
cooperation and on unity among all international
actors — Governments, international, regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and the
media — so as to avoid a diffusion of our efforts and to
increase our ability to prevent and fight terrorism and
reduce its impact.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
want to thank Pakistan for its initiative in convening
today’s meeting and its Minister for Foreign Affairs
for presiding over it earlier today. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive statement.
We express our solidarity with Pakistan and our deep
sadness about the recent events there.
Terrorism is a threat to international peace and
security. That is why the international community
must intensify its efforts to fight it in a coordinated
and effective way. As we have made clear, Colombia
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
and reiterates that no motives or circumstances can
justify it.
The international community is endowed with
an ample legal framework in the matter, including 14
international treaties and four additional protocols,
as well as resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. We note the progress made towards
the universalization of that framework in recent years,
and we call on Member States to remain vigilant in
their effective implementation of those measures.
The ongoing efforts in the fight against terrorism
have highlighted the need for a more coordinated and
creative approach. Achieving that goal will require
us to address the complexities of terrorism through
international cooperation and coordination. To address
such a global phenomenon, the United Nations,
especially the General Assembly as its principal organ,
will have to act as a central axis of policy cooperation,
even as the Security Council, in the framework of its
mandate, must adopt measures to complement and
supplement international counter-terrorism activities
through its resolutions and subsidiary organs. My
13-20637

country supports all efforts to avoid duplication of
effort and to promote coherency and coordination
among the Organization’s various entities involved in
the fight against terrorism.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is the instrument that best reflects the
consensus of the international community, and its four
pillars must therefore continue to guide a balanced
response to terrorism. Building the capacities of States
is a fundamental aspect of global counter-terrorism
activities and should serve to support the development
of internal normative frameworks. Counter-terrorism
measures must be in full accordance with the rule of
law, due process and human rights. We must continue
to provide technical assistance to States to facilitate
national capacity-building so that they can implement
their international obligations.
Colombia reiterates the importance, as a central
aspect of the fight against terrorism, of adopting
measures to protect the rights of victims and of
compensating them for the harm they have suffered.
We must continue to work to ensure that victims are
heard and that States have appropriate mechanisms for
helping them, healing them and protecting their rights.
Fighting terrorism requires us to attack its fi nancing
sources. We believe that this should be one of the highest
international priorities in the struggle against terrorism.
Most sources of terrorist financing can be traced to
organized crime. In order to prevent terrorist networks
from tapping into the financial and logistical resources
that fundamental their activities, we must develop
comprehensive measures incorporating elements of
judicial instruments addressing transnational organized
crime.
Terrorist financing derived from crime opens
new opportunities for States to engage in effective
international cooperation in exchanging information
and intelligence. That is why we continue to work with
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to which we have made consistent financial
contributions. Late this month, our country will host an
international conference to develop national strategies
for the fight against terrorism, the purpose of which is
to strengthen countries’ national capacities and support
them in developing strategies.
No country is immune to terrorism, which is why
the international community must remain united in

31

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

the project to eliminate the scourge of terrorism in a
comprehensive way. Colombia will continue to work
bilaterally, regionally and multilaterally to achieve
tangible results in the fight against terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I thank Pakistan for
facilitating this important debate at a time when
terrorism is taking a terrible toll on the nations of
the world. I am particularly conscious of the terrorist
violence in our own region, and join other speakers in
condemning the recent violence that caused widespread
death and destruction in Pakistan.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We hope that this meeting will have a lasting impact
on strengthening United Nations counter-terrorism
initiatives and further invigorate the Security Council’s
commitment to strengthening international cooperation
in combating terrorism.
Given the ramifications of modern terrorism, the
United Nations must remain the most appropriate entity
to spearhead the global campaign against terrorism,
which targets mostly civilians, with women and
children being the main victims. The world has watched
helplessly, far too frequently, images of the shredded
bodies of innocents scattered around pockmarked
buildings. The United Nations must grapple firmly
with this hydra-headed evil and develop appropriate
multifaceted and lasting strategies. Our goal must be
to end or dramatically lessen the misery and human
suffering wrought by this scourge. We must not let our
efforts be diluted by exhaustion as we seek to create
a safer world for all. We wholeheartedly support the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Sri Lanka ended a terrorist conflict three and a
half years ago. We determined early on that no terrorist
group could survive for long without critical support
from international linkages and networks. We were
assisted substantively through complex, multifaceted
and comprehensive coordination with the international
community, and we will remain grateful to all our friends
who came to our assistance. While our security forces
confronted the terrorists militarily, after many efforts
to engage them in negotiations, a carefully developed
international strategy, which included financial
measures that denied access to funds collected overseas;
32

law-enforcement coordination, which included the
seizure and destruction of illegally acquired weapons;
and robust prosecutions and intelligence-sharing,
which assisted in securing the arrest and punishment
of fundraisers and arms procurers, contributed to
achieving our goal. Our efforts continue as the evil
minds of terrorist sympathizers devise new strategies
to pursue their goals.
The Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Secretary-General, other agencies of the United
Nations and the Member States themselves, through
the adoption of 13 anti-terrorism conventions and
other action plans, have made it abundantly clear that
terrorism, the terrorizing of civilians for political gain,
is totally abhorrent to the international community.
Sri Lanka continues to chair the Ad Hoc Committee
on terrorism, which seeks to conclude a comprehensive
convention on terrorism. We have also taken the view
that unless the underlying conditions conducive to
terrorism are addressed, the problem will persist. We
are glad that the Security Council has emphasized
the need to address the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism and to counter the forces that fuel
extremism.
Sri Lanka also continues to improve its own
capacity to fight terrorism by providing training for
law-enforcement and judicial officers in the areas of
intelligence- and information-sharing, investigation
skills, the gathering and analysing of financial
intelligence, and so on. We collaborated with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in
the hosting of a regional workshop for police officers,
prosecutors and counter-terrorism focal points in South
Asia, held in Colombo in 2010. The Galle dialogue,
hosted by Sri Lanka, focuses increasingly on the threat
of piracy.
It is well established that international linkages
and international networks help terrorists and
their front organizations to profit from human and
arms trafficking — a widespread phenomenon at
present — money-laundering, credit-card fraud,
weapons smuggling and cybercrime. Having been a
victim of terrorism for almost three decades, Sri Lanka
learned early on the value of confronting all those
aspects in order to address our terrorist problem. In
that undertaking, we were particularly assisted by our
international partners. Sri Lanka works closely with
the countries of the region, in particular Australia, in
addressing the problem of human smuggling.

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Sri Lanka wishes to underline that the root causes
of terrorism are complex and that terrorism cannot be
associated with any ethnicity or religion. Countering
terrorism should not be viewed primarily in a military
context. Sri Lanka’s decision to engage the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam terrorists militarily in 2006
followed their persistent refusal to engage in peace
negotiations and their ready embrace of unmitigated
violence targeting civilians.
Since the end of the terrorist conflict in Sri
Lanka, the country has prioritized rehabilitation,
reconstruction, reintegration and reconciliation to
achieve a sustainable peace. Through vast development
efforts, Sri Lanka has adopted measures encompassing
the political, economic and social spheres to ensure
that terrorism will never again find a foothold in our
land. Democratic processes have been re-established,
and local government elections have been held in
former conflict-affected areas after a lapse of three
decades. Sri Lanka embarked upon a domestic
process — the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
Commission process — to ensure that there will be
no recurrence of internal conflict and to identify any
infractions of the law committed during the military
operations.
The reconciliation process, which is very complex,
has been approached from different angles. The
Government has adopted an extremely conciliatory
attitude towards former combatants. Consistent with our
culture, forgiveness was the theme. More than 11,000
former combatants, including over 560 child soldiers,
have been rehabilitated and allowed to return to their
homes and communities. That was less than three years
since the end of the conflict. The Tamil community,
scattered around the world, is an important factor
in the reconciliation and reconstruction effort. Any
concerns on the part of the minorities will be a priority
as Sri Lanka seeks reconciliation. A political process,
through a parliamentary select committee involving
the elected representatives of political parties, has also
been initiated.
It is our hope that the international community will
maintain vigilance and not create opportunities, even
inadvertently, for terrorists and their sympathizers to
achieve through international mechanisms what they
were unable to achieve through bullets, suicide bombs
and shattered lives. The encouragement of one group, in
whatever form, will send a clear message to the others
to adjust their tactics.

13-20637

It is important that we soon conclude our
negotiations on the comprehensive convention on
terrorism. We note the discussions that have been
taking place since the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 51/210, of 1996, and hope that these will be
brought to a successful conclusion urgently.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba endorses the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Government of the Republic of Cuba reaffirms
its strongest opposition to all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
wherever and by whomsoever committed, whatever the
motives, including those in which States are directly or
indirectly involved.
Cuba likewise condemns any action aimed at
encouraging, supporting, financing or covering up any
act, method or practice of terrorism. Our country has
an impeccable record of fighting terrorism and has
never allowed, nor will it ever allow, Cuban territory
to be used to carry out, mastermind or finance terrorist
acts against any country.
Cuba has adopted and implemented legislative,
administrative and institutional measures aimed
at preventing and suppressing all terrorist acts and
activities and others directly or indirectly connected
with them, including those related to the financing of
terrorism, border protection and surveillance, arms
trafficking, judicial cooperation, and adherence to
international legal instruments on the prevention and
suppression of international terrorism.
Cuba has effective legislation against acts of
terrorism — Law 93, adopted by the National Assembly
of People’s Power of the Republic — which defines all
acts of international terrorism as serious crimes and
establishes very heavy penalties in accordance with
international obligations.
Cuba is a State party to 14 of the existing
international conventions on terrorism and strictly
complies with its obligations under Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
and other related resolutions.
Cuba is convinced that the only effective way to
prevent and combat terrorism is through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation among all States on the basis
33

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

of mutual respect, non-interference in internal affairs,
and the sovereign equality of States. We also believe
that the international community should not accept
that, under the pretext of the so-called fight against
terrorism, certain States commit acts of aggression
and interference in the internal affairs of other States;
commit or allow flagrant violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law; or carry out unilateral
acts that are contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles and norms of international
law.
Cuba has been the victim of terrorism. The Cuban
people have lost 3,478 sons and daughters as a result
of terrorist actions committed against our homeland
for half a century. Another 2,099 have been disabled
for life for the same reason. Most of these actions have
been organized, financed and carried out from United
States territory.
The arbitrary and unjustifiable inclusion of Cuba
in an annual list of States that allegedly sponsor
international terrorism, drawn up by the United
States Department of State on groundless pretexts
and without the slightest evidence of the participation
or involvement of our country in any terrorist act, is
a spurious and politically motivated exercise. Cuba
rejects as illegitimate the mechanism whereby the
United States Government arrogates to itself the right
to certify the conduct of other nations in relation to
terrorism and to issue discriminatory and selective lists
for political purposes, while adopting a double standard
by failing to prosecute self-confessed perpetrators
of horrendous terrorist acts against Cuba and other
countries in our hemisphere and allowing them to
remain free. The United States Government has also
spurned the cooperation offered by Cuba and failed
to respond to reiterated Cuban proposals to create a
bilateral cooperation programme to combat terrorism.
Cuba reiterates its denunciation of the most
notorious terrorist of the Western Hemisphere, Luis
Posada Carriles, who moves freely about the United
States under the protection of its authorities. Nothing
justifies the failure of the United States Government
to meet its international obligations to prosecute or
extradite that terrorist for his crimes. In documents
declassified by that Government’s Central Intelligence
Agency and Federal Bureau of Investigation, he has been
identified as the mastermind of the mid-air explosion of
a Cubana de Aviación airliner on 6 October 1976.

34

Paradoxically, the United States Government
maintains five innocent Cuban fighters against
terrorism, who have been arbitrarily and unfairly
deprived of their freedom simply for seeking, with
extraordinary altruism and courage, to obtain
information on terrorist groups based in Miami in order
to prevent violent acts and save the lives of Cuban and
United States citizens alike. Therefore, Cuba demands
the immediate release of Gerardo Hernández Nordelo,
Ramón Labañino Salazar, Fernando González Llort,
René González Sehwerert and Antonio Guerrero
Rodríguez.
The General Assembly is mandated to address
and advance the measures necessary to eliminate
international terrorism and develop effective
international cooperation to combat that phenomenon.
The General Assembly provides the proper framework
for achieving those objectives. Cuba reaffirms the
importance of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly in
resolution 60/288, as a primary instrument for guiding
States’ efforts in the global fight against terrorism.
Cuba endorses the adoption of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism that defines
terrorism in a clear and comprehensive manner,
including the activities of persons in charge of a
State’s armed forces and other acts not regulated by
international humanitarian law, and making a clear
distinction between terrorism and the legitimate fight
of peoples for their independence and in defence of
their right to self-determination. Such a convention
should eliminate the deficiencies and omissions of the
existing legal framework.
At the same time, Cuba confirms its conviction that
terrorism cannot be eradicated through war, selectivity,
impunity and double standards, and that there can be
no effective cooperation if only some terrorist acts
are condemned while others are ignored, tolerated
or justified, or if this issue is simply manipulated for
narrow political benefit.
In conclusion, I reiterate the willingness of the
Cuban Government to cooperate with any State in
preventing and combating international terrorism on
the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality and the
principles and rules of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
take the floor on behalf of the 15 States members of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Allow me to begin by conveying my
country’s congratulations to Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, and her
delegation on Pakistan’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. I
thank her most sincerely appreciation for her choice of
theme for today’s debate, which unfortunately spares
no region of the world.
We honour the memory of the victims of the bloody
terrorist attacks in the Pakistan province of Balochistan
and in the Swat Valley, which recently led to the deaths
of at least 100 people in the region.
The scourge of terrorism is present on the African
continent, with the Al-Shabaab network in East Africa,
Boko Haram in Nigeria, and a collection of other
terrorist groups associated with Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb that are most active in West Africa, the Sahel
and beyond, as stressed during the ministerial meeting
of the Security Council on the situation in the Sahel,
organized by the Moroccan presidency of the Security
Council on 10 December 2012 (see S/PV.6882).
It is clear that identifying a global approach to
fighting terrorism is the foremost concern of the States
members of ECOWAS. Indeed, since the beginning of
the crisis in Mali about a year ago, ECOWAS — through
President Alassane Ouattara of the Republic of Côte
d’Ivoire and Acting Chair of the Conference of Heads
of States and Government of ECOWAS — has called
the attention of the international community to the
threat to regional and international peace and security
posed by the presence of terrorist groups in Mali.
In that regard, we welcome the joint vision and
action shared by the African Union, ECOWAS and
the Security Council with regard to Mali, leading to
the adoption of resolution 2085 (2012), authorizing the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission to Mali (AFISMA). Far more than in the past,
we are all seeing on the ground the manifest effort
of terrorists to make Mali a safe haven for terrorist
groups and organized crime by using that country and
its vast territory to recruit and train terrorists, launch
operations across the world and then withdraw in total
impunity. The most recent terrorist offensive launched
last week in southern Mali confirmed the concerns
that have led the African Union and ECOWAS to stress
continuously to the Security Council the urgent need
13-20637

to adopt a resolution authorizing the deployment of an
international force to Mali.
Recent events clearly testify to the relevance
of resolution 2085 (2012), adopted by the Security
Council on 20 December 2012. The attacks carried
out by terrorist groups in southern Mali clearly pose
a direct, genuine and immediate threat to regional and
international peace and security. First and foremost,
they represent an imminent danger to the lives of
civilians and the territorial integrity of Mali.
In view of the situation on the ground,
ECOWAS — in its communiqué of 11 January signed by
President Alassane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire as Acting
Chairman of the Conference of the Heads of States and
Governments of ECOWAS — thanked the members of
the Security Council and the French Government for
their swift response aimed at stabilizing the military
situation in Mali and maintaining the territorial
integrity of that State Member of the United Nations.
Furthermore, the ECOWAS Committee of Chiefs
of Defence Staff are meeting today and tomorrow in
Bamako with a view to finalizing an evaluation of the
situation and developing a plan of operations for the
effective deployment of AFISMA with troops from
Nigeria, Senegal, the Niger, Burkina Faso, Benin and
Togo. In the light of ongoing events in Mali, a summit
meeting of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government is
scheduled to take place in Abidjan on 19 January.
ECOWAS considers France’s intervention in Mali
to be absolutely legitimate as, on the one hand, it
responds to the explicit request for assistance expressed
by the legitimate Malian authorities and, on the other,
it is aligned with resolution 2085 (2012) of the Council.
We offer our sincere thanks to France for its leadership
in managing the Malian crisis, as well as to the United
Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Germany,
Belgium and Denmark for their multifaceted support to
the operations under way in Mali.
ECOWAS condemns terrorism in all forms and
manifestations, irrespective of the motivation, and
believes that nothing can justify an act of terrorism.
ECOWAS backs the joint activities of the international
community in that context and fully supports the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
adopted in September 2006. Moreover, ECOWAS urges
its member States to adopt the Strategy’s Plan of Action
based on the four pillars of addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism; preventing and

35

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

combating terrorism; building States’ capacity to
prevent and combat terrorism and strengthening the
role of the United Nations system in that regard; and
ensuring respect for human rights in the fight against
terrorism.
Many members of ECOWAS have established legal
frameworks to combat terrorism, including the adoption
by some States of specific legislation on terrorism, as
recommended by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. Indeed, many international tools adopted
in the fight against terrorism have also been ratified by
ECOWAS member States in the context of their efforts
to adopt specific measures to prevent, identify and
combat threats of terrorism. Such instruments include
the 1992 ECOWAS Convention on Mutual Assistance
in Criminal Matters; the 1994 ECOWAS Convention
on Extradition; the Intergovernmental Action Group
against Money Laundering in West Africa, established
1999; the 2002 regulation of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) on the
freezing of assets and other financial resources under
the framework to combat the funding of terrorism; the
2006 ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons; the 2007 directive on combating the financing
of terrorism by member States of the WAEMU; and the
2009 Regional Action Plan to Address the Growing
Problem of Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime
and Drug Abuse in West Africa.
As has been reiterated many times, no State can
combat terrorism alone. That is why our approach must
be global. In particular, strengthened coordinated action
is necessary nationally, regionally and internationally.
In that respect, the support of the international
community is crucial, particularly through an effective
capacity-building programme to assist our States in
their resolve to implement the necessary inclusive and
integrated regional and global strategy to effectively
respond to the threat of terrorism.
In conclusion, ECOWAS cherishes the hope that
this important debate on terrorism will contribute
to further galvanizing the international community
around the need for the close and genuine cooperation
of all towards putting a definitive end to a scourge that
affects all States and undermines the foundations for
development necessary to ensure the peace, security
and stability of our States.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Saudi Arabia.

36

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on Pakistan’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am confident that
your experience and wisdom will enable the Council
to achieve appropriate outcomes on the sensitive
issues under consideration. Moreover, I express my
deep gratitude to you for convening this open debate
on counter-terrorism, and particularly thank Her
Excellency Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, for attending and presiding
over our meeting today. In addition, we underscore our
alignment with the statements delivered on behalf of
the Group of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
There is clearly no need for us to reiterate the wellknown fact that terrorism is a global phenomenon,
unassociated with a specific religion or race. Although
it threatens no specific country or region, it represents a
threat to the entire world; the international community
must therefore combat it with determined action and
cooperation aimed at achieving the desired results.
My country remains a leader in the fight against
terrorism. At the international level, the Kingdom
continually reiterates its rejection and condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
regardless of its source or objectives. Since 1963, my
country has acceded to 14 regional and international
agreements and conventions against terrorism and its
funding. Moreover, the Kingdom has implemented all
resolutions of the Security Council to counter terrorism
and its funding, including through the freezing of
assets, travel bans and arms embargos against all
persons and entities listed on the Security Council
sanctions committees consolidated list, and through its
close cooperation with other countries and international
organizations in the fight against terrorism. Those
include, in particular, United Nations entities and their
subsidiary bodies, such as the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and
the Working Group on Counter-terrorism.
I also recall the High-Level Meeting on Countering
Nuclear Terrorism, with a Specific Focus on
Strengthening the Legal Framework, which was held
at the start of the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly on 28 September 2012. In that regard, I take
this opportunity to commend the efforts of the Security

13-20637

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

Council, especially its Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), to control and prevent the
use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
their means of delivery to non-State actors, whether
individuals or organizations, who attempt to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer
or use those weapons. In that context, last year the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia contributed an $500,000 in
support of the work of that Committee. We reiterate
the importance of such resolutions in limiting terrorist
organizations’ access to weapons of mass destruction
and in intensifying the policing of providers of
nuclear services in order to ensure that they are not
providing illegitimate entities with nuclear materials or
technology.
As always, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
continued to undertake effective leadership initiatives
in support of international cooperation in combating
terrorism, in the form of the International Conference
on Counter-Terrorism, held in Riyadh in 2005 by
invitation of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,
King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. An idea
emerged at the Conference that is today a reality,
namely, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre,
which is now effectively and actively shouldering
its responsibilities in strengthening international
cooperation in combating terrorism. Saudi Arabia’s
support for the Centre demonstrates our commitment to
collective action and the maintenance of international
peace and security. Accordingly, we call on all members
of the international community to cooperate with the
Centre in providing it the benefit of their expertise,
which will in turn enable the Centre to achieve the
goals for which it was established. In that respect, I am
pleased to announce that my country is cooperating with
the United Nations on convening meeting, to be held in
mid-February, on cooperation between internationals
centres to fight terrorism in Riyadh.
At the national level, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has instituted several important measures and security
safeguards aimed at combating and limiting terrorism.
Those include establishing new security departments
specialized in counter-terrorism activities; enacting
and amending many laws, rules and regulations related
to combating terrorism; and strengthening rules
and restrictions regulating the weapons, munitions,
equipment and/or spare parts industry and the import,
sale, possession and/or trade in such weapons, so as to
prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has also tightened border
13-20637

controls in order to prevent the infiltration of terrorists
and arms smuggling.
However, my country’s efforts to combat terrorism
are not limited to security measures. Saudi Arabia has
been keen to address the ideological, economic and
social aspects of terrorism, as well as to compensate
the victims of terrorist crimes and provide them with
the necessary psychological treatment. In that regard,
we have established the Prince Mohammed Bin Nayef
Rehabilitation Centre, which provides counselling and
guidance to repentant terrorists, in order to reintegrate
them into the societies of their homelands as active
citizens. The Centre has now become a model for the
eradication of the roots of terrorism and its ideologies.
I would like to recall the outcome of the third
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which was adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session (General
Assembly resolution 66/282). While I reiterate my
country’s support for, and commitment to, all the
elements and pillars of the Strategy, I should like point
out that most international efforts have focused on the
Strategy’s second and third pillars, concerning ways
to confront and combat terrorism, build countries’
capacity and develop the role of the United Nations.
We are fully aware of the sensitivity of discussing
the first pillar of the Strategy, which refers to the
factors that lead to the spread of terrorism. But in order
to be fair and honest with ourselves, we must admit that
it is important that we look into ways to eradicate the
causes that lead to terrorism. Those include occupation,
oppression, colonization, ethnic cleansing, and, finally,
depriving people of their right to self-determination,
achieving national independence and meeting people’s
aspirations to freedom and dignity. In particular, they
include the aggressive Israeli practices perpetrated
on a daily basis against the Palestinian people in the
State of Palestine, which is still under occupation. It
is important to note that the acts of resistance to such
occupation cannot be classified as terrorism, because
acts of legitimate resistance are no more than a form
of self-defence against the systematic State terrorism
manifested through occupation.
With regard to the fourth pillar, which addresses
human rights, I would like to express our appreciation
for the efforts of Mr. Ben Emmerson, Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,

37

S/PV.6900 (Resumption 1)

particularly for his report to the Human Rights Council
on framework principles for securing the human rights
of victims of terrorism (A/HRC/20/14). We emphasize
that the fight against terrorism cannot retain its high
morals unless they are fully aligned with respect for
human rights. We also stress that combating terrorism
can never justify harming innocent civilians or
considering them mere collateral damage.
The President: I thank the representative of Saudi
Arabia for his gracious remarks about me. I would
also like to take this opportunity to thank all Council
members, and other Members of the United Nations, who
in their speeches today expressed their solidarity with
Pakistan and conveyed their condolences to us in this
moment of national tragedy, when we became victims
of terrorism. We appreciate their vocal expressions of
solidarity with Pakistan.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey,
who wishes to make an additional statement.
Mr. Şahinol (Turkey): The delegation of Turkey
feels compelled to take the floor in response to the
unfounded allegations made by another delegation
against Turkey, which we categorically reject. Turkey
will continue to stand by the Syrian people, who must
be the masters of their own future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
wishes to make an additional statement.
Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
know it is late and that we have had a long day debating
important issues related to our joint efforts to combat
terrorism. However, I have asked for the floor to make a
brief reply to two statements made during the course of
this debate, by the representatives of the Israeli regime
and Canada, in the course of which allegations were
made against my country.
With reference to what was said by the representative
of the Zionist regime, it is not really my delegation’s
intention to comment on such a rambling statement.
That regime is responsible for so many terrorist acts and
crimes that it would exceed the patience of this meeting
for me even to enumerate them. State terrorism, the
assassination of Iranian nuclear scientists, sabotage and
cyber attacks are just a few examples of that.
With regard to what was said by the representative
of Canada and the allegations raised against the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, I should say that, while

38

my delegation categorically rejects such baseless and
malicious allegations against an important segment of
the Iranian defence forces, it is a pity that Canada, based
on its narrow-minded foreign policy, once again used
this body to show its animosity towards Iran. Raising
such unfounded and baseless allegations against my
country is yet another politically motivated attempt to
deviate from the main issues at hand that we should be
discussing in this body.
Iran is a victim of terrorism and, surprisingly, some
of the main terrorist elements whose hands covered
in the blood of thousands of innocent Iranian have
been provided asylum in Canada. Not only is Canada
harbouring such elements, but it is also misusing
international organs, including this body, to hide the
true nature of its support for terrorism.
As today’s debate in the Chamber has made clear,
the fight against terrorism should be non-selective and
universal in its scope and applicability.
The President: The Security Council has before it
the text of a draft presidential statement on behalf of the
Council on the subject of today’s meeting. I thank the
Council members for their valuable contributions to the
draft statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
draft presidential statement, which will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2013/1.
It is so decided.
I wish to thank all speakers for their statements.
We have had a full and comprehensive debate that
has lived up to the importance and scope of the topic.
The condemnation of terrorism was unequivocal. The
determination to address and combat it was strong and
unambiguous. The importance of a comprehensive
approach for more effective counter-terrorism efforts
emerged as a prominent and recurring theme. I am sure
that many of the important ideas and proposals that
came up in the debate will receive due consideration in
our work related to counter-terrorism.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.
13-20637
