S/2020/1129

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 23 November 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia (on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam), the Niger, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in Libya”
convened on Thursday, 19 November 2020. A statement was also delivered by the
representative of Libya.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
President of the Security Council

20-15863 (E) 301120 231220

*2015863*

S/2020/1129

Annex I
Statement by the Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Stephanie Williams
[Original: English and Arabic]
Since I last briefed the Security Council, on 2 September (see S/2020/879), we
have made substantial progress in the search for peace and stability in Libya. After
many years of oppression, division, chaos, misery and conflict, Libyans are coming
together, for the sake of Libya and for the sake of their children and grandchildren,
to chart a Libyan vision for the way forward — one that holds the opportunity to
preserve the country’s unity and reassert its sovereignty.
As the de facto truce on the ground continued to hold, the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), with the support of the Council and the Berlinestablished International Follow-up Committee on Libya, facilitated open dialogue
to build stability, security and national unity among the Libyan parties. Those efforts
resulted, first, in the signing of a countrywide permanent ceasefire agreement in
Geneva on 23 October, with immediate effect. There, the 10 military officers who
make up the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC) set their differences aside and,
guided by their patriotic spirit, responded to the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire. This historic agreement provides for the withdrawal of all military units
and armed groups from the front lines and the departure of all mercenaries and
foreign fighters from the entire Libyan territory within a period of 90 days. In a
further show of Libyan determination, that decision was followed by two subsequent
rounds of discussions taking place on Libyan soil to expedite the operationalization
of the agreement.
In the southern Libyan city of Ghadames, from 2 to 4 November, I joined
both delegations as they developed the terms of a Libyan-led and United Nationssupported ceasefire monitoring mechanism to be initially established in an area
running from Sawknah to Abu Qurayn and Bin Jawad, in central Libya. In Sirte,
from 10 to 13 November, the Joint Military Commission established its headquarters
at the Ouagadougou Conference Centre. Participants identified the reopening of
the coastal road between Misrata and Sirte, supported by the deployment of a joint
security force as well as the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries from
the area.
I am pleased to report that tangible progress was achieved as part of the package
of confidence-building measures agreed in Geneva: flights between Benghazi and
Tripoli as well as to Sebha, Ghat and Ubari have resumed, and I am hopeful about
the reopening of flights to Ghadames soon. The exchange of detainees continues,
facilitated by The Elders and with the support of the Joint Military Commission. The
sharp decrease in the number of civilian casualties as compared to the second quarter
of 2020 is another stark reminder that when guns are silent, civilians are protected.
Following arrangements to remove foreign forces from the oil installations, the
National Oil Corporation progressively lifted the force majeure on oil installations,
ending the oil blockade that had been imposed on the country for more than nine
months. Oil production is now back to pre-blockade levels, at 1.2 million barrels
per day. Progress on a transparent economic arrangement for the management of oil
revenue would help support that very positive development. The resumption of oil
production, in addition to the ceasefire, created the conditions to address underlying
security issues. On 16 November, I joined a meeting in Brega with the Chair of the

2/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

National Oil Corporation and the eastern and western commanders of the Petroleum
Facilities Guard to discuss the unification and restructuring of the guard force.
In another sign of progress, on 13 October the Board of Trustees of the Libyan
Investment Authority announced that it would conduct its first comprehensive
audit since it was created in 2008. In combination with the ongoing UNSMILfacilitated financial audit review of the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya,
those twin audits will significantly increase transparency in how public funds are
being managed.
The high standard of professionalism and responsibility displayed by the Joint
Military Commission and the progress achieved on the security track paved the way
for the resumption of the political process.
Last week, starting formally on 9 November, I convened the first inperson session of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis, on the basis of
the Berlin Conference conclusions endorsed by resolution 2510 (2020). In the leadup, I separately held a series of virtual consultations with large groups of Libyan
mayors, women and youth to hear their recommendations and priorities and inform
the discussions of the Forum. I would like to reiterate the Organization’s and my
personal gratitude for the Tunisian presidency’s gracious hosting of the first round
of intra-Libyan political talks.
Among the 75 participants representing the main Libyan geographical, social
and political constituencies, 26 were elected by the House of Representatives and the
High Council of State, and 49 — including 16 women — were selected by UNSMIL.
I am pleased to report that discussions took place in a constructive and collegial
atmosphere, and I applaud the participants for their goodwill and perseverance.
On 15 November, the Political Dialogue Forum adopted a political road map
to presidential and parliamentary elections to be held on 24 December 2021. The
agreed document, entitled “For the Preparatory Phase of a Comprehensive Solution”,
complements the Libyan Political Agreement and sets general principles and
objectives guiding the transition period under reconstituted and unified institutions,
as well as the main time frames for the endorsement of a new executive authority
by the House of Representatives and milestones for the constitutional arrangements
and elections.
With a the date for the elections fixed in 12 months, the road map sets out
clear deadlines by which relevant institutions must take action on the appointment
of sovereign positions and the endorsement of the new executive authority, failing
which the Political Dialogue Forum will reconvene and take decisions, in line with
the Berlin Conference conclusions and resolution 2510 (2020). The Forum has been
mandated to meet regularly in order to monitor the implementation of the road
map with a view to ensuring that the benchmarks towards elections are met. These
mechanisms are set up to prevent a new open-ended transition and as a guarantee to
the overwhelming demand of the Libyan people for national elections.
Key human rights principles that emerged from consultations with civil
society actors, including women’s rights activists, were also included in the road
map, further serving to underpin a rights-centred process.
The Forum’s participants also consensually agreed on the new prerogatives
and eligibility criteria for the executive positions. Notably, participants agreed to
reform the powers and competencies of the Presidency Council and establish a
separate Prime Minister. A Government of national unity will be led by a Prime
Minister and two deputies, whose main mandate will be to lead the transitional

20-158633/33

S/2020/1129

period towards elections, reunify State institutions and provide security and basic
services to the population until elections are held.
I am particularly grateful to the women participants, who played a critical role
in the Political Dialogue Forum and made important contributions as bridge-builders.
They issued a statement outlining a series of principles and recommendations for
improving women’s participation in the political process and governance. They called
for better representation in political life and for the State to fulfil its international
commitments regarding the rights and protection of women. Their demand that
women should account for no less than 30 per cent of leadership positions in the
reformed executive authority was also echoed in the road map, attesting to the
leading role that women played in the dialogue. Next week, I will reconvene the
Forum virtually in order to continue talks on the modalities for the selection of
executive positions.
Libyans have made it clear: organizing presidential and parliamentary
elections is their demand and must be a common objective. The Chair of the High
National Elections Commission, Mr. Emad Al-Sayeh, confirmed that that sovereign
institution has the technical capacity to implement elections within an enabling
political and security environment, a feasible legislative framework and a timely
and sufficient budget. I am encouraged by Prime Minister Serraj’s announcement
on 16 November that the Government will allocate funds and resources for the
Commission. I trust that that statement will be promptly translated into facts, as
I believe that, together with the agreement of the Political Dialogue Forum to hold
elections on 24 December 2021 and the exceptional work led by the JMC on security
arrangements, there is now a more conducive environment for holding inclusive and
credible elections.
I also gladly acknowledge that the Central Committee for Municipal Council
Elections was able to continue with elections in another five municipalities, including
in Misrata, the third-largest Libyan city. I congratulate the Committee for succeeding
in holding credible elections with all of the necessary precautionary measures in the
midst of an ongoing pandemic and despite a challenging post-war environment.
More work certainly remains to be done, but the Libyans stood up and did
their part. We owe it to them that we do ours by fully respecting and supporting the
Libyan-Libyan agreements that were reached under the authority of resolution 2510
(2020) and the outcomes of the Berlin Conference. That includes respect for the
principle of non-interference in Libya’s internal affairs and the full implementation
of the United Nations arms embargo on Libya. The Council has tools at its disposal,
including to prevent obstructionists from jeopardizing this rare opportunity to
restore peace in Libya. I call on the Council to use those tools.
Allow me to reiterate that the situation remains volatile — there is no time
for complacency. While the Joint Military Commission seeks to operationalize the
ceasefire agreement, the two sides have not yet begun to withdraw their forces.
The Government of National Accord forces remain stationed at Abu Qurayn and
Washkah, with patrolling activities reportedly taking place. Military cargo flights
were monitored at Watiya and Misrata airports. The Libyan Arab Armed Forces and
auxiliaries continued to set up fortifications and military outposts equipped with air
defence systems between Sirte and Jufrah and in the northern area of Jufrah airbase.
Intense cargo aircraft activity was monitored between Benina airport, Jufrah and
Ghardabiya airbase. I request the Council’s support by enforcing relevant resolutions
pertaining to the arms embargo.
On the economic front, the negotiation of a durable economic arrangement
for the transparent distribution of oil revenues remains dependent on advances
4/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

made on the political track. Under the arrangements for resuming oil production,
the National Oil Corporation is holding oil revenue in reserve until an agreement
is reached. While the Libyan economic dialogue has developed policy options to
improve wealth management, negotiating such an arrangement remains challenging
given the polarization between the two executive polities.
The killing of Hanan Al-Barassi — a lawyer and vocal critic of corruption,
the abuse of power and human rights violations — should lead all Libyans to put
their differences aside and swiftly forge an inclusive solution to the protracted
crisis in order to restore justice and accountability and end the prevailing climate of
impunity. Her brutal slaying illustrates the threats faced and the personal risks that
Libyan women take for speaking out.
Many people remain arbitrarily detained in Libya, without the judicial systems
in place to challenge the basis for their detention. In addition, as the Council has
heard before, illegal detention facilities operated by armed groups are part of the war
economy, with torture, extortion, rape and other human rights abuses being used as
tools of control. I once again reiterate calls for all illegal facilities to be identified
and closed.
Humanitarian needs, compounded by the increasing impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, will remain in the near term, as agreements on the
ground materialize and the economy rebounds. It is estimated that, for the beginning
of 2021, 1.3 million people will be in need of some form of humanitarian assistance —
an increase of 40 per cent as compared to last year.
Following the suspension of hostilities, the number of displaced people in
Libya has decreased from 426,000 people in June to 392,000 people, but their return
to their homes has been slow, as basic services are still lacking. The risks posed
by booby traps, including improvised explosive devices, landmines and explosive
remnants of war, will continue to impede safe and dignified returns until all
contaminated areas are cleared.
This year, more than 11,000 migrants and refugees trying to reach Europe
have been intercepted at sea and returned to Libya, which is by all definitions not a
safe port for return. The numbers already far surpass the total for 2019. Hundreds
have paid the ultimate price, with more than 900 migrants and refugees drowning
or presumed drowned in the Mediterranean in 2020. On 12 November, three deadly
shipwrecks recorded in one day claimed more than 100 lives.
Migrants and refugees remaining in Libya have faced an upsurge in grave
protection risks and violations of their human rights. On 10 November, a 15-yearold Eritrean asylum seeker was killed, and two others were injured, when armed
men entered the property where they were staying and started shooting. The young
victim was awaiting resettlement out of Libya to a third country. That follows other
incidents this year in which migrants and refugees have been killed or injured; many
others have been arbitrarily detained. As of 8 November, more than 2,000 migrants
and refugees were in official detention centres in Libya.
The number of COVID-19 cases and deaths in Libya continues to increase
month-on-month. As of 15 November, there were 74,324 confirmed cases and 1,025
deaths. The first two weeks of November saw a 22 per cent increase in the number
of COVID-19 cases, with Libya’s biggest cities — Tripoli, Misrata and Benghazi —
witnessing the largest increases. With limited testing capacity and poor mortality
surveillance, the numbers are a fraction of what health experts suspect to be the true
scale of the problem.

20-158635/33

S/2020/1129

At a time when we need to focus efforts on combating COVID-19, the
continued closure of primary health-care facilities owing to shortages of health-care
workers, power cuts and the lack of personal protective equipment affects not just
the ability to effectively combat the virus but also people being able to continue to
access other essential health services.
Equally, a recent assessment of vaccines in Libya shows that supplies of
vaccines for common childhood diseases will run out by the end of the year if no
immediate measures are taken to procure and distribute additional supplies. That
will be Libya’s second vaccine stock-out in 2020. That means that many children
have missed or may miss their scheduled vaccine doses, which increases the risk of
outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases.
The United Nations and our partners are at the forefront supporting the national
authorities with their COVID-19 response, including by providing health supplies
and personal protective equipment, as well as capacity-building for health workers.
We are also providing support to alleviate the suffering of those most affected and
in need of assistance owing to the protracted conflict and socioeconomic impacts
of COVID-19, and we have reached more than 309,000 people with humanitarian
assistance this year.
I am optimistic about the way forward in Libya, yet clear-eyed about the many
challenges that lie ahead. Ten years of war cannot be solved in one week of political
talks, but we hear more now the language of peace than the language of war. For the
sake of Libya, 75 Libyans came together in Tunis last week in a good-faith effort
to start the process of healing their nation’s wounds. They sat, they talked — as
they say in Libya, “gamiz wa hadriz” — and they extended their hands, if not their
hearts, to each other. I have witnessed in the past several months the potential for
a paradigm shift in how the Libyan military, politicians and leaders view their role
in charting the country’s path forward, from one of a transactional power-sharing
arrangement in which the riches are divided up among the privileged few, to one of
sharing responsibility in order to save the country from further destruction. Only
shared responsibility nurtured by patriotism and love of country can lead to the
shared security and prosperity for which so many Libyans yearn. Libyans deserve if
not the support then at least the non-interference of the main international actors as
they seek to forge a sovereign political path forward for future Libyan generations.

6/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for her briefing. Belgium is grateful for her determined efforts
in seeking a political solution to the ongoing conflict in Libya. We witnessed several
positive developments in recent weeks under the auspices of the United Nations.
Those positive developments are a testament to the courage and determination of
the Libyan people in the search for a united, stable and secure Libya for all Libyan
people. I will quickly cover three points.
First, Belgium wishes to commend the Libyan parties on the signing of the
ceasefire agreement in Geneva on 23 October. The full and immediate implementation
of that ceasefire agreement is now essential. We call on all actors, both inside and
outside Libya, to play a constructive role towards a return to security and stability.
All mercenaries and foreign fighters must now leave Libyan territory, as stipulated
in the agreement. The arms embargo, which continues to be violated, must be fully
respected, in accordance with Council resolutions. In that regard, Belgium welcomes
the role of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. The
international community has a responsibility to oppose any attempt to reverse the
progress made, including through the use of sanctions.
The recent talks held by the Joint Military Commission in Ghadames and Sirte
with a view to operationalizing the ceasefire agreement are positive steps forward.
We encourage the participants to continue along that path and to make progress on the
various elements of the agreement, including the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of militias. The resumption of oil production is a positive development
and should benefit all Libyans.
Secondly, on the political front, Belgium welcomes the convening of the
first round of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis, as advocated by the
Berlin Conference and resolution 2510 (2020). We welcome the agreement reached
by participants on a road map towards credible, inclusive and democratic national
elections, which are scheduled for 24 December 2021. We call for those efforts to
continue to ensure that a Government of national unity is swiftly formed.
It is vital that women and women’s rights be taken into account in political
processes in order to achieve sustainable and inclusive peace. In that regard, we
welcome the positive role played by women participants in the Forum.
Thirdly, as long as the security and basic human rights of the population are
not guaranteed, there can be no democratic transition in Libya. We strongly condemn
the assassination of lawyer Hanan Al-Barassi on 10 November, which showed that
hostile forces continue to work against peace and stability in Libya. We therefore call
for an independent, impartial and effective investigation and that the perpetrators be
held accountable.
The assassination of Ms. Al-Barassi is not an isolated case. It is a heinous
example of the violence faced by women activists, such as Salwa Bughaighis and
Seham Sergiwa, which serves to highlight the importance of our doing everything
possible to deliver justice to the victims of those crimes. The International Criminal
Court and the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya will play an important
role in the fight against impunity in Libya, which is the basis for a process of
national reconciliation.
20-158637/33

S/2020/1129

To conclude, I wish to reiterate Belgium’s full support for the United Nations
mediation efforts in Libya. I would also like to once again commend the courage and
determination of all the United Nations Support Mission in Libya staff and the entire
country team. If we are to maintain the momentum and take advantage of the recent
positive developments, it is necessary now more than ever to urgently appoint a new
Special Envoy and UNSMIL coordinator for the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.

8/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
I wish to thank Acting Special Representative Williams for her briefing.
I commend her for the work she has done towards achieving peace in Libya and
expect that she will continue to contribute to peace, stability and development in the
country in her future role.
I also welcome Ambassador Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, to
this meeting.
The current situation in Libya is showing positive momentum, and the
international community should seize the rare window of opportunity to promote
lasting peace and sustainable development in the country. I would like to emphasize
the following four points.
First, we must ensure the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. China
welcomes the signing of the ceasefire agreement on 23 October between the parties
to the Libyan conflict within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.
We commend the political will shown by all parties to achieve a ceasefire, and we
thank Acting Special Representative Williams and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya for their work.
The ceasefire in Libya is an important positive result of implementing the
Secretary-General’s global ceasefire initiative and the Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020 initiative, which is good news for the region and the world. Only when
the ceasefire agreement is implemented effectively on the ground can the hard-won
peace gains be truly consolidated. China calls for the establishment of a mutually
acceptable ceasefire monitoring mechanism as soon as possible. We hope that the
United Nations and all the relevant parties will form a plan as soon as possible in
order to continue to play a constructive role and maintain and consolidate the current
positive momentum.
Secondly, we must continue to promote political dialogue. China appreciates
the efforts made by Tunisia, Morocco, Egypt and other regional and neighbouring
countries to promote intra-Libyan dialogue and welcomes the resumption of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum. The international community should fully respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Libya and insist on
advancing the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process under the auspices
of the United Nations. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s appointment of a
Special Envoy as soon as possible.
All parties in Libya should focus on the interests of the country and its
population, continue to build up mutual trust, resolve differences and reach consensus
on and implement relevant political arrangements as soon as possible. This relates
not only to the future of Libya but also peace in the entire region. At the same time,
economic development must be integrated into the political process in order to lay a
solid foundation for lasting peace in Libya.
Thirdly, we must resolutely combat terrorism. Terrorism in and around Libya
remains an important threat to international and regional security. The international
community must maintain a high degree of vigilance, strengthen coordination
and cooperation, jointly respond to challenges and resolutely combat all forms of
terrorism. Preventing the cross-border movement of foreign terrorist fighters should
20-158639/33

S/2020/1129

be included in the overall consideration for resolving the Libyan issue in order to
avoid a spillover effect that threats the security of neighbouring countries.
Fourthly, sanction tools must be applied prudently and steadily. We have
always believed that sanctions are a means but not an end and should always serve
the political settlement of relevant issues. Under the current circumstances, the arms
embargo should be strictly enforced, and any actions that aggravate conflicts, such
as military intervention, should be avoided. At the same time the implementation of
sanctions should avoid harming the overall national interests of Libya and the normal
livelihoods and humanitarian needs of the people, especially to avoid a negative
impact on Libya’s fight against the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The crisis in Libya has been ongoing for nearly 10 years, and there is now
a dawn of hope. However, the political process is still very fragile and needs to be
maintained with the support of the international community. China will continue to
work with all parties to help Libya achieve long-term stability and prosperity at an
early date.

10/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
At the outset, we would like to thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie
Williams for her briefing today on the situation in Libya.
In our first statement before the Security Council on the Libyan issue in
January 2019 (see S/PV.8448), the Dominican Republic praised the efforts of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for successfully
negotiating a ceasefire in Tripoli. We also commended the convening of the
conference in Palermo, Italy, in 2018 and highlighted the participation of Libyan
representatives, which demonstrated that there was a clear intention to make changes
for the benefit of peace and security in Libya.
In the months that followed, there were several times when the achievements
made up to that point seemed to be fading in the face of growing threats to peace and
security in the country. The high level of insecurity, the unacceptable humanitarian
situation of migrants, the poor conditions in the so-called detention centres, human
trafficking and the constant violations of the arms embargo and the illicit trafficking
thereof were all aspects of profound concern for the Dominican Republic.
All of those aspects are a constant threat to the protection and well-being of
the Libyan people. The ceasefire agreed in Geneva on 23 October by the Libyan
Joint Military Commission, under the auspices of the United Nations, revealed a
light at the end of the tunnel, harbouring hopes that this time the ceasefire will
be permanent.
Today we once again express our faith and hope that the current negotiations
remain on track in the political, economic, security and human rights spheres, with
a view to ensuring that the Libyan people may enjoy lasting peace and stability once
and for all after nearly a decade of suffering and armed conflict. In that regard,
we join others in commending the tireless work of Ms. Williams and the entire
UNSMIL team on the ground, especially in launching the first face-to-face session
of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis and in calling for a power vacuum
to be avoided at this critical time.
We are pleased to see the important participation of women in the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum, as we believe that women play a crucial role at the
negotiating table and in promoting peace, national reconciliation, justice and
gender equality. Given this vital momentum and having agreed on a date for the
next presidential and parliamentary elections in Libya, we remain concerned that a
Special Envoy is yet to be appointed.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has hit every nation in the
world, and Libya has been no exception. We call on donor countries to support the
countries hit hardest by the pandemic and its devastating consequences by increasing
their official development assistance and financial aid and debt relief programmes.
We reiterate our call that the vaccine and other health technologies necessary to
tackle COVID-19 be equitably accessible and their distribution guaranteed to
everyone on the planet.
To conclude, we would like to highlight our deep satisfaction that, despite the
countless challenges that still remain with regard to the situation in Libya, as our
Security Council membership comes to a close the Libyan nation appears to be more
determined than ever to use dialogue as the main weapon to achieve a lasting peace.
20-1586311/33

S/2020/1129

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for her briefing on
the latest developments in Libya.
I would like to express Estonia’s sincere appreciation of, and support for,
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and Acting Special Representative
Williams in having worked to facilitate the contacts and mediate between the Libyan
parties. That has been especially apparent in the past few weeks, following the
signing of the ceasefire agreement. The political process under the umbrella of the
United Nations and the Berlin process remains the only acceptable international
framework to support Libyans in achieving a lasting peace.
We commend the Libyan parties for coming together and welcome the signing
of the permanent ceasefire agreement on 23 October by the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission. The process that has ensued — the meetings on all three dialogue
tracks: the military, political and economic tracks — is indeed encouraging. We
call on all parties to continue on that path in order to fully implement the ceasefire
agreement and abide by all the political and economic commitments.
Equally important to the Libyan parties’ commitment is the support of the
international community. That means putting an end to all foreign interference and
the violations of the Libyan sanctions regime. In that connection, the European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI will continue to make an important
contribution to those efforts.
Support from the international community must also include ensuring the
departure of all foreign fighters and mercenaries who are present in Libya, as set out
in the ceasefire agreement. The only way forward is to allow for a Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political process to be implemented.
Estonia remains concerned about the humanitarian situation in Libya.
Migrants and asylum seekers are frequently subjected to violence, including sexual
and gender-based violence, and access to health-care facilities remains very limited,
especially in the light of the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic. We call on
the authorities to take concrete steps to allow aid to reach those most in need.
Moreover, I would like to stress that all violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law must be thoroughly investigated, and those
responsible must be held accountable.

12/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank the Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her briefing, but in particular for all of the
efforts she has made throughout her mandate, allowing for significant progress to be
made on the path to finding a solution.
With regard to security, we welcome the signing on 23 October of a permanent
ceasefire agreement that covers the entire Libyan territory. The discussions within
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission regarding the modalities for implementing
that agreement have enabled real progress. The reopening of coastal roads, and
subsequently roads in the central region of the country, could enable further progress.
That must be accompanied by the effective withdrawal of forces from the front lines
as well as other confidence-building measures, including a comprehensive process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of militias.
We call on the foreign forces and mercenaries present in Libya to withdraw
within the 90-day period stipulated in the agreement. The arms embargo must also be
fully respected, in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the Security Council.
The Libyan parties called on the Council to adopt a draft resolution to
guarantee the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. The Council must now
uphold its responsibility by authorizing the deployment, under the auspices of the
United Nations, of a credible and effective monitoring mechanism, including to
support the efforts made by the Libyan parties themselves. That is why we urge the
Secretariat to propose realistic but also ambitious options on this issue as soon as
possible. France stands ready to work with its partners in that regard.
On the political front, too, the progress made must be sustained. It is up to
the Libyans, and the Libyans alone, to decide on their future. The convening of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis and the continuation of those talks in a
few days’ time are encouraging. The adoption of a road map and agreeing on the
date of 24 December 2021 for holding the elections are important steps. The Forum
participants must now agree on the formation of a new executive responsible for
organizing those elections. No one should impede that process. Potential spoilers
will be subjected to sanctions.
We condemn the violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law, especially those committed against migrants and refugees. Those responsible
must be held to account. That is why, together with Germany, we have taken the
initiative to request the identification of migrant traffickers.
France strongly condemns the assassination in Benghazi of the lawyer and
human rights activist Hanan Al-Barassi. Such crimes must not go unpunished. We
welcome the strengthened cooperation between the International Criminal Court
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
France will remain mobilized to ensure that all stakeholders are focused on
the same goal of achieving peace in Libya. It is in that spirit that we announced the
convening of a meeting of Libya’s neighbours. The Libyan crisis has endured for too
long. France stands ready to continue its efforts, and the Council must play its role
fully in order to put an end to the crisis and support the efforts of the Libyan parties.

20-1586313/33

S/2020/1129

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
We are at a historic juncture. The breakthrough achieved in the Joint Military
Commission and the subsequent Libyan Political Dialogue Forum have demonstrated
that we are close to a Libyan-owned political solution, which will bring peace and
stability to Libya within the framework of the Berlin process and resolution 2510
(2020), under the auspices of the United Nations.
We welcome the ceasefire agreement reached as a result of the Joint Military
Commission talks. We call for the swift and full implementation of that agreement.
As an international community, we must respect the aspirations of Libyans to cease
all fighting, which includes full adherence to the arms embargo and — I want to
underscore this — the immediate and complete withdrawal of all foreign troops,
fighters and mercenaries. To make that clear, withdrawal means leaving Libya, not
rebranding fighters as alleged training personnel.
The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum was another step in the right direction.
Libyans are finally beginning to shape their own future. We commend all of the
Forum’s participants for their constructive role and commitment. We urge all key
players to stay the course and to continue to engage in dialogue with a view to swiftly
appointing the new Government. That also means that the Council’s message to
spoilers must be that spoiling the process has consequences. It also remains essential
to continue to pave the way towards elections. We call on all parties to the conflict
to support the political dialogue.
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has played a
decisive role in guiding those negotiations. Under the highly able leadership
of Stephanie Williams, the United Nations has demonstrated again why it is
absolutely indispensable. The progress we have seen is excellent news for Libya, the
United Nations and the Security Council.
Full adherence to the arms embargo will remain key to supporting the
political process. Violations must not be committed again. The participants of the
Berlin Conference are called upon in particular to make sure that the arms embargo
is strictly implemented. The Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, will continue to monitor the situation. We
thank the Panel of Experts on Libya for its excellent work and its detailed reporting.
All States Members of the United Nations must extend their full cooperation to
the Panel.
As a regional organization acting under resolution 2292 (2016), the European
Union will continue its efforts to implement the arms embargo through its Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, as mandated by the Council. Operation
IRINI has displayed the utmost transparency in communicating with the Sanctions
Committee and is acting in full adherence with the applicable Council resolutions.
The civilian population of Libya has endured years of suffering. We hope
that the ceasefire, political dialogue and the resumption of oil production will pave
the way to rebuilding the country’s infrastructure, enable an effective response
to the coronavirus disease pandemic and put an end to impunity for violations of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law. The perpetrators
of such violations must be brought to justice in order to enable a reconciliation
process. We will remain committed to increasing accountability and enforcing the
rule of law.

14/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

I once again commend Acting Special Representative Williams and the
dedicated staff of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, who continue
to work under exceptional and extremely difficult circumstances. Although
Ms. Williams has our full support at the top of UNSMIL, we look forward to a swift
leadership appointment.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, I regret to inform the Council that the presentation of the
Committee’s activities that was planned as part of today’s meeting had to be
cancelled. Owing to the blockade of one member of the Committee, we were not able
to agree on a mere factual account of what has happened since September. That is
very unfortunate and disappointing given the importance of the 1970 Committee’s
work in support of a peaceful solution for Libya. It is another lamentable development
following the failure to agree on the publication of the interim report of the Panel of
Experts in September. Those who are blocking even such small steps in the Sanctions
Committee must bear the responsibility for this.

20-1586315/33

S/2020/1129

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
It is my honour to deliver this joint statement on behalf of Viet Nam and
Indonesia, the two Security Council members from the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her briefing. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya, Ambassador Taher Elsonni, to this meeting.
Based on this morning’s briefing, Viet Nam and Indonesia would like to make
the following points.
First, we welcome the political and security progress in Libya, including the
signing, on 23 October, of the agreement for a complete and permanent ceasefire in
Libya as well as the Libyan parties’ intensified face-to-face interactions to pursue
its implementation. We also commend the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) for facilitating the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and its efforts to
establish a ceasefire monitoring mechanism. We urge the relevant parties to fully
respect and adhere to the ceasefire agreement and support its implementation. That
must include the unwavering commitment to upholding the arms embargo, in line
with relevant Council resolutions on Libya.
We further welcome the launching in Tunisia of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum and the agreement of the Libyan parties to move forward towards presidential
and parliamentary elections next year. Those positive developments clearly
demonstrate that the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process is the only
solution for long-term peace in the country. It is essential to preserve this positive
momentum, including by actively supporting UNSMIL. To that end, we reiterate our
joint call for the appointment of a new Special Envoy for Libya. That is long overdue.
Secondly, Viet Nam and Indonesia support the role of neighbouring countries
and regional organizations in promoting peaceful dialogue in Libya. As two SouthEast Asian nations, we fully understand the importance of regional and subregional
cooperation. ASEAN’s One Vision, One Identity, One Community is the result of the
sustained efforts of all countries in our region over many decades. With shared goals
and responsibility to our peoples, we have been able, and will continue, to achieve
a lot together, including ensuring regional peace, security, stability and prosperity.
Based on that conviction, we recognize and commend the neighbouring countries,
particularly Tunisia, Morocco and Egypt, for hosting the Libyan dialogues. We also
recognize the efforts of the African Union and the League of Arab States to resolve
the crisis in Libya.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation must be prioritized during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We urge all relevant parties in Libya to fully
respect international humanitarian law, immediately stop targeting civilians and
civilian objects, ensure the safety of health-care workers and allow unhindered
humanitarian access.
Further measures must be taken to protect vulnerable groups — particularly
women, children, migrants and refugees — from the negative impact of both the
conflict and the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, we express our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims of the tragic incident off the coast of
Al-Khums, Libya. We call on all international partners to continue to provide
technical and financial support to countries in the region through bilateral
and multilateral frameworks. We also commend the efforts of UNSMIL and the
16/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

United Nations Mine Action Service in addressing the humanitarian challenges
in Libya.
History has taught us that only through dialogue, not military scenarios, can
peace be achieved. As we move to the next chapter in Libya, allow me to conclude
with a quotation from Martin Luther King, Jr:
“Peace cannot be kept by force; it can only be achieved by understanding.
Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive
out hate; only love can do that.”

20-1586317/33

S/2020/1129

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
At the outset, I should like to express my sincere gratitude to Ms. Stephanie
Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, for her
enlightening briefing as well as her personal efforts for the stabilization of Libya. I
also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya to this meeting.
Our meeting today takes place against the backdrop of the recent positive
political and security developments in Libya, in particular the signing of the ceasefire
agreement on 23 October. The Niger welcomes that progress, which illustrates the
willingness of Libyans to move forward. The agreement is also the culmination
of the shared and complementary commitments of several actors, including the
United Nations.
My delegation would like to reiterate its appreciation for the tangible efforts of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and its Head, Ms. Stephanie Williams, as
well as neighbouring countries and regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the European Union, in promoting peaceful
dialogue. The rounds of talks held in Morocco between the Libyan delegations of the
High Council of State based in Tripoli and the Parliament based in Tobruk, as well as
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum convened in Tunis, are to be welcomed, as they
have contributed greatly to instigating the current positive momentum.
We are encouraged by the efforts and determination shown by Libyans
during the recent consultations of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in Ghadames
regarding the implementation of the 23 October ceasefire agreement. That is a
decisive step towards the stabilization of Libya, but one that will be a genuine sign
of progress only if accompanied by the departure of foreign forces and the cessation
of external interference.
The Niger welcomes the creation by the Secretariat of an inter-agency planning
team for Libya with a view to supporting the implementation of the prospective
ceasefire monitoring mechanism in an integrated and timely manner. We call on
the Libyan parties concerned to fully implement the ceasefire agreement, respect
international humanitarian law and continue efforts to achieve concrete results
through political, economic and military dialogues, in line with resolution 2510 (2020).
The Niger is also encouraged by the announcement regarding the organization
of elections in December 2021. We call on the international community, and the
United Nations in particular, to take early measures to support the electoral process,
which will undoubtedly constitute an important milestone on the path to normalizing
the situation in Libya. In respect of the belligerents, we believe that true legitimacy
is obtained through the ballot box and not through external alliances, which cannot
replace the dialogue among the daughters and sons of Libya.
At the economic level, the serious consequences of the conflict have led to
a deterioration in living conditions and reduced Libya’s once-legendary ability to
provide other aspects, beyond basic social services, that foster the development of
its population. The fall in oil production has been a major contribution to that issue.
We therefore welcome the fact that all petroleum facilities have reopened and that
according to the National Oil Corporation, production has increased and now stands
at 1 million barrels a day. We hope that the resumption of normal oil production will
serve to meet the urgent needs of Libyans across the country.
18/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

We remain concerned about the humanitarian situation in Libya. The
coronavirus disease pandemic continues to wreak havoc across a country where
the violence has also damaged the health-care infrastructure. What is even more
worrying is that there are currently more than 70,885 confirmed cases, including 970
deaths. In that context, special attention should be given to the situation of African
migrants in detention camps, who are often used as fighters or human shields by the
various armed groups in the country. It is regrettable that despite that real danger,
more than 11,000 people have been returned to Libya and are at risk of being exposed
to human rights violations, detention, abuse, trafficking and exploitation, as has
been documented by the United Nations.
I would like to end with an expression of hope. Today we sense that Libyans,
like their supporters, have realized that military options will not work. That is
certainly why notable progress is being made on the political front, with the launch
of discussions, on the military front, with a ceasefire agreement that is more or less
holding up and on the economic front, with the collegial management of revenues
from oil, whose production has been significantly ramped up. It is high time that we
left it up to Libyans to discuss their country’s destiny among themselves. We should
let them stop fighting and start debating.

20-1586319/33

S/2020/1129

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing today on the situation
in Libya.
It has been our consistent position that the Libyan crisis can be resolved only
by peaceful political and diplomatic means. We welcome the fact that the period of
armed confrontation and fratricidal hostilities that has been tearing Libya apart since
its statehood was destroyed in 2011 has given way to a phase of negotiations. Our
principled approach to achieving settlement in Libya is based on the need to ensure
that Libyans themselves make their own decisions without external interference.
We have promoted the idea in various international forums that any proposals
or initiatives must be approved by the Libyans themselves. When that condition
is met, the chances of reaching a consensus and advancing the political process
increase significantly.
We commend the ceasefire agreement reached by the Libyan parties
within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. In the interests of
strengthening that agreement, discussions are continuing on mutual confidencebuilding measures, including with regard to civilians. We welcome the steps taken to
restore road connections and resume flights between the country’s various regions.
Those decisions will help to normalize the lives of ordinary citizens and ensure the
provision of humanitarian assistance. The unification of the country’s security forces
is another essential element, as is making arrangements for the stable functioning of
the oil industry, on the understanding that the country’s natural resources belong to
all Libyans.
However, we are concerned about the reports of continuing violations of the
Libyan arms embargo. We believe that supplies of weapons and the introduction of
mercenaries fuel the conflict. That must end, especially since any provocations could
disrupt the current ceasefire. The weapons that have continued to flow into Libya
since 2011 create the conditions for spreading the threat of terrorism throughout the
entire African continent.
We believe that in the current critical situation, the States that can influence
the parties in Libya should encourage them to work for further de-escalation. We
have maintained a dialogue with all parties in Libya and continue to encourage them
in constructive approaches.
We closely monitored the progress made in the first round of talks in the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, convened in Tunis under the auspices of the
United Nations. The parties arrived at specific agreements on the principles of
the transition period. However, they still have to some important issues to deal
with concerning the parameters for forming effective national authorities capable
of ensuring the country’s unity. We believe that national dialogue requires the
representation of the broadest possible spectrum of Libyan groups. That will help to
ensure that Libya’s entire population accepts the agreements while safeguarding the
country against further ordeals.
The United Nations has played the central role in achieving a settlement in
Libya. We are grateful to Ms. Williams for her efforts, but at the same time we
call on the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Envoy as soon as possible. That
process has been unjustifiably prolonged.
20/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex XI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
I thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her briefing. We welcome the Permanent Representative
of Libya to this meeting.
We commend the positive developments unfolding in Libya. They are a
testament to the fact that the only possible solution to the conflict is through an
all-inclusive inter-Libyan political process that avoids threats of violence or
the use of force. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes in particular the
signing on 23 October of a permanent ceasefire agreement. We look forward to its
implementation and to receiving the Secretary-General’s interim report by the end of
the year on the options for monitoring the ceasefire. It has been and will always be
our bedrock conviction that dialogue and diplomacy are the only means of achieving
durable peace, stability and prosperity for all Libyans.
The progress that we are witnessing in Libya is the result of the resolve,
willingness and determination of the Libyan people, who yearn for a better future.
That progress has been facilitated by the complementary role of the international
community, specifically under the auspices of the United Nations three-point plan. The
international community must support the Libyan people in meeting their challenges
head-on, while respecting the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that
regard, we applaud the work of Acting Special Representative Williams and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to advance the political dialogue, and we
reiterate the need to appoint a Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
order to consolidate the meaningful gains achieved so far.
We also commend Libya’s neighbouring countries for their constructive
efforts, of which the most recent was the in-person Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
held in Tunisia. We noted with satisfaction the participation of women and youth in
the Forum and emphasize their critical importance to Libya’s rebuilding process.
We look forward to the implementation of the Forum’s outcomes and reiterate our
support for the upcoming dialogue processes and other positive initiatives, including
the Libyan national reconciliation conference.
Reversing the gains and losing the current momentum would be debilitating.
We therefore urge all parties to fulfil their obligations and fully adhere to international
law, including by strictly complying with the arms embargo. We encourage the
countries involved to act responsibly and guard against undermining the political
process in Libya.
We also recognize the dire humanitarian challenges facing Libya, which have
been further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. In that context, we
stress the importance of abiding by international humanitarian and human rights
law. There can be no impunity in Libya for the atrocities committed over the
years. In in that regard, we reiterate our support for the Human Rights Council’s
International Fact-Finding Mission on Libya in investigating atrocity crimes and
ensuring accountability.
Likewise, we urge the Libyan authorities to facilitate safe humanitarian access
in order to address the difficulties facing refugees and migrants, especially those in
detention centres. In keeping with the Secretary-General’s previous observations that
Libya remains an unsafe port for the return of migrants and refugees, we emphasize
that their safety and dignity should be the top priority at all points of interception,
rescue, disembarkation and beyond.
20-1586321/33

S/2020/1129

Amid the most difficult and challenging times, Libyans are providing hope
and optimism for the future of the country through the dialogue process. We
therefore encourage all Libyans to stay the course and all stakeholders to the peace
process to intensify their efforts in order to assist Libya in meeting its challenges.
The difficulties facing Libya at this juncture are tremendous but not insurmountable.
In conjunction with the United Nations, the African Union, the European Union
and neighbouring countries, Libya has the support necessary to overcome the
impediments to the ennobling of its people. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
remains in solidarity with the Libyan people.

22/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
Let me begin by thanking Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her briefing, as well as her tireless
efforts and sustained diplomatic shuttling between the Libyan parties. Her wideranging and consistent consultations with all actors in Libya testify to the fact that
women can lead when given the opportunity to do so.
Ms. Williams has given pride to millions of women everywhere, especially
this year as we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of
the United Nations — towards the future we want.
We also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya, Mr. Taher Elsonni,
to this meeting, and look forward to his briefing on the latest developments in
his homeland.
South Africa is encouraged by the recent positive developments in Libya,
which we believe have initiated a process for leading Libyans on a positive
trajectory. We therefore encourage the parties to continue the positive momentum
in the interest of all Libyans. In that regard, my remarks this morning will focus
on three points: security developments, the political track and the economic and
humanitarian situation.
First, South Africa welcomes the progress made in Libya following the signing
of the ceasefire agreement on 23 October and the continued in-person engagement
of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission to give practical expression to the agreement.
We welcome the relative calm and the cessation of hostilities that have resulted
from the holding ceasefire. We are also encouraged by the prevailing amicable and
harmonious conduct of the parties to the negotiations.
Those developments build trust and confidence in the process as it unfolds,
and we must sustain that momentum going forward, reaffirming that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in Libya. That has proven to be self-evident, as the
drawn-out conflict brought no benefit for the people of Libya but only destruction
and unnecessary suffering. Instead, the constructive discussions we have witnessed
have paved the way towards a political road map that should ultimately contribute to
a peaceful and sustainable political solution. In that regard, South Africa wishes to
reiterate that an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process is essential
to building a sustainable political solution.
Secondly, South Africa believes that united institutions in Libya must form
the basis for the restoration of justice and accountability for all Libyan citizens, and
we continue to express our full support for the United Nations three-step political
process, as during the United Nations-led Berlin process.
We welcome the resumption of the in-person Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
launched in Tunis on 9 November and express our appreciation to the Government
of Tunisia for supporting the Libyan people in their quest for peace and stability.
Those talks are significant and have led to agreements being reached on critical
decisions, including the holding of elections on 24 December 2021, the opening
of airports and the resumption of local flights, the opening of roads linking cities
and the establishment of a joint force to protect oil facilities and infrastructure. We
express our full support for those talks as the parties move ever closer to creating a
road map for free, fair and credible parliamentary and presidential elections.
20-1586323/33

S/2020/1129

In that regard, South Africa reiterates its support for the ongoing efforts
of the African Union (AU) through its Peace and Security Council and the Highlevel Committee on Libya and its Contact Group, as well as the work of the AU
Special Envoy for Libya, as they continue to engage with the main stakeholders in
the country. We believe that the efforts of the United Nations and the African Union
should work in unison in order to achieve the common goal of ending the conflict
in Libya.
Thirdly, we must all bear in mind that if the conflict in Libya continues, it will
lead only to a further deterioration of the humanitarian and economic conditions,
made worse by the coronavirus disease pandemic. South Africa is therefore deeply
concerned about the devastation and humanitarian damage that the conflict has
already wrought.
We welcome the resumption of oil production and exports for the benefit of
all Libyans. We are pleased to note that oil production has now reached 1 million
barrels per day, which will increase revenue and alleviate some of Libya’s economic
suffering. We also welcome the efforts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya to ensure that all Libyans do in fact benefit
and that the arms embargo is respected, in order reduce the possibility of fuelling
further conflict. In that regard, we call for an end to all foreign interference in Libya,
as it not only prolongs the suffering resulting from continued armed conflict but also
threatens the sovereignty of Libya and the efforts to unify State authority.
Much remains to be done to consolidate this positive start towards ensuring
sustainable peace, security and development in Libya. It will be important to put
in place a ceasefire monitoring and verification mechanism to help to preserve the
current relative calm and prevent any further violence. Verifying the repatriation of
foreign fighters, along with all their equipment and arms should form an important
part of that process. It is also necessary to remove all landmines around cities,
service points and infrastructure.
As for the path ahead, in terms of the political dialogue and putting the
constitutional framework in place for the eventual holding of elections, we call on
all parties as well as the United Nations and the AU and their partners to make every
effort to start that work as soon as possible so that elections can take place as agreed
by the parties.
We believe that those steps can take place concurrently with the African
Union’s efforts to convene an intra-Libyan reconciliation conference in Addis
Ababa, which will be key to bringing Libyans together and healing the country. In
that regard, South Africa would like to call on the Secretary-General to appoint a
Special Envoy without delay to oversee and support the political process in Libya, in
accordance with resolution 2542 (2020).
In conclusion, we are confident that the Libyan people will soon deliver
themselves from the near-decade-old tumult and armed conflict, through
sustained inclusive political dialogue with the coordinated support of the
international community.

24/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, we would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her helpful
briefing and her valued and vigorous efforts to advance a political settlement in
Libya. We also thank the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya for capably steering the work of the Committee, and
we look forward to his briefing to the Council at the earliest opportunity.
We should also acknowledge the support of the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat in launching the three tracks established at the Berlin Conference, as
well as the support of all international and regional actors for the recent positive
developments in Libya.
Tunisia closely followed the negotiations that it hosted between 9 and
15 November as part of the first round of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum held
under the auspices of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Tunisia lauds the positive and constructive atmosphere of the Forum and the clear
commitment of all participants to a logic of dialogue, consensus and patriotic spirit,
all of which attested to their firm belief that it is essential to act quickly to end the
suffering of the Libyan people and bring about a comprehensive political settlement.
Tunisia enthusiastically welcomes the outcomes of the Forum and acknowledges
the important consensus that was reached and the steps that were taken towards
developing a road map for resolving the crisis, including the agreement on holding
elections on 24 December 2021, as well as defining and consolidating the powers
of the executive branch. Tunisia also applauds the extent to which Libyan women
participated in this dialogue and hopes that they will be encouraged to participate in
all ongoing tracks.
Tunisia hopes that the process will build on the outcomes of the Forum in
order to resolve the crisis. We call on all the Libyan parties to retain the same positive
spirit as they work to achieve the desired goals as soon as possible, thereby fulfilling
the Libyan people’s desire to restore security and stability and to devote themselves
to the work of building and developing their country in an atmosphere of respect for
Libyan unity and sovereignty.
Tunisia also reiterates that it is firmly committed to continuing to assist the
efforts of UNSMIL to promote a peaceful, lasting political settlement of the crisis,
and that it stands ready to increase its assistance in order to ensure that the upcoming
rounds of dialogue are fruitful.
Tunisia notes with satisfaction the commitment of the Libyan parties to the
ceasefire that was signed on 23 October in the context of the work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, which is a symbol of the unification of Libyan institutions.
Tunisia also welcomes the rounds that followed the signing of the ceasefire agreement
in line with Security Council resolution 2542 (2020) and looks forward to the report
of the Secretary-General on potential mechanisms to monitor the ceasefire.
Tunisia urges all stakeholders to work to implement all the provisions of the
agreement, including the stipulation that all mercenaries and foreign fighters shall
depart from the Libyan territories in accordance with the agreed time frame because
of the threat that they pose to the security and stability of Libya and the entire region.
We underscore the responsibility of the Security Council in this regard. We also
reiterate our call to all parties to commit fully to complying with the arms embargo
on Libya and to refrain from interfering in the country’s internal affairs.
20-1586325/33

S/2020/1129

We would like to emphasize that all the tracks emanating from the Berlin
Conference should be coherent, so as to ensure that the new phase is grounded in the
path to a comprehensive political settlement and avoid a reversal of the gains already
made. We also stress that all Libyan parties must take responsibility, commit to a
political solution, uphold the best interests of the country, restore the political and
social milieu and promote an inclusive discourse.
Tunisia emphasizes the need to comply with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in Libya. In particular, we call for the situation
of migrants and refugees to be addressed and for enhanced accountability, in order
to eliminate impunity for grave violations and crimes committed in Libya, including
the mass graves discovered in Tarhunah and summary executions and assassinations.
In closing, my delegation joins the preceding speakers in emphasizing the need
to swiftly appoint a United Nations envoy for Libya and a coordinator for UNSMIL,
which will be an important pillar of United Nations and international efforts to
advance the political process and help the Libyan parties move forward along the
tracks of military, political and economic dialogue and strengthen confidencebuilding measures.

26/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex XIV
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I would like to start by thanking Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Stephanie Williams for what may be her final briefing to
the Council in that capacity. Her expert leadership of the dedicated team of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and her exceptional personal
efforts have facilitated significant progress towards peace in Libya, perhaps more
than we thought was possible earlier this year. We thank her for all she has done.
The United Kingdom welcomes the agreement reached a few days ago by the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum on a political road map, including for elections to
be held in December 2021. Libyans now have a shared sense of political direction
for the first time in years. I want to pay tribute to the important role played by
women participants in the Forum. We welcome the courage of the Libyan parties in
agreeing to a nationwide ceasefire and the early progress made in implementing the
agreement, particularly the sense of common endeavour that members of the Joint
Military Commission have created and the momentum that they have maintained,
including through their most recent meeting. As Ms. Williams highlighted, though,
much remains to be done.
The ceasefire agreement between the Libyan parties specifies that within a
period of three months of the agreement being signed, all mercenaries and foreign
fighters shall depart from the Libyan territories, land, air and sea, and that until a new
unified Government assumes its functions, military agreements on training inside
Libya must be suspended and training crews must depart. I very much hope that we
will hear today from all Council members that they support and endorse that position
of the Libyan parties. The message is clear. Libyans want a rapid end to foreign
military interference in their country and an end to violations of the arms embargo.
The Joint Military Commission agreed last week that foreign forces should, as a first
step, move at least five kilometres back from the front line. That must now happen,
and quickly. Where members of the international community continue to flagrantly
flout international law and block progress being made by the Libyans and the
United Nations, we must be ready to take firm action, including by imposing
sanctions.
On the political track, we should all support UNSMIL in convening further
rounds of the Political Dialogue Forum and building towards Libyan agreement on
a new, inclusive interim Government and a firm constitutional basis for those new
arrangements. Again, we must be ready to respond clearly and quickly to those who
seek to spoil, derail or indefinitely delay progress towards the political solution that
the Libyan people want and deserve.
I would also like to welcome the spirit of compromise that has led to
a resumption of oil production and exports across Libya. It is now vital that the
international community unite around the efforts of UNSMIL to ensure that the
revenues generated by those exports are managed fairly and transparently for
the benefit of people across Libya. We welcome the discussions on new security
arrangements at oil installations. It is clear that those arrangements must remain
firmly in Libyan hands.
The United Kingdom is concerned about the continuing deterioration of the
human rights situation in Libya this year, alongside the worsening outbreak of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.

20-1586327/33

S/2020/1129

We strongly condemn the shocking killing of the lawyer Hanan Al-Barassi in
Benghazi on 10 November, a sombre reminder of the need to protect the freedom of
expression and the rights of women. We call for that killing and the disappearance
in July 2019 of parliamentarian Seham Sergiwa to be investigated properly,
expeditiously and transparently.
It seems that not a week goes by without the discovery of a new mass grave
site in Tarhunah. We are also concerned about the reports of increasing numbers of
deaths of migrants at sea and the conditions in detention centres. We are committed
to accountability, and we call on the authorities throughout Libya to give their full
cooperation to the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya.
The recent ceasefire and the progress made on the political track, both brokered
by the United Nations, are truly significant. The Libyan parties have demonstrated
a readiness to compromise and move forward. I do not want to underestimate
the challenges they face, but my message is clear. The Libyans have shown us
the direction in which they want to proceed: a political road map, elections and a
permanent nationwide end to the conflict that has blighted their lives. They want an
end to foreign interference. Now is the time for us, the members of the international
community, to live up to our obligations and play our role in helping them get there.
And for some, it is time to get out of Libya.

28/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
We would like once again to give special thanks to Ms. Stephanie Williams
for her exceptional work in leading the United Nations political process in Libya.
Since the Council last met to discuss the situation in Libya in September (see
S/PV.8758), that work has borne considerable fruit. The Libyans have agreed
on a nationwide ceasefire and come together to conduct the first round of the
United Nations-facilitated Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
We applaud the agreement reached by the Forum participants on a road map
to holding national elections on 24 December 2021, which will enable all Libyans
to choose their country’s leadership and direction. Those developments demonstrate
the broad consensus among Libyans that an inclusive, negotiated political solution
is the only way to end the conflict. They also validate the United Nations political
process as the only viable way to achieve peace and national reconciliation.
Over the past two weeks, a large and diverse group of Libyans have been
meeting in Tunis to take part in the Political Dialogue Forum, and we would like
to thank Tunisia for its facilitation efforts. The Libyans agreed on a pragmatic
agenda that outlined the parameters for achieving peace, including setting a date for
national elections, the establishment of a new executive authority, an agreement to
unify key institutions and the provision of enhanced support to the High National
Elections Commission.
We call on all members of the Council to adhere to their Berlin process
commitments and to genuinely and actively support the United Nations political
process, especially as momentum remains on our side. The Libyan announcement
of a nationwide ceasefire served as the foundation for the Political Dialogue Forum.
Yet the successful implementation of the ceasefire depends on every member of the
Council. We all agree that the solutions must be Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. It is
therefore incumbent on us to support the Libyans’ decision to stop the fighting and
to do so on their own terms. An externally imposed alternative that aims to partition
Libya and establish a long-term foreign military presence is utterly unacceptable.
The international community must honour the Libyan agreement that all
mercenaries and foreign fighters should depart Libya and all military units and
armed groups withdraw from lines of contact and return to their bases within
90 days of the 23 October ceasefire agreement. We welcome the Libyan Joint
Military Commission’s recent meetings on Libyan soil, in Ghadames and at the new
headquarters in Sirte, with a view to operationalizing the ceasefire agreement.
The international community should also hold accountable any spoilers of
Libya’s peace, security and stability. We must send out a strong message that the
international community will take meaningful action to put an end to the culture
of impunity that has fuelled the conflict in Libya. Towards that goal, the United
States, Germany, the United Kingdom and Estonia have nominated some of the most
egregious abusers of human rights in Libya, including Mohammed Al-Kani and the
Kaniyat militia, to the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya.
The United States will continue, through appropriate mechanisms, to be a
strong supporter of meaningful accountability and justice for victims of atrocities.
We welcome the creation of the International Fact-Finding Mission to document
the atrocities and other human rights abuses in Libya. Accountability will help to
promote justice for victims and secure lasting peace.
20-1586329/33

S/2020/1129

We also support the National Oil Corporation as it fulfils its apolitical and
technocratic mandate and resumes nationwide oil-and-gas sector operations and
commend the steps it has taken to ensure full transparency regarding all revenues
received. As Libyans seek to improve governance, it is shameful that certain Libyan
and external actors have sought to politicize and undermine economic institutions,
such as the Libyan Foreign Bank, and to plunder those revenues. The leadership of
the Libyan Foreign Bank must be clarified.
The Council has been clear that Libya’s wealth must be safeguarded for all
Libyans, and we must redouble our efforts to ensure that no funds are misappropriated
or diverted during this very critical period. The United States will remain keenly
focused on this developing situation, and we will do our part in helping the Libyan
people to finally build a future based on peace and the opportunities that come
with it.
Lastly, at this consequential moment in the political process, it is critical that
the Special Envoy position be filled quickly with an individual who has a strong track
record in negotiations. Mr. Nickolay Mladenov is the right choice for that role. We
look forward to consulting with the Secretary-General and the Council on potential
African candidates for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
coordinator position. We will continue to support Ms. Stephanie Williams in her
commendable leadership role of UNSMIL until a new Special Envoy is appointed,
and we greatly appreciate her willingness to continue to extend her mandate as the
United Nations works to fill that post.
Again, we wish to thank Ms. Williams. We really are very grateful for
everything she has done for this Libyan-led process.

30/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Libya to the
United Nations, Taher Elsonni
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing on
the latest developments in Libya. We wish her and her team success in all their efforts
to find practical solutions to the current crisis. Allow me also to thank the countries
that are leaving the Council at the end of this year for their efforts, that is, Germany,
the Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Belgium and South Africa, with special thanks
to the last for being the foremost champion of the Libyan cause and people.
We have all followed the rapid developments in Libya since the ceasefire was
announced, after the attempts that have been made to bring about a ceasefire since last
January, when Russia brokered the signing of an agreement in Moscow. However, we
all know what happened at the time and who backed out. The developments we are
following began with the meetings of the Joint Military Commission in Ghadames
and later in Sirte, which were aimed at laying the groundwork for a dialogue and
the other tracks. This is why we have been following the meetings very closely,
hoping that they will lead to practical and realistic solutions that will guarantee
success, most importantly, in verifying compliance with the ceasefire and ensuring
that mercenaries and foreign fighters depart every region of Libya, along with their
various weapons, under the supervision of the United Nations. Recent reports have
shown that mercenaries and high-grade weapons continue to pour into Libya and
that landmines continue to be planted and fortifications prepared, particularly in
Sirte and Jufrah. We must therefore prevent the entry of outlaws who would imperil
regional stability and the national security of neighbouring countries in particular.
In that connection, we welcome the efforts that have been under way for several
days now, as well as the meeting convened in Brega by the Chair of the National
Oil Corporation, aimed at consolidating the Petroleum Facilities Guard, which is
responsible for protecting Libya’s oil facilities and maintaining their neutrality in
the midst of conflict. After the unjust and nearly nine-month blockade on ports and
fields was lifted, we saw production begin to recover, and it has now reached more
than 1 million barrels per day. We want to emphasize that any tampering with the
wealth and livelihood of Libyans is completely unacceptable.
Here the question we will continue to ask is what international assurances
of compliance with these agreements can be given, and whether the countries
interfering in Libyan affairs have been persuaded that a military solution cannot
work in Libya. The Skhirat agreement taught us a lesson. In spite of international
promises and successive United Nations resolutions, the obstructionists found a way
to sabotage negotiations that had gone on for more than a few days, lasting roughly
a year, because of how divided this Council is and because it is not serious about
implementing its own resolutions.
The latest developments, including the launch of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum in Tunisia — which we take this opportunity to congratulate and thank for
hosting the Forum — have been a ray of hope for Libyans, giving cause for some
optimism. While we appreciate all genuine international efforts to support peaceful
solutions, amplify the voices of reason and dialogue, and silence the voice of cannons
and clashes, we must keep in mind that this is the kind of forum that everyone was
looking forward to in Ghadames last year, just days before the aggression began.
What is happening now is what should have happened back then. Had the parties
come to the table to engage in dialogue, it would have been possible to prevent the
20-1586331/33

S/2020/1129

bloodshed, the deaths of children, women and our finest youth, the displacement of
thousands of people and the escalation of foreign intervention in the country. We
therefore underscore that the role of the Libyan parties in dialogue is crucial for
every track, whether at home or abroad; that the national interest must be upheld; and
that efforts must be made to find fundamental, comprehensive and uncompromised
solutions. Moreover, Libyans must not be subject to external dictates of any kind,
however enticing, because international intervention will continue and will not stop
as long as the door remains open to it. There are those who allow it to enter, and what
our country has endured for nearly 10 years has been a lesson to us all.
Given how much Libyans have suffered over the years, their fear of repeating
past mistakes and experience of a crisis of confidence, we must understand the fears
of some and their criticism of the course that the dialogues are taking, whether
with regard to the mechanism for selecting interlocutors and representatives, the
process itself, the conflicting alliances or anything else. We must therefore respect
the opinions of all and refrain from questioning anyone’s patriotism. Despite all the
difficulties and challenges of the recent dialogue, we all saw the warm domestic
and international welcome given to the consensus reached by participants in the
Tunis Forum on setting 24 December of next year — the seventieth anniversary
of national independence — as the date of the general election. That in itself is
a positive achievement that must be supported and upheld. In that context, we
reiterate what has been stated in several initiatives and statements by the Chair of
the Presidency Council and called for repeatedly: that presidential and parliamentary
elections should be held as soon as possible, as the only way to end the conflict
over legitimacy and to unify institutions, and as a real test for those who claim to
be popular and eligible for leadership. Let those who are competitive compete. We
therefore call urgently for an accelerated consensus on the appropriate constitutional
provision for holding these elections, for respecting the popular demand that all
transitional phases be ended, for the adoption of a permanent national constitution,
and for an end to the succession of superannuated political bodies divided against
themselves that recycle the same personages over and over again.
To ensure that the political dialogues succeed and that we benefit from past
experience, we would like to emphasize the following points.
First, in order to ensure the credibility and success of the electoral process, we
call on the Security Council to adopt a binding resolution supporting the consensus
reached by Libyans in the various dialogues, including a road map and a constitutional
provision on holding elections on 24 December 2021. Such a resolution should grant
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya a mandate, through the Organization’s
specialized bodies, to provide technical and logistical support for the electoral
process under the supervision of the High National Elections Commission and to
monitor the process in coordination with the African Union and the European Union
in order to ensure integrity and transparency. It should hold accountable anyone
obstructing the process or its outcome.
Secondly, the main objectives of any new transitional phase, if agreed on,
should be as follows: to prepare for the election, which is only a year away; to provide
prompt services to all regions; to unify State institutions, especially sovereign ones,
in order to bring them into alignment with the executive branch and each other; to
combat corruption; to disband all remaining militias in the country and to place the
military and its branches throughout the country under civilian authority.
Thirdly, the African Union has called for a national reconciliation conference
to support other United Nations tracks, led by South Africa, the current Chair of
the African Union, and the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya, chaired
by the Republic of Congo, in order to begin a new chapter by enabling Libyans to
32/33

20-15863

S/2020/1129

discuss with one another confidence-building principles, the course of transitional
justice, amnesty, reparations and the return of displaced persons, regardless of their
affiliations or political and ideological leanings.
Fourthly, it is imperative to hold accountable all who have committed war
crimes or crimes against humanity against civilians, whatever their political
affiliation, at any stage of the conflict since 2011, whether by carrying out the
crimes or supporting their commission, as well as the countries involved. The crimes
committed during the attack on Tripoli on 4 April 2019 are especially important in
that regard. Efforts must be made to achieve justice and eliminate impunity because
to this day, landmines planted in southern Tripoli by militias affiliated with Haftar
continue to claim victims, and women continue to be abducted and killed, as was the
case of the attorney Hanan Al-Barassi a few days ago in Benghazi. We continue to
discover multiple mass graves in Tarhunah on a daily basis. Given this abundance
of evidence and proof, we once again call on the Security Council not to limit itself
to declarations of regret and condemnation, but to immediately place the names of
the persons responsible for those crimes and the persons who gave orders to carry
them out on the sanctions list. The work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and the publication of the report of its
Panel of Experts should not be obstructed, as the Chair of the Committee just stated,
because someone in this Council seems to want to hide the facts.
To conclude, we reiterate that detrimental foreign interventions in my country
constitute a major obstacle to reaching an intra-Libyan agreement. We warn the
countries that are responsible of the consequences of interference, which undermines
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Libyan State and threatens regional
peace and security. We call on the Security Council and the international community
to seize this opportunity, consider the wrongs it has committed against Libya and
demonstrate its good intentions by supporting the will of Libyans and their right of
self-determination and not allowing Libya to be used as a proxy battleground for
settling scores, spilling the blood of our people in the process. Let it be known that
Libya, in spite of its crises, has not and will not break. Although we are suffering today,
we will recover tomorrow, thanks to our people, who will not accept humiliation,
because Libyans are a proud and dignified people. One day, reconciliation will come.
We will turn the page on the past, and Libyans will remember those who helped to
kill them and sow discord among them, and those who stood with them and came to
their aid.

20-1586333/33
