S/2017/751

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 September 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 25 of Security Council
resolution 2358 (2017) and paragraph 44 of resolution 2297 (2016). It provides
information on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and challenges faced
by the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) in carrying out its
mandate. It covers major developments in Somalia during the period from 1 May to
22 August 2017.

II. Political and security overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The Federal Government of Somalia continued to capitalize on the opportunity
created by the February 2017 election of Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed “Farmajo”
as President and the subsequent formation of a new cabinet under the Prime
Minister, Hassan Ali Kheyre. Encouraging steps were taken to strengthen relations
with the federal member states. On 6 June, President Farmajo visited Kismaayo,
where he promised to pay regular salaries to the Somali national army and Darawish
forces in Jubaland. The Federal Cabinet plans to hold meetings in the regional
capitals, the first of which took place in Kismaayo on 12 July.
3.
The new Government continues to confront several challenges, including
drought response and security. The new Government intends to remain on good
terms with all its partners and is concerned that a crisis in the wider region might
have far-reaching consequences on the stability of Somalia. It therefore opted to
remain neutral in the Gulf crisis of June 2017.
4.
In remarks on the fifty-seventh anniversaries of independence (26 June) and of
unity between southern Somalia and “Somaliland” (1 July), President Farmajo
expressed interest in resuming talks with “Somaliland”. The “Somaliland”
Administration has called for a resumption of the stalled talks but rejected the call
for unity.
5.
On 18 May, the Speaker of the House of the People, Mohamed Osman Jawari,
outlined the key priorities of the tenth Parliament, which included enactment of
quality legislation, constitutional review, conflict resolution and reconciliation.
Parliament resumed on 8 July for its second session, which is expected to last for

17-14598 (E)

060917

*1714598*

S/2017/751

eight weeks. During the session, it should enact critical legislation, including on the
electoral law and anti-corruption. On 22 August, the Upper House of the Federal
Parliament passed the law regulating telecommunications, following its passage in
the House of the People on 9 August. This represents an important step towards
establishing a new source of federal revenue.
6.
Significant progress was made in kick-starting the next phase of the
constitutional review process. A Joint Constitutional Review Par liamentary
Committee was established in April and the Federal Minister of Constitutional
Affairs held broad consultations with counterparts from federal member states and
civil society on key issues. On 19 May, the Federal Minister of Constitutional
Affairs presented a preliminary comprehensive master plan to the international
community to complete the review within two years.
7.
Significant work lies ahead to deepen federalism, including reaching a
political agreement on the division of powers between the Federal Government and
federal member states, the allocation of revenue and the management of natural
resources, and defining the pending status of the Banadir region, in which
Mogadishu is located.
8.
Relations between the executive and legislative branches in some federal
member states remain fraught with challenges. On 14 August, the HirShabelle State
Assembly voted to remove the President of the HirShabelle Interim Administration,
Ali Abdullahi Osoble, citing poor performance and lack of consultation with the
Assembly. President Osoble insisted, however, that he remain President given that
the vote was not carried out in accordance with the state constitution. On 28 May,
the Jubaland Regional Assembly expelled two members who had accused the
President of Jubaland, Sheikh Ahmed Islam “Madobe” of corruption, human rights
abuses and suppression of the freedoms of expression, assoc iation and assembly. On
17 May, citing procedural grounds, the Speaker of the Puntland Regional Assembly
rejected a proposal by the President of Puntland, Abdiweli Mohamed Ali “Gaas”, to
enlarge the Assembly in response to demands from clans complaining ab out
underrepresentation.
9.
Reconciliation efforts in Galmudug have yielded mixed results. On 3 May, the
Galmudug State Assembly elected Ahmed Duale Geele “Xaaf” as State President.
The attendance of the President of Puntland at the inauguration warmed rel ations
between the two administrations, which resulted in some progress in the
implementation of agreements to resolve the conflict in Gaalkacyo. Following failed
negotiations in April between the Federal Government and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a
(ASWJ) on power-sharing in Galmudug, President Xaaf initiated informal contacts
with ASWJ and various communities to prepare for reconciliation and unification
between his administration and ASWJ in Dhuusamarreeb. However, formal
negotiations have yet to start and inter-clan conflicts in Heraale, Galguduud region,
could also potentially delay a final settlement.
10. In preparation for presidential elections scheduled for November 2017, the
parliamentary elections scheduled for April 2019 and House of Elders (guurti)
elections scheduled for April 2020, the “Somaliland” National Electoral
Commission concluded voter card distribution in the Awdal and Saahil regions in
May. Another distribution phase commenced in the Togdheer and Maroodijeex
regions on 8 July. Although President Farmajo officially complained about the
Berbera port agreement between the “Somaliland” Administration and a company
based in the United Arab Emirates, in April a high -level delegation from the United
Arab Emirates attended the Berbera port inauguratio n on 11 May.

2/17

17-14598

S/2017/751

B.

Security developments
11. The security situation in Mogadishu remains volatile notwithstanding some
improvements as a result of initiatives taken by the Federal Government in
conjunction with the Banadir Regional Administration. In particular, the formation
of a Mogadishu stabilization force led to a decrease in the number of Al -Shabaab
attacks in Mogadishu during and after Ramadan compared with previous years:
from 269 in 2015 and 255 in 2016 to 208 in 2017. However, notwithstanding the
decline in overall security incidents during Ramadan, a higher number of casualties
from attacks involving vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices was recorded
compared with 2016. The effectiveness of the ongoing stabilization operations in
Mogadishu has compelled Al-Shabaab to rely increasingly on improvised explosive
devices, which are a major concern, not least because of their impact on civilians.
Incidents on 8, 15 and 17 May involving explosive-laden vehicles killed at least 11
people and injured many more. On 20 June, an explosive-laden minibus detonated at
the entrance gate of the Wadajir District Commission, causing 17 deaths and 30
injuries. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility. On 22 June, a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device detonated in front of a police station, followed by a secondary
explosion targeting first responders, resulting in several deaths and injuries. On
12 June and 4 July, a total of nine mortar shells targeted the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) bases at Mogadishu Stadium and Villa Somalia, killing one
soldier and injuring two others.
12. Galmudug and HirShabelle saw increased volatility owing to clan conflicts,
political tensions and Al-Shabaab activities. On 12 May, seven people were killed in
a land dispute near Dhuusamarreeb, Galguduud region. On 11 May, one civilian was
injured after Al-Shabaab fighters ambushed an Ethiopian military convoy returning
from Halgen to Beledweyne in the Hiraan region. On 18 May, Al -Shabaab attacked
Ethiopian positions in Halgen. On 28 May, four persons were killed and seven
others injured after an armed man opened gunfire indiscriminately at a food
distribution site in Caabudwaaq, Galguduud region. On 7 June, an AMISOM
defensive base in the Mahaday district, Shabelle Dhexe region, came under heavy
fire by Al-Shabaab.
13. Al-Shabaab guerrilla warfare continued in rural areas of central and southern
Somalia. Attacks on Somali and AMISOM forces along logistics routes were
regularly reported. In a significant incident, Al -Shabaab ambushed soldiers from the
Ugandan contingent of AMISOM as they were patrolling the main road between
Mogadishu and Baraawe in the Shabelle Hoose region. In that incident, several
Ugandan soldiers were killed and several were injured. Joint military operatio ns by
Somali security forces and AMISOM, supported by the United States of America,
against Al-Shabaab bases were also reported, including a brief takeover of Barrire
and Janaale settlements, before these were retaken by Al-Shabaab.
14. In a significant development, the former Al-Shabaab leader Mukhtar Robow
Abu Mansoor defected to the Federal Government on 13 August. Robow separated
from Al-Shabaab in 2013 and was subsequently targeted by the group.
15. Puntland witnessed renewed armed conflict. Aerial and ground offensives
against Al-Shabaab hideouts took place in the Galgalo Mountains. On 8 June,
Al-Shabaab fighters killed at least 70 Puntland security force soldiers at a military
base in Af-Urur camp near Boosaaso, making it the most lethal Al-Shabaab attack in
Puntland since 2010. In addition, the splinter group professing allegiance to
pro-Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) fighters also continued its activities
near Qandala. On 24 June, pro-ISIL fighters clashed with Darawish soldiers about
40 kilometres southwest of Qandala, resulting in the deaths of one Darawish soldier
and one pro-ISIL fighter.

17-14598

3/17

S/2017/751

III. Support for peacebuilding and state-building efforts
A.

Inclusive politics
16. The Conference on Somalia, held in London on 11 May, generated renewed
momentum for key political processes. With respect to the constitutional review, the
Conference welcomed the commitment of the Federal Government and federal
member states to work closely with Parliament to take the process forward, buildin g
on the work already undertaken.
17. The federal and state ministers of constitutional affairs met in Mogadishu from
14 to 16 May as part of the ongoing consultations of the Federal Ministry of
Constitutional Affairs with Somali stakeholders on the constitutional review.
Preparations are under way for a national consultative constitutional conference, at
which the master plan for the review is to be endorsed by key stakeholders.
18. UNSOM held extensive consultations with Mogadishu-based community
leaders to seek their views on the process to determine the final status of
Mogadishu. While calling for an inclusive process, interlocutors insisted on the
need for Mogadishu to have its own institutions (including a president and a
regional assembly) similar to those of existing federal member states, and for
political participation and representation in future public institutions to be open to
everyone who lives in Mogadishu. The clan elders requested that United Nations
entities continue their support for broad consultations on the final status of
Mogadishu.

B.

Support for universal elections
19. At the London Conference on Somalia, the Federal Government committed to
holding universal elections in 2021 and to developing the electoral law by the end of
2018.
20. In line with those commitments, the National Independent Electoral
Commission finalized its strategic plan, 2017-2021, which outlines how it intends to
deliver its mandate, including details of the electoral operations to be undertaken as
well as a timeline for a constitutional referendum and universal elections. The
Commission is now seeking funding for implementation from the Federal
Government and donors. In May, the Commission opened its political party
registration office and, in July, it hosted an international workshop on party
registration, which brought together Arab and African ele ctoral management bodies.
The workshop aimed at enhancing the capacity of the Commission to register
political parties and benefited from technical and financial support from the Arab
Organization for Electoral Management Bodies, as well as from the UNSOM
Integrated Electoral Support Group.
21. In August, the National Independent Electoral Commission launched the first
lexicon of electoral terminology in Somali, developed with the support of the
Integrated Electoral Support Group. The lexicon provides a co mmon and precise
linguistic framework for electoral training, voter and civic education programmes
and drafting of electoral legislation. Also in August, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the International Organization for Migration
(IOM), the World Bank and Terra Incognita released a feasibility study on options
for the launch of a national identification programme. That study described the
structure that would best support a sustainable identification system for Somalia in
the longer term and could possibly serve voter identification requirements for
elections beyond 2021.

4/17

17-14598

S/2017/751

22. A United Nations electoral needs assessment mission took place in the first
quarter of 2017. It concluded that the holding of universal elections in 2021 would
be determined in large part by a steady improvement of the security situation and
the development of a national election administration structure, which would
necessitate the establishment of a national independent electoral commission
presence at the state levels and the appointment of a constitutional court and other
judiciary branches, as well as the creation of a dispute mechanism within the
national independent electoral commission to adjudicate electoral disputes. Timely
completion of the constitutional review and adoption of the electoral legal
framework, along with adequate and predictable funding for the Commission, would
also be of key importance.

C.

Prevention and resolution of conflict
23. The Federal Government hosted a national consultative conference in
Mogadishu from 13 to 17 June to map out existing conflicts and identify
reconciliation needs and capacities. On this basis, the Government is preparing a
report setting out priorities, a short-term road map on addressing immediate internal
conflicts and a comprehensive, long-term national strategy.
24. A lack of agreement on jurisdictional and financial issues continued to mar
relations between federal and state authorities. The refusal by the Federal
Government to allow the use of airports in HirShabelle and its development of the
El Maan seaport, owing to the likelihood of their adverse impact on Federal
Government revenues, continued to strain relations with the HirShabelle Interim
Administration. No consensus has been reached between federal and state entities
on the division of revenues generated from fishing.
25. Tensions over access to water and grazing lands escalated during the reporting
period owing to uneven rainfall across the regions. A series of killings in Gaalkacyo
prompted the formation of a joint ceasefire committee, which included ministers
from both Puntland and Galmudug. On 22 June, the committee reached an
agreement to promote peaceful coexistence. In Banyaley, Hiraan region, at least 50
persons were killed in clashes over water and grazing rights in June, before
engagement by the HirShabelle Interim Administration with clan elders resulted in a
ceasefire agreement.
26. The leader of the self-proclaimed “Khatumo State”, Ali Khalif Galayd,
initiated peace talks with the “Somaliland” Administration. In June, Khatumo
representatives offered to join “Somaliland” on the condition that the latter agreed
to review its power-sharing structure and constitution to accommodate Khatumo
interests. Meanwhile, on 24 July, the “Somaliland” Admini stration appointed Adna
Adan Ismail, former Minister of Foreign Affairs of “Somaliland”, as Special Envoy
to the talks between “Somaliland” and Somalia.

D.

Rule of law and security institutions

1.

Security sector assistance and reform
27. The security pact agreed between Somalia and international partners in
London on 11 May, together with the agreement on the national security
architecture, provide the parameters for building viable Somali security institutions
and implementing effective security sector reform. This will allow Somalis to
gradually assume primary responsibility for security from AMISOM, as part of a
conditions-based transition.

17-14598

5/17

S/2017/751

28. Follow-up work is under way on implementing the national security
architecture, while additional political discussions are required to obtain full buy -in
of all relevant actors and institutions and to address outstanding issues, including:
(a) the number and composition of security institutions at the federal and state
levels; (b) governance, oversight and accountability mechanisms; (c) coordination
and cooperation arrangements among the various federal and sub -federal
institutions; (d) overall affordability of the security sector; (e) the processes for the
integration of regional forces; and (f) right-sizing serving personnel.
29. From 5 to 10 July, the National Security Council met and agreed to incorporate
the recommendations of the Defence and Security Committee of the Federal
Parliament on command and control of the national security architect ure. It also
decided to establish a task force that would work on completing the structure of the
national security institutions.
30. Robust Somali ownership of the national security architecture implementation
process was demonstrated through the establishment of Somali-led mechanisms, as
part of the comprehensive approach to security, aimed at enabling more coherent
donor support and more effective planning and delivery structures. An
implementation architecture for the comprehensive approach to security, with
government co-leadership in all areas, is being discussed by the Federal
Government, the United Nations, the African Union and international partners.
31. As part of the comprehensive approach to security, UNSOM is supporting the
National Security Office and the secretariat of the National Security Council by
building capacity in civilian oversight, finance, integration/demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, weapons and ammunition management, and
maritime security.
32. The African Union-United Nations joint review of AMISOM identified the
operational readiness assessment of the Somali national army as a prerequisite to
determine its current capacity and capabilities, as well as an opportunity to identify
future gaps for the transition of responsibility for security from AMISOM to the
national army. With the support of the United Nations, the African Union and
international partners, the Ministry of Defence and the national army are taking the
lead in the exercise, which is expected to start in August and be completed before
December.
33. UNSOS continued the delivery of its non-lethal support package to 10,164
registered troops of the Somali national army participating in joint operations with
AMISOM in 17 different locations. During the reporti ng period, the Head of
UNSOS met twice with the Commander of the national army to discuss how to
improve support, especially with respect to the avoidance of costly air delivery of
rations and better accounting for the provision of fuel. The United Nations trust
fund in support of the Somali national army currently has a balance of
approximately $5 million, which is sufficient to support non-lethal operations for
another three months.
2.

Police
34. The UNSOM Police Section continued to support implementation of the new
policing model through the technical committees in each federal member state.
State-specific plans will be developed to outline the organization of the state police
forces and their responsibilities and address related administrative and l ogistical
issues. Efforts are under way to establish a federal police technical committee and a
joint technical committee to be led by the Ministry of Internal Security.

6/17

17-14598

S/2017/751

35. The UNSOM Police Section, reinforced by the Standing Police Capacity,
continued to support the Gaalkacyo Ceasefire Team Advisory Group. In July and
August, UNSOM and AMISOM police facilitated a joint training for 100 police
officers from Puntland and Galmudug aimed at preparing the officers for joint
police patrols in Gaalkacyo under common command.
3.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
36. Under the National Programme for the Treatment and Handling of Disengaged
Fighters, UNSOM continued to support the Federal Government in strengthening
coordination mechanisms with partners and donors. Efforts are ongoing to
harmonize implementation of the following phases of the Programme: outreach,
reception, screening, rehabilitation and reintegration. UNSOM organized a
workshop to review the National Intelligence and Security Agency s creening
procedures for disengaged combatants and to strengthen the Agency’s capacity in
that regard.
37. Four rehabilitation transition centres for disengaged Al -Shabaab fighters
operate in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. The Kismaayo centre
became operational in June with the admission of the first group of 26 disengaged
Al-Shabaab fighters. By the end of July, the Baidoa centre was supporting 148
beneficiaries, and an additional 70 had entered the reintegration phase. Both centres
are run by IOM and funded by Germany. The centre in Mogadishu, which is
supported by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, currently
has 65 beneficiaries. Owing to a lack of funds, only 11 beneficiaries remain in the
centre run by the Federal Government in Beledweyne. The Government has
requested international support to enhance the capacity of the centre, which could
encourage further defections.
38. On 10 June, UNSOM launched a weekly radio campaign to encourage
defections by young males in Mogadishu, Baidoa and Kismaayo who are vulnerable
to Al-Shabaab recruitment.

4.

Maritime security
39. The National Maritime Coordination Committee met on 28 June to align the
maritime domain with the national security architecture agreement and submitted a
proposal to place the coast guard under the Ministry of Internal Security.
40. While six hijacking incidents were reported in March and April 2017,
illustrating that the piracy networks had retained their capability, no major piracy
incidents occurred during the current reporting period. UNSOM is assisting the
National Security Office to build a system to map and establish coordination centres
for incidents at sea.

5.

Mine action
41. The United Nations Mine Action Service provided refresher training t o the
explosive ordnance disposal teams of the Jubaland state police in Kismaayo and the
federal police in Mogadishu, including training of the latter in handling explosive
detection dogs. In Mogadishu, police explosive ordnance disposal teams trained by
the Service responded to 21 incidents involving improvised explosive devices, for
which they conducted post-blast investigations.
42. UNSOM, the United Nations Mine Action Service and the United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research assisted the Federal Government in the fourth
national weapons ammunition management consultation process, held from 18 to
20 June. The Federal Government agreed to establish a commission on weapons

17-14598

7/17

S/2017/751

ammunition management and to expand the second phase of physical security a nd
stockpile management to all federal member states for the period 2017 -2020.
6.

Justice and corrections
43. The Federal Minister of Justice continued to consult with the state ministers of
justice in order to reach a political agreement on the propos ed justice and
corrections model for Somalia.
44. The first comprehensive training curriculum for judges, prosecutors and court
clerks was launched in Mogadishu on 17 July to lay the groundwork for an
independent, capable and accountable judiciary. As part of the programme, 350
court personnel from all over Somalia will be trained by the end of 2017.
45. The Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections Areas in the Rule of
Law in Post-Conflict and Other Crisis Situations is developing phase II of the
Somalia Joint Rule of Law Programme for the period 2018 -2021, which is aimed at
supporting the Federal Government in strengthening the rule of law throughout the
country and implementing the security pact.

E.

Human rights and protection

1.

Human rights
46. A total of 582 civilian casualties were recorded during the reporting period,
half of which (265 causalities) were caused by incidents perpetrated by Al -Shabaab.
Twelve casualties are attributed to AMISOM and 41 to incidents involving state
security forces.
47. Competition over resources depleted by the drought intensified clan conflicts,
resulting in 175 civilian casualties, compared with 77 in the previous reporting
period. The majority were the result of conflicts between Gaaljecel and Jej ele clan
militias in HirShabelle and between the Duduble and Cayr clans in the Galguduud
region.
48. Twelve targeted assassinations of participants in the 2016 electoral process
were recorded. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for four of them and seven were
attributed to unknown assailants. In one incident, the Federal Minister of Public
Works, Abbas Abdullahi Sheikh Siraji, was shot and killed by security personnel on
3 May.
49. Sixteen airstrikes were documented, including eight in Gedo, four in Shabel le
Hoose, three in Juba Hoose and one in Somaliland, resulting in 18 civilian
casualties and a significant loss of livestock and property.
50. Nine executions were carried out following death penalty convictions,
accounting for almost half of the executions reported in all of 2016. Half of the
executions that have taken place thus far in 2017 were in Puntland, and convictions
were related to terrorism activities. Three prisoners reportedly died while in custody
owing to poor detention conditions and lack of medical care.
51. The Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in Somalia conducted
a 10-day visit to Mogadishu, Garoowe and Hargeya in May. He met with
representatives of UNSOM, AMISOM, the Federal Government and civil society
organizations and urged continued support towards reforming the police, the
judiciary and other rule of law institutions to ensure better compliance with human
rights standards. He also encouraged authorities to address sexual violence cases
and the rehabilitation of juveniles arrested and accused of being affiliated with
Al-Shabaab.

8/17

17-14598

S/2017/751

52. There was progress on the establishment of the independent human rights
commission by the interim technical selection panel, which convened in Mogadishu
on 9 July. In addition, a total of 134 detainees charged with minor crimes in
Mogadishu and Puntland were pardoned on the occasions of Ramadan and the
independence day of Somalia.
2.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
53. The United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy Task Force approved
the risk assessment for United Nations support for the integration of the 3,000
Puntland defence forces into the Somali national army. The mitigation measures
have been communicated to the Federal Government, the Puntland autho rities and
donors interested in providing support to inform them of requirements under the
policy and to reiterate the importance of compliance. UNSOM has proposed the
creation of a working group to assist the Federal Government in engaging on human
rights due diligence issues. The African Union and the United Nations Joint
Working Group on Human Rights Due Diligence Policy reviewed the
implementation status for prevention and mitigation measures and measures to
respond to violations, including strengthening accountability through boards of
inquiry and increasing the capacity of the Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and
Response Cell.

3.

Child protection
54. All of the children associated with Al-Shabaab who were captured in Puntland
in March 2016 have been released. However, the prison sentences of 40 of the
children, who are now at a rehabilitation centre in Garoowe, have yet to be
rescinded. UNSOM and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) continue to
urge the Puntland Administration to allow their reintegration in locations closer to
their areas of origin.
55. The Somalia country task force on monitoring and reporting verified
245 incidents of grave violations affecting 485 children (124 girls and 361 boys).
Al-Shabaab is expanding its recruitment campaign in Galmudug by compelling
children to attend Al-Shabaab-managed madrasas reportedly used to indoctrinate
and train them as fighters. In several instances, elders, imams and teachers who
failed to hand over children were abducted.
56. From 3 to 6 May, UNSOM and UNICEF trained National Intelligence and
Security Agency screening officers on the reception and handover to child
protection actors of children formerly associated with armed groups. On 18 and
19 May, United Nations entities supported a joint mission to screen 235 members of
the South-West special police force, which identified and separated two children
from the force.

4.

Prevention of sexual violence
57. Sexual violence remains a significant protection concern, mostly affecting
displaced women and girls living in settlements for internally displaced persons.
The settlements are easy targets for perpetrators of sexual violence because there is
limited physical and police protection. A total of 71 cases of sexual violence were
reported, of which 67 involved girls. Between May and June, the members of the
gender-based violence subcluster conducted prevention activities that reached a
total of 2,041 girls, 1,792 boys, 4,860 women and 1,927 men.
58. UNDP, in coordination with UNSOM, conducted a workshop for 50 SouthWest state police officers on human rights, the role of police in protecting civilians,
access to legal aid, and the prevention of sexual and gender -based violence. In

17-14598

9/17

S/2017/751

Puntland, 25 police investigators, prosecutors and judge s were trained in
investigating crimes related to sexual and gender-based violence. The United
Nations Population Fund supported the establishment of the first forensic laboratory
in Somalia for collecting evidence relevant to obtaining justice for victims of sexual
and gender-based violence.

F.

Development coordination and recovery
59. The gross domestic product growth in Somalia remains urban -based,
consumption-driven and fuelled by donor support and remittances from the
diaspora. The implementation of the national development plan faces challenges, as
the fiscal situation and management of Somalia remain weak, hampering the ability
of the Government to provide basic services. Meanwhile, the economic impact of
the ongoing drought is substantial. The Federal Government requested the
international community in June to increase budget support to cover salaries and
other operational expenditures. Options are being explored with the Federal
Government and donors to increase support for salaries through exi sting
mechanisms financed through the World Bank multi-partner fund.
60. The New Partnership for Somalia for Peace, Stability and Prosperity was
endorsed at the London Conference on 11 May. Building upon the partnership
principles underlying the New Deal Compact, and encompassing a number of the
political and socioeconomic priorities set out in the national development plan, the
New Partnership agreement represents a solid arrangement for mutual
accountability. The Federal Government, the United Nations and international
partners are developing a monitoring framework to ensure oversight and adherence
to agreed commitments in the New Partnership agreement, and have held a series of
meetings to modify existing aid coordination structures to align them with the
national development plan.
61. The Federal Government, federal member states and the international
community are collectively working on an early recovery and resilience approach
that builds on the national development plan, with both short - and long-term
programmes to prevent cyclical drought and famine. In developing the approach,
they will consider the opportunity of early returns of internally displaced persons
and will also look at the possibility of major investment in both urban and rural
infrastructure. Ongoing family-level resilience programmes will also be stepped up
to enable communities to emerge from the drought and to support municipal
authorities in managing increased drought- and conflict-induced urbanization.
62. An integrated UNSOM and United Nations country team initiative was
developed to provide support to the Federal Government in its anti -corruption
efforts, which included the drafting of a national anti-corruption strategy and
legislation, public information and capacity-building activities and support in the
process of ratifying the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
63. Civil society plays a key role in delivering services across the humanitarian,
development and peacebuilding spectrum in Somalia. However, its work is oft en
hampered by inadequate regulatory frameworks, bureaucratic obstacles and
inconsistencies in rules and regulations at different levels of government. In order to
support the development of a comprehensive regulatory framework for
non-governmental organizations, the Federal Government is working on new
legislation to codify best practices, with the support of the United Nations and
international partners and in close coordination with non -governmental
organizations.

10/17

17-14598

S/2017/751

64. In late June, Al-Shabaab started to ban the use of Somali shillings in
HirShabelle, Galmudug and Puntland. This reportedly followed the recent printing
of new bank notes by the Puntland Administration to pay the salaries of its soldiers.
Despite calls from local authorities to disregard the ban, businesses continue to
avoid transactions in shillings, using the United States dollar or Ethiopian birr
instead. The resulting devaluation of the shilling has adversely affected the
livelihood of the people, who have limited access to the alternative currencies.

G.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Community recovery
65. With support from the Peacebuilding Fund, United Nations entities supported
Jubaland and the Interim South-West Administration in developing local
government laws. The Interim South-West Administration and the Jubaland
Regional Assembly passed local government laws on 5 June and 27 July
respectively. The Interim South-West Administration launched its district council
formation process in Baidoa on 11 July. Community recovery pro jects continued to
be developed by Somali authorities in conjunction with the United Nations and
international partners. The United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) launched early recovery activities, contributing $820,000 to help local
authorities to deliver tangible dividends to communities and enable government
outreach in the Kismaayo district in Jubaland. The Jubaland and South -West
Administrations, with USAID support, launched eight community projects to
rehabilitate infrastructure and community facilities in Baardhere and Dinsoor
districts, with investments totalling $1.8 million.
66. United Nations entities supported the Jubaland authorities in establishing
mobile courts and creating traditional dispute resolution and legal aid uni ts in the
Jubaland Ministry of Justice, Constitution and Religious Affairs. Similar efforts are
being undertaken by the Interim South-West Administration. Community policing
activities were conducted in Kismaayo and Baidoa to build trust between youth and
the security forces. Technical and vocational curricula were developed, beneficiaries
were selected and trainings were carried out.

2.

Gender equality and women’s empowerment
67. In May, United Nations entities facilitated a preparatory event in Mogadi shu
for the London Conference. The event, which was attended by civil society
stakeholders, presented an opportunity for women leaders to engage in the
preparatory process. Gender-mainstreaming was adopted as part of the security pact
and the New Partnership agreement endorsed at the London Conference.
68. During June and July, UNSOM gathered women’s experiences in local
reconciliation and mediation in order to better support their engagement in those
processes. In July, UNSOM conducted a needs assessment of civil society and
female members of the Federal Parliament. A plan is being developed to strengthen
the mediation and reconciliation capacity of women leaders.
69. In July, UNDP facilitated a lessons learned forum on women’s representation
in the 2016 electoral process, which will inform strategies for enhancing women’s
political participation and representation in the 2021 elections. Notwithstanding the
gains in women’s representation during the 2016 electoral process, their political
participation remains limited.

17-14598

11/17

S/2017/751

3.

Youth empowerment
70. In line with the national development plan and the emphasis of the Federal
Government on job creation and education for youth, the needs and aspirations of
Somali youth have been mainstreamed throughout the new Uni ted Nations Strategic
Framework for Somalia for 2017 to 2020. The youth coordination meetings held in
different regions have become important platforms for increasing coordination
between federal and state authorities, international partners and local yout h civil
society organizations. The meetings enable stakeholders to map interventions in
different regions and identify gaps and overlaps in programming. The United
Nations currently has 18 youth-specific programmes in which it has invested
$28 million. Seven of those programmes support technical, educational and
vocational training to enhance youth employment.

4.

Preventing and countering violent extremism
71. Somalia’s national strategy and action plan for preventing and countering
violent extremism was endorsed at the London Conference. UNSOM continued to
provide strategic guidance to the Federal Government on operationalizing the
strategy, emphasizing that in the implementation of the strategy and action plan, the
protection of civilians, including children, from (forced) recruitment needs to be
ensured. UNSOM established a monthly platform to facilitate a joint approach to the
strategy and action plan in Somalia and share information on the efforts of the wider
United Nations system and international partners. UNSOM is consulting with the
newly established United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism on how it can best
support UNSOM in the balanced implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

IV. Humanitarian situation
72. The gu rains (March to June) were late, short and below average in much of
Somalia, resulting in an elevated risk of famine in some areas. The number of
people in need of assistance increased to 6.7 million, including 3.2 million people
that required urgent life-saving assistance. More than 766,000 people have been
internally displaced since November 2016, with just over 7,000 people seeking
refuge in Ethiopia and Kenya.
73. While the gu rains were near normal levels in Somaliland and parts of
Puntland, they were, on average, 50 per cent below normal in the areas with the
least rainfall. Food security is not expected to improve in some areas through the
end of 2017. A further deterioration is anticipated in a few regions, including
Galguduud, Gedo, Mudug, Shabelle Dhexe and Shabelle Hoose. Late rains provided
respite in some areas, resulting in the recharge of water points, the regeneration of
pastures, the improvement of livestock conditions and a hope of early recovery.
However, owing to the impact of the prolonged drought, recovery is expected to
take at least two consecutive seasons of good rainfall. Scaled -up support throughout
the rest of 2017 will be essential to prevent increasing levels of food insecurity and
protect livelihoods.
74. Acute malnutrition is rising; the number of acutely malnourished children
could reach 1.4 million by the end of 2017, including 275,000 cases of severe acute
malnutrition. Global acute malnutrition rates of up to 29 per cent (the emergency
threshold is 15 per cent) have been reported among internally displaced persons.
Nutrition partners had treated nearly 400,000 beneficiaries for acute malnutrition by
the end of June. More than 173,000 children have been supported so that they may
stay in school. The prolonged drought has exacerbated the massive acute watery
12/17

17-14598

S/2017/751

diarrhoea/cholera outbreak, with nearly 75,930 cases and 1,155 deaths reported by
end of July. While efforts by the authorities and partners have contained the disease
in most areas, the case-fatality rate of 1.5 per cent remains above the 1 per cent
emergency threshold. Some 13,428 suspected measles cases have been reported.
75. Donors had provided $870.1 million as at 13 August, enabling a massive,
scaled-up response. About 3 million people have been reached through f ood security
interventions, many of them through cash programming. In order to address
malnutrition and disease outbreaks, 225 nutrition centres and 104 acute watery
diarrhoea/cholera treatment facilities were established. Some 3.5 million people
have been provided with access to safe water in 2017 thus far. Over 18.5 million
heads of livestock have been treated against diseases, benefiting 2.8 million people.
76. Under the revised 2017 humanitarian response plan, $1.5 billion is being
sought in order to reach 5.5 million people in 2017. However, clusters have scaled
back due to a lack of funding. These include clusters on water; sanitation and
hygiene; education; providing children with a safe space and access to food and
water, which is key to stopping acute watery diarrhoea/cholera; and interventions
for women and girls who are victims of gender-based violence, which is especially
relevant for internally displaced persons.
77. Humanitarian and development partners have engaged the private sector on
drought response. The private sector played a critical role in stabilizing prices
during the drought, directly contributing resources through the National Drought
Committee, and improved people’s access to food by moving commercial supplies
to areas with the greatest need and those where humanitarian actors had access
challenges due to insecurity. In addition, United Nations entities and the World
Bank continued to support the engagement of the Federal Government with the
private sector with the aim of increasing revenue generation.
78. Humanitarian operators faced an increase in attacks by non -state armed actors
and increased violence at aid distribution sites. In June, over 90 violent incidents
affected humanitarian personnel, facilities and assets; 4 humanitari an workers were
killed, 9 were injured, 6 were arrested or placed in temporary detention and 13 were
abducted. Three humanitarian workers were expelled by the authorities. Road access
challenges, accompanied by illegal taxation and abuse of travellers, con tinue in
many areas. During the second quarter of 2017, non-state armed actors intensified
blockades in Diinsoor, Wajid and Xuddur in the Gedo and Bakool regions, which lie
at the epicentre of the crisis, impacting the availability of key commodities.

V. Support to the African Union Mission in Somalia
79. The efforts of the United Nations Mine Action Service in mentoring, training
and supporting joint operations helped AMISOM to identify and destroy 4 of the
22 improvised explosive devices encountered. In order to enhance the mobility
threat analyses of the Mission, the Service also carried out 36 assessments of the
main supply routes, covering 1,576 kilometres, to identify vulnerable points where
improvised explosive devices could be placed.
80. While UNSOS continued to operationalize the mission enabling units to
support the efforts by AMISOM to open main supply routes, benefiting from
additional equipment donated by the United States and the mobility planning
training for AMISOM troops in Mogadishu provided by the United Nations Mine
Action Service, no further progress was reported following the previous successes
achieved in Sectors 1 and 5. Because the troop-contributing countries decided to
limit their patrolling owing to prevailing insecurity, pro gress in opening and

17-14598

13/17

S/2017/751

securing the routes was limited. UNSOS was therefore required to take measures to
ensure that the contingent personnel continued to receive life support rations
through sustained and unplanned resupply by air to many locations. In orde r to
mitigate the impact of these demands on their planned activities, UNSOS and
AMISOM have agreed on the importance of making the most effective use of
available resources through a regular review of budgetary performance and major
cost drivers to ensure that sustained logistical support to AMISOM remains
consistent with operational priorities.
81. Negotiations over the tripartite memorandum of understanding between the
African Union, the United Nations and AMISOM troop - and police-contributing
countries concluded in June 2017. On 23 June, Uganda signed the new
memorandum of understanding and on 7 July Ethiopia signed it. The remaining
troop- and police-contributing countries are expected to sign in the coming months.
The tripartite memorandum of understanding will enable troop- and policecontributing countries to seek reimbursement for equipment lost in hostile action
since 2012.
82. In order to address water shortages in the AMISOM areas of operation, United
Nations entities signed a letter of assist with Ethiopia on 17 May 2016 for the
drilling of 30 water wells in Sectors 3 and 4 on a cost -reimbursable basis. Ethiopian
troops deployed the equipment in Baidoa in June 2017, and drilling work
commenced in August 2017.
83. In its resolution 2036 (2012), the Security Council authorized 12 military
helicopters for AMISOM. The three helicopters deployed by Kenya in December
2016 remain its only air assets. Discussions are ongoing with other AMISOM troop contributing countries on the deployment of additional military helicopters.
84. The AMISOM and Somali national army trust funds are at balances of less
than $0.5 million and $5.0 million, respectively. That is sufficient to pay salaries for
AMISOM consultants working in the Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and
Response Cell for one year, and to provide logistics support to the Somali national
army for three months.

VI. United Nations presence in Somalia
85. United Nations entities continue to be present in the following locations in
Somalia: Hargeysa, Boosaasso, Garoowe, Gaalkacyo, Mogadishu, Beledweyne,
Baidoa, Dollow and Kismaayo. The United Nations remains exposed to Al -Shabaab
terrorist threats and clan violence in these locations, particularly in southern
Somalia where most roads are inaccessible owing to the terrorist threat. This has
severely limited the monitoring and implementation of projects and humanitarian
programmes. In spite of these challenges, United Nations entities have worked hard
to remain accessible to its Somali counterparts and to respond quickly to
humanitarian and development needs.
86. The security risk levels for the AMISOM-protected area at Mogadishu
International Airport have remained high since the last assessment in May 2017.
UNSOS continues to implement recommended risk mitigation measures to improve
safety and protection for all United Nations personnel within the airport. Similar
projects are ongoing in Baidoa, Beledweyne and Kismaayo.
87. As at 11 August, there were 545 international and 1,164 national United
Nations personnel deployed throughout Somalia. The staff ceiling in Mogadishu
was raised from 485 to 525 to accommodate staff in transit and facilitate the
humanitarian response in other regions. In response to the emergency drought
14/17

17-14598

S/2017/751

situation in Somalia, an increasing number of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes operate and maintain a permanent presence of both international and
national personnel outside of Mogadishu.

VII. Observations
88. Since assuming office, the Federal Government has shown a strong
commitment to take on the vast challenges facing Somalia. At the Conference on
Somalia, held in London on 11 May, I personally observed this commitment as w ell
as the continued resolve of the international community to support Somalia.
I commend the leadership of President “Farmajo”, Prime Minister Kheyre and the
federal member state leaders in that regard and urge all Somalis to work together to
translate the renewed momentum into genuine and sustainable progress.
89. I welcome the security pact agreed in London between Somalia and its
partners to develop a viable Somali security sector at the federal and state levels
based on the national security architecture. The primary responsibility for security
lies with the Somali authorities and institutions. I call on the federal and state
leaders in Somalia to take the steps necessary to complete discussions on the details
of the national security architecture through an inclusive process to achieve the full
buy-in of all stakeholders. This will contribute to the State -building and
peacebuilding efforts and will be an important opportunity to reinforce the national
identity of the Somali national security forces. I also urge international partners to
render, in a coordinated and timely manner, the support necessary to develop Somali
security institutions and enable them to gradually take over security responsibility
from AMISOM. In order to establish a credible baseline to inform this transition,
the relevant Somali actors must, with the support of international partners, do their
utmost to complete the operational readiness assessment on time. In the future, the
assessment should include regional forces in addition to the Somali national army.
90. Building on the outcomes of the London Conference, the Federal Government
and the Federal Parliament have taken important steps to advance the review of the
provisional constitution, the cornerstone of a full-fledged federal Somalia. There is
no time to lose for Somalis to address the difficult questions on the division of
powers, revenues and resources between the federal and state governments.
Regional actors, civil society and minority groups should be able to meaningful ly
engage in these discussions. A constitution that serves all segments of Somali
society will require consensus-building, dialogue and reconciliation at all levels,
including through the active participation of women. An electoral legislative
framework and agreement on the electoral model are now also needed. The United
Nations and international partners are engaging the Federal Parliament to promote
the representation of women parliamentarians on the various legislative committees.
However, without adequate funding for the constitutional review, other related
political processes, including preparations for universal elections in 2021, could
face delays. I call on donors to urgently provide the required support to take forward
the constitutional review process. The relevant United Nations entities will continue
to provide their support through good offices, the facilitation of political dialogue
and technical advice.
91. I welcome ongoing preparations by the “Somaliland” Administration to hold
long overdue presidential elections on 13 November 2017. The repeated delays in
the holding of the elections have raised serious concerns and eroded the credibility
of the democratization process in “Somaliland”. I urge the authorities to ensure that
there are no further delays in the holding of the presidential and the parliamentary
elections.

17-14598

15/17

S/2017/751

92. AMISOM remains essential to ensuring security in Somalia in the medium
term. I urge members of the Security Council to support the implementation of the
recommendations of the African Union-United Nations joint review of AMISOM
through the provision of adequate, predictable and sustainable funding to establish a
credible trajectory towards eventual withdrawal of the Mission. If AMISOM were to
leave in haste, or prematurely hand over responsibility to Somali security
institutions, there would be a risk of reversing the progress made on security. The
AMISOM transition should be organized and supported in a way that marks the end
of the international security presence in Somalia without losing the security gains so
painstakingly achieved over the past 10 years, while equal focus should be given to
building the capacity of the national security institutions, with full Somali
ownership.
93. I would like to reaffirm the continued support of UNSOS, within its mandate
and resources, to AMISOM and the Somali national army. I urge the involvement of
United Nations entities in the planning processes for military operations and a
phased transfer of AMISOM security responsibilities to Somali security forces.
I call for continued Member State support to replenish the AMISOM and Somali
national army trust funds to ensure uninterrupted support.
94. Undoubtedly, the achievement of long-term security for Somalis will depend
not just on military interventions, but also on the population’s confidence in the
Somali authorities’ ability to ensure and safeguard local reconciliation and the rule
of law, including the justice chain and its basic services. I welcome the continued
engagement at the federal member state level, as well as by the Federal
Government, to implement the new policing model, of which federalism is an
essential element and which was strongly endorsed at the London Conference.
I urge the Federal Government and the federal member stat es to swiftly reach
political agreement on a justice and corrections model for Somalia, ensure timely
implementation of the new policing model and extend local governance structures
across Somalia.
95. While the worst has been averted, the threat of famine persists in the second
half of the year. I remain extremely concerned about the humanitarian crisis,
including the ongoing food insecurity due to deepening drought conditions and
increasing malnutrition, displacement and inter-clan tensions. These factors could
further weaken already vulnerable communities, and the situation is not expected to
improve this year. I welcome the international community’s continued generous
support for drought-affected communities, as well as the efforts by Somalis to
promote reconciliation between the affected clans. I urge the Somali authorities to
find further constructive means for resolving disputes. I also call on the
international community to provide additional funding to enable partners to sustain
the current level of humanitarian response.
96. I remain concerned about the human rights situation in Somalia. The forced
recruitment by Al-Shabaab of over 200 children and the abduction of 100 clan
elders in Galmudug is alarming. The group’s tactics and indiscriminate attack s on
civilians and its restriction of humanitarian access in areas under its control are
reprehensible.
97. I am concerned about the growing number of cases of sexual violence, and
especially about emerging patterns that indicate that many sexual assaults take place
in settlements for internally displaced persons. Fearing reprisal, many survivors do
not report being sexually assaulted, and, while the provision of medical services to
survivors appears to have improved, it remains an area of major concern.

16/17

17-14598

S/2017/751

98. I am also concerned about the ongoing lack of accountability for targeted
killings of delegates who participated in the 2016 electoral process. I call for
investigations into such crimes and for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
99. I welcome the fact that all of the children captured in Puntland in March 2016
have finally been released. I urge the Puntland authorities to continue to meet their
commitments to overturn the prison sentences against 40 of the children and to
continue working with United Nations entities towards their reintegration in
locations closer to their area of origin.
100. The comprehensive approach to security agreed to by Somalia and its
international partners is critical to the establishment of lasting peace and security in
Somalia. I urge the Federal Government and its international partners to expedite
the delivery of coordinated support.
101. I thank the African Union, AMISOM, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations
and other development partners for their continued support to the process of
peacebuilding and state-building in Somalia. In particular, I thank the African Union
for its continued strategic partnership with the United Nations in Somali a. I pay
tribute to AMISOM and Somali security forces for the sacrifices they continue to
make in Somalia in the interest of long-term peace and stability in the country and
beyond.
102. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Michael Keating; my two Deputy
Special Representatives and the staff of UNSOM; the Head of UNSOS and his staff;
and the staff of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes engaged in
Somalia for their continued hard work under challenging conditions.

17-14598

17/17
