A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/159
28 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 149
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/52/650)]
52/159. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,1
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations,2 and the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,3 and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host
country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Noting the spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding that has guided the deliberations of the
Committee on issues affecting the United Nations community and the host country,
Taking into account the increase in the profound interest and concern of many Member States as regards
the work of the Committee,
Considering that meetings of the Committee and of the working group on the use of diplomatic motor
vehicles were devoted to the consideration of the topic "Transportation: use of motor vehicles, parking and
related matters",

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/52/26).

2

Resolution 22 A (I).

3

See resolution 169 (II).

98-76243

/...

A/RES/52/159
Page 2

1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country contained in paragraph 118 of its report;1
2. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations
and the missions accredited to the United Nations is in the interests of the United Nations and all Member
States, and requests the host country to continue to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference
with the functioning of missions, and to promote compliance of local authorities with international norms
concerning diplomatic privileges and immunities;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and hopes that the concerns
raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in
accordance with international law;
4. Welcomes the efforts of the Committee aimed at identifying affordable health care programmes for
the diplomatic community;
5. Notes that during the reporting period the travel controls previously imposed by the host country
on staff of certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities remained in effect,
again urges the host country to consider lifting such travel controls, and in this regard notes the positions of
the affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
6. Calls upon the host country to review measures and procedures relating to the parking of diplomatic
vehicles, with a view to responding to the growing needs of the diplomatic community, and to consult with
the Committee on these issues, and requests the host country to take steps in conjunction with the competent
authorities to resolve the problem of the parking of diplomatic vehicles, in order to maintain appropriate
conditions for the functioning of the delegations and missions accredited to the United Nations in a manner
that is fair, non-discriminatory, efficient and consistent with international law, with due regard to diplomatic
privileges and immunities and to the proposals made in the Committee and its working group on the use of
diplomatic motor vehicles;
7. Requests the Committee to review its membership and composition, with the participation of
observers, to consider proposals regarding its membership and composition, and to report on the results of
its deliberations to the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the
United Nations with the host country;
9. Requests the Committee to continue its work, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled "Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
72nd plenary meeting
15 December 1997
