A/RES/75/248

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 January 2021

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 152
Administration of justice at the United Nations

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 31 December 2020
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/668, para. 6)]

75/248.

Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001 and its resolutions 57/307
of 15 April 2003, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005, 61/261 of 4 April
2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007, 63/253 of 24 December 2008, 64/233 of 22 December
2009, 65/251 of 24 December 2010, 66/237 of 24 December 2011, 67/241 of 24 December
2012, 68/254 of 27 December 2013, 69/203 of 18 December 2014, 70/112 of 14 December
2015, 71/266 of 23 December 2016, 72/256 of 24 December 2107, 73/276 of 22 December
2018 and 74/258 of 27 December 2019,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations 1 and on the activities of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services, 2 the report of the Internal Justice Council on
administration of justice at the United Nations 3 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 4 as well as the letter dated
20 November 2020 from the President of the General Assembly addressed to the Chair
of the Fifth Committee,5
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations and on the activities of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services, the report of the Internal Justice Council on
administration of justice at the United Nations and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;

__________________

A/75/162 and A/75/162/Add.1.
A/75/160.
3
A/75/154.
4
A/75/560.
5
A/C.5/75/16.
1
2

21-00049 (E)

080121

*2100049*

A/RES/75/248

Administration of justice at the United Nations

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of
the Advisory Committee;
I
System of administration of justice
3.
Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in the
system of administration of justice;
4.
Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the
system of administration of justice, regardless of their duty station;
5.
Acknowledges the evolving nature of the system of administration of justice
and the need to carefully monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains within the
parameters set out by the General Assembly;
6.
Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of its resolution 61/261, to
establish a new, independent, transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced and
decentralized system of administration of justice consistent with the relevant rules of
international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to ensure respect
for the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability of managers and
staff members alike;
7.
Notes with appreciation the publication of the Digest of Case Law of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal for the period
2009–2019, which provides improved access to the jurisprudence of the Tribunals, and
requests the Secretary-General to present information relating to the establishment of a
searchable database of Dispute Tribunal and Appeals Tribunal decisions in his next
report;
8.
Welcomes the ongoing outreach efforts, and urges the Secretary-General to
continue to implement the outreach strategy, with a view to continuing to raise
awareness of the role and functioning of the various parts of the system and the
possibilities that it offers to address work-related complaints, paying particular attention
to field missions and offices;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure a strong culture of
accountability throughout the Secretariat, in particular with proactive and transparent
application of the United Nations three-pillared approach to the management of
misconduct, namely, prevention, enforcement and remedial action, and to ensure access
to effective remedies for all categories of personnel;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to hold managers
accountable when their decisions have been established to be grossly negligent
according to the applicable Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations 6 and have
led to litigation and subsequent financial loss, and to undertake an analysis of the issue
of publishing the results of action taken in response to the referrals for accountability
by the Tribunals, such as in the compendium of disciplinary measures, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
11. Underscores the inherent and explicit authority of the Dispute and Appeals
Tribunals to issue protective orders, consistent with their statutes, rules of procedure
and code of conduct, in order to protect complainants and witnesses against retaliation,
stresses the importance of fully implementing such orders, and requests the Secretary General to report on the application thereof;

__________________
6

2/5

ST/SGB/2018/1.
21-00049

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/75/248

12. Encourages the Secretary-General, in his capacity as the Chair of the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to promote protection against
retaliation across the system;
13. Reiterates that retaliation against complainants or staff appearing as
witnesses constitutes misconduct, notes with appreciation the policy on protection
against retaliation for reporting misconduct and for cooperating with duly authorized
audits or investigations 7 as well as the efforts to continuously improve the framework
for protection from retaliation, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to
provide information on the implementation of the policy for all categories of personnel
covered in his next report;
II
Informal system
14. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an
efficient and effective option both for staff who seek redress of grievances and for the
participation of managers;
15. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of the
system of administration of justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be made of
the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary litigation, without prejudice to the
basic right of staff members to access the formal system, and encourages recourse to the
informal resolution of disputes;
16. Also reaffirms the importance of the informal dispute resolution process in
the Organization, which represents an effective method of dispute resolution as
compared with the formal process, and urges the Secretary-General to reinforce his
efforts to address the underservice of staff in the field and to provide an update on the
action taken in the context of his next report;
17. Welcomes the continued analysis of the root causes of work-related conflict
included in the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the
United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, stresses the importance of
improving management performance and staff communication, urges the Secretary General to continue to address the direct feedback and systemic issues identified in the
report in order to mitigate and prevent work-related conflicts, including through the
improvement of the policies and procedures of the Organization, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide information on progress resulting from the action taken in
the context of his next report;
18. Also welcomes the continued efforts of the Secretary-General to improve the
prevention and resolution of disputes involving non-staff personnel, based on his five
initiatives, and his efforts to further explore more cost-effective means to resolve
disputes, and requests the Secretary-General to report on progress, including the financial
and administrative impact, to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue the pilot project whereby
non-staff personnel are offered access to services provided by the Office of the United
Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services within its existing resources, and requests
the Secretary-General to report thereon in his next report;
20. Encourages the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services to continue its outreach activities, including through virtual formats as
appropriate, especially in the field and including all categories of non-staff personnel,
in order to promote informal dispute resolution;
__________________
7

21-00049

ST/SGB/2017/2/Rev.1.
3/5

A/RES/75/248

Administration of justice at the United Nations

21. Notes that the availability of United Nations documents in relevant official
languages is limited in some areas of Secretariat activity, and therefore invites the
Secretary-General to take the appropriate measures to implement, within existing
resources, current multilingualism policies, in compliance with relevant rules and
regulations, and requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the context of his next
report, information on measures taken to ensure the availability of outreach documents
in all official languages;
22. Also notes the efforts of the Secretary-General to promote knowledge and
awareness of and action on racism within the Organization, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to include information on racism and cases involving racial discrimination in
the context of his next report on the activities of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to provide information on
trends and cases of discrimination within the Organization in the context of his next
report on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services;
24. Notes the absence of a mental health component within the legal framework
to process cases of harassment, discrimination and abuse of authority, and requests the
Secretary-General to provide options to address such absence, to reinforce his efforts to
achieve a harmonious working environment free from discrimination, harassment and
abuse of authority in all forms and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixth session;
25. Notes with concern the recent pattern of upward harassment of female
managers, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action to address the
issue, including through providing tools and mandatory training on the value of civility
in the workplace, and to report thereon in his next report;
III
Formal system
26. Welcomes the progress made in reducing the number of pending and ageing
cases before the Dispute Tribunal, including through the efficient use of half -time
judges, stresses the importance of the continued implementation of all measures
introduced by the General Assembly in its resolutions 73/276 and 74/258, and requests
the Secretary-General to continue to report on the measures taken to further address the
backlog of cases, with priority given to cases that are pending for more than 400 days;
27. Recalls paragraph 24 of its resolution 73/276, appreciates the efforts of the
Dispute Tribunal and the Office of Administration of Justice to develop and implement
the case disposal plan, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the real-time
case-tracking dashboard is made publicly available;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to track the data on the number
of cases received by the Management Evaluation Unit and the Dispute Tribunal in order
to identify any emerging trends, including on the increased number of non -receivable
cases, and to include his observations on those statistics in future reports;
29. Encourages the Dispute Tribunal to continue to make full use of
telecommuting in the deployment of half-time judges so as to promote efficiencies, and
decides that the practice of publishing the schedule and cause list for each half-time
judge on the website of the internal justice system shall be extended to the full -time
judges;
30. Commends the Secretary-General for the creation of the toolkits for
self-represented applicants, encourages the Secretary-General to continue to provide
4/5

21-00049

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/75/248

assistance to self-represented applicants and enhance their understanding and ability to
utilize the system and mitigate efficiency concerns, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to continue to monitor the issue of self-representation and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
31. Recognizes the ongoing positive contribution of the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance to the system of administration of justice;
32. Notes the overall trend of increase in the workload of the Office of Staff
Legal Assistance, expresses its satisfaction that the majority of requests for legal
assistance received by the Office were settled or otherwise disposed of without recourse
to any formal mechanism, and acknowledges that the Office should be adequately
resourced;
33. Also notes the continuing high opt-out rates from the voluntary staff funding
mechanism, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
strengthen incentives for staff not to opt out, particularly in locations and United Nations
entities where the participation rate is low;
IV
Other issues
34. Stresses that the Internal Justice Council can help to ensure independence,
professionalism and accountability in the system of administration of justice, and
requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Council with including the views of both
the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal in its reports;
35. Welcomes further views of the Internal Justice Council in its next report to
the General Assembly on possible ways to improve judicial and operational efficiency;
36. Approves the proposed conditions of service and appointment requirements
for the Internal Justice Council, as set out in annex V to the report of the Secretary General on administration of justice at the United Nations, 8 which shall guide the
appointment of the members of the Council and its functioning;
37. Recalls paragraph 35 of its resolution 74/258, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide further analysis of and clarification on the proposed amendments to
articles 2 and 7 of the statute of the Appeals Tribunal on pension matters 9 in the context
of his next report;
38. Decides to consider at its seventy-sixth session the proposed amendments to
the rules of procedure of the Appeals Tribunal and the Dispute Tribunal, as set out in
annexes I and II to the report of the Secretary-General on administration of justice at
the United Nations;
39. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report to be
submitted by the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth Committee
as the Main Committee entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary
matters.
48th (resumed) plenary meeting
31 December 2020

__________________
8
9

21-00049

A/75/162.
Ibid., annex IV.
5/5
