194

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

Deeply concerned about the heavy burden that has been
placed on the fragile economy of Somalia by the continuing presence of large numbers of refugees,
Aware of the additional burden imposed by the new influx of refugees and the consequent urgent need for additional international assistance,
Concerned about the continuing and serious shortfalls in
the provision of food assistance, which have resulted in
dangerous ration restrictions, epidemics related to malnutrition, other shortages and extreme hardship in refugee
camps in Somalia,
Concerned a/so that continuing funding difficulties have
necessitated a reduction in normal activities, entailing reductions in staff and programmes, as well as the cancellation of sorne long-term agricultural projects,
Recognizing from the recommendations contained in the
report of the High Commissioner that there remains an
urgent need for increased assistance in the provision of
food, water and medicines, in the areas of transport and
logistics, shelter and domestic items, construction, the
strengthening of health and educational facilities, and the
expansion of the number of self-help schemes and smallscale farming and settlement projects necessary for the
promotion of self-reliance among the refugees,
Conscious of the continued consequences of the social
and economic borden placed on the Government and people of Somalia as a result of the continued presence of refugees and new refugee flows and the consequent impact on
national development and the infrastructure of the country,
1. Takes note ofthe report ofthe United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Commends the measures that the Government of
Somalía is taking to provide material and humanitarian
assistance to refugees, in spite of the limited resources and
the fragile economy of Somalia;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and the High Commissioner for their continued efforts to
mobilize international assistance on behalf of the refugees
in Sornaba;
4. Takes note with satisfaction of the assistance rendered to refugees in Somalia by various Member States,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund and other concerned intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
5. Appeals to Member States, international organizations and voluntary agencies to render maximum and
timely material, financia! and technical assistance to the
Government of Somalía in its efforts to provide all necessary assistance to the refugees and to enable the Office of
the High Commissioner to restore its original programmes
to their normal scale;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Office ofthe High Commissioner, the United Nations Development Programme and other relevant United
Nations agencies, to dispatch a high-level inter-agency
mission to Sornaba to review existing refugee programmes, taking into account the country's extremely
limited resources and the burden that the presence of the
refugees places on its economy and vital public services,
and to prepare a comprehensive programme of assistance,
combining both refugee-related humanitarian and developmental needs, for eventual submission to the international community;
7. Requests the High Commissioner, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, to apprise the Economic and

Social Council, at its second regular session of 1987, ofthe
refugee situation in Somalia;
8. Also requests the High Commissioner, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to submit to the General
Assembly at its forty-second session a report on the progress achieved in the implementation ofthe present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/139.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/181 of 15 December 1980,
36/158 of 16 December 1981, 37/173 of 17 December
1982, 38/90 of 16 December 1983, 39/108 of 14 December 1984 and 40/135 of 13 December 1985 on the situation of refugees in the Sudan,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation of refugees in the Sudan and the report of
the inter-agency mission annexed thereto, 127
Appreciating the measures which the Government of the
Sudan is taking in order to provide shelter, protection,
food, education, and health and other humanitarian services to a very large and persistent number of refugees in
the Sudan,
Recognizing the heavy burden placed on the people and
Government ofthe Sudan and the sacrifices they are making in caring for the refugees and the need for adequate international assistance to enable them to continue their efforts to provide assistance to the refugees,
Grave/y concerned at the serious social and economic
impact of the massive presence of refugees, as well as its
far-reaching consequences for the country's development,
security and stability,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance rendered by
Member States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations in support of the refugee programme in the Sudan,
Bearing in mind the findings and recommendations of
the inter-agency mission to the Sudan, particularly the
suggestion that the international community should explore new and effective approaches to ensure that the borden of dealing with refugees is shared more equitably. 128
Recognizing the need to view refugee-related development projects within local and national development
plans,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolution 40/135 127 and welcomes
the report of the inter-agency mission annexed thereto;
2. Commends the measures that the Government of
the Sudan is taking to provide material and humanitarian
assistance to refugees, in spite of the effects of the drought
and the serious economic situation it faces, and stresses
the need for additional resources to lessen the impact of
the presence of refugees on the economy of this least developed country;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, donor countries and intergovernmental and 11011governmental organizations for their efforts to assist the
refugees in the Sudan;
127 A/41/264.
128 See A/41 /264,

annex, para. 53.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Expresses grave concern at the serious and farreaching consequences of the massive presence of refugees
in the country on its security, stability and development,
as reflected in the report of the inter-agency mission;
5. Also expresses grave concern at the shrinking resources available for refugee programmes in the Sudan
and the serious consequences ofthis situation on the country's ability to continue to act as host and provide assistance to refugees;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in following up on
the report of the inter-agency mission and furthering the
integration of developmental and refugee aid, to take steps
to ensure that continued joint inter-agency expert planning for the Sudan takes place, as suggested by the mission
in its report;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
necessary financia! and material assistance for the full implementation of ongoing projects in the areas affected by
the presence of refugees;
8. Appeals to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the
international financia! institutions to provide the Government ofthe Sudan with the necessary resources for the implementation of development assistance projects in regions affected by the presence of refugees;
9. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential
services to the refugees in their settlements;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/140.

Emergency assistance to voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 39/106 of 14 December 1984
and 40/136 of 13 December 1985,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
emergency assistance to voluntary returnees and displaced
persons in Chad, 129
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the drought
and the invasion of locusts and predators, which are compounding the already precarious food and health situation
in Chad,
Conscious that the large number of voluntary returnees
and displaced persons as a result of the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of integrating
them into society,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Government of Chad for international emergency assistance to
the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad,
who are victims of the war and of natural disasters,
l. Endorses the appeals made by the Government of
Chad concerning emergency assistance to the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;

129 A/41/531.

195

2. Reiterates its appeal to ali States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support,
by generous contributions, the efforts being made by the
Government of Chad to assist and resettle the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
3. Takes note with satisfaction ofthe action undertaken
by the various bodies of the United Nations system and
the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Again requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to mobilize emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons
in Chad;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, to
report to the General Assembly at its forty-second session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/141.

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolutions, in particular resolution
40/ 133 of 13 December 1985, as well as ali those of the
Economic and Social Council, on assistance to displaced
persons in Ethiopia,
Taking noteofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 130
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 90
Recognizing the increasing number of voluntary returnees and refugees in Ethiopia,
Deeply concerned at the situation of displaced persons
and voluntary returnees in the country, which has been
aggravated by the devastating effect of the prolonged
drought,
Aware of the heavy burden placed on the Government of
Ethiopia in caring for displaced persons and victims of
natural disasters, as well as for voluntary returnees and
refugees,
1. Commends the efforts made so far by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other organizations of the United Nations system, as well
as by the specialized agencies, in mobilizing humanitarian
assistance to assist the elforts of the Government of Ethiopta;
2. Appeals to Member States and to international organizations and voluntary agencies to render adequate
material, financia) and technical assistance to the Government and people of Ethiopia in their elforts to provide relief and rehabilitation to displaced persons, voluntary
returnees and refugees in Ethiopia;
3. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts in mobilizing
humanitarian assistance for the relief, rehabilitation and
re~ettlement of voluntary returnees and refugees in Ethiopta:

11

º A/41/516.
