S/2019/852

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 October 2019
Original: English

Children and armed conflict in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, is the fourth report
of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in the Central African
Republic and covers the period from January 2016 to June 2019.
In the report, the Secretary-General addresses the effect of the cycles of violence
on children in the country, highlighting trends and patterns of the si x grave violations
committed against children, and presents information, where available, on the
perpetrators. The progress made by parties to the conflict in terms of dialogue, action
plans and other child protection commitments is also outlined. The Secr etary-General
provides a series of recommendations aimed at ending and preventing grave violations
against children and strengthening child protection in the Central African Republic.

19-18856 (E)

111119

*1918856*

S/2019/852

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions, is my fourth report on the situation of children
affected by armed conflict in the Central African Republic and covers the period from
1 January 2016 to 30 June 2019. In the report, I describe patterns of grave violations
against children that have occurred since my previous report ( S/2016/133) and outline
challenges and progress in addressing the protection of children since the adoption of
the conclusions of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict of the Security
Council (S/AC.51/2016/3). Where feasible, parties to the conflict responsible for
grave violations are identified. In the annexes to my most recent annual report on
children and armed conflict (A/73/907-S/2019/509), the former Séléka coalition and
associated armed groups, including the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique (FPRC), the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC) and the
Union pour la paix en Centrafrique (UPC), local militias known as anti-balaka, and
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) are listed for recruitment and use, killing and
maiming, and rape and sexual violence. In addition, the former Séléka coalition and
associated armed groups are listed for attacks against schools and hospitals, and LRA
for abduction. The United Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting in
the Central African Republic, co-chaired by the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), documented and verified the
information contained in the present report. Grave violations against children were
mostly committed by armed groups. There were few cases attributed to Government
forces. The monitoring and reporting of grave violations was hampered by security
and logistical constraints that limited physical access throughout the reporting period.
In addition, victims and witnesses were often prevented from seeking assistance or
reporting incidents owing to insecurity and fear stemming from the continued
presence of perpetrators within the communities. The information contained in the
present report is therefore only a partial representation of grave violations against
children committed during the reporting period.

II. Overview of political and security developments
2.
Following elections at the end of 2015 and early 2016, the President of the
Central African Republic, Faustin Archange Touadera, took over from the transitional
government in March 2016, representing a new political era in the Central African
Republic. However, the security situation remained fragile, particularly outside
Bangui. In the east and south-east of the country, the intensification of LRA activities
and the large number of abductions by LRA at the beginning of 2016 triggered
population displacement. As of May 2016, a security gap had emerged owing to the
end of the mandate of the African Union Regional Task Force in the Central African
Republic to fight LRA.
3.
In June 2016, the split between Arab and Fulani elements of UPC, and the
refusal of UPC to join a reorganized ex-Séléka coalition under FPRC leadership,
gradually led to a confrontation between the two groups. FPRC assumed a hard -line
position towards the Government, attempting to reunite all ex-Séléka groups under a
single chain of command. UPC opposed a united ex-Séléka, expanding itself
eastward. Later in 2016, conflict erupted between the FPRC -led coalition (FPRC,
MPC, the Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centr afrique (RPRC)
and anti-balaka) and UPC. Resource-rich areas originally controlled by UPC were
targeted by the FPRC-led coalition, leading to serious clashes during which grave
violations against children occurred.

2/16

19-18856

S/2019/852

4.
Violence associated with the seasonal movement of Fulani pastoralists and the
presence of armed groups claiming to protect them resulted in human rights abuses
against civilians in the central and western parts of the country during 2016. Some
Fulani herders were often heavily armed and involved in violent clashes with farming
communities. Fighting commonly took place between anti-balaka and FPRC along
the transhumance corridors in Ouham prefecture. Fighting between anti -balaka and
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (3R) resulted in the closure of schools and
displacement in parts of Ouham-Pendé prefecture. Meanwhile the geographical
expansion of MPC resulted in humanitarian workers becoming targets of attacks and
temporarily pulling out of Batangafo and Bocaranga.
5.
The year 2017 witnessed the establishment of a new Government in September,
including a new ministry dedicated to women, family and children. FPRC and
anti-balaka representatives received ministerial portfolios. The conflict, particularly
in the east, was often presented by armed groups and some political leaders as being
due to religious and ethnic differences, resulting in hate crimes, targeted attacks
against communities and mass displacement. Conflict intensified between the F PRCled coalition and UPC. In early 2017, local self-defence groups in Haute-Kotto and
Mbomou prefectures began to organize and turn themselves into armed militias
associated with anti-balaka determined to rid the country of Fulani, who were seen as
being associated with UPC. Clashes between armed Fulani and UPC against
anti-balaka spread to Haut-Mbomou prefecture. Sites for internally displaced persons
established near hospitals and religious institutions were frequently targeted by armed
groups.
6.
In the central and western parts of the country, violence fuelled by cattle rustling
erupted between MPC, Révolution et justice (RJ) and anti -balaka, affecting the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to children. In September 2017, a new Fulani
armed group named Siriri emerged in the western areas of Nana-Mambéré and
Mambéré-Kadéï prefectures to reportedly protect the Fulani and their livestock.
However, they attacked communities and were eventually assimilated by 3R in
November 2018.
7.
During 2017, MPC established a coalition with RJ and aggres sively expanded
farther west towards the borders of Cameroon and Chad. In October, Raymond
Belanga, also known as “General” Ahmat Bahar, deserted MPC and created the
Mouvement national pour la libération de la Centrafrique (MNLC) to reportedly
protect local communities from other armed groups. The intensity of the conflict grew
around Paoua and Bocaranga, resulting in widespread population displacement.
8.
Throughout 2018, sporadic attacks by armed groups against civilians continued,
predominantly in the centre and the east. Clashes also continued between anti-balaka
and FPRC and between anti-balaka and UPC, resulting in child casualties and
displacement. Local cessation-of-hostility agreements were negotiated with the
support of MINUSCA throughout the country. For example, the signing of the
Bangassou agreement on 9 April resulted in more freedom of movement for
humanitarian workers and the local population and the dismantling of checkpoints.
The country task force on monitoring and reporting noted a signifi cant decrease in
reported grave violations against children in the area compared with 2017. In other
places such as Batangafo and Ippy, however, local peace accords offered only a
temporary improvement in security, and were subsequently broken by large -scale
attacks on civilians, in particular internally displaced persons, by armed groups.
Retaliatory attacks between anti-balaka and UPC remained a common pattern that had
a serious impact on the protection of children.
9.
The year 2018 also saw a temporary spike in violence in Bangui. On 8 April,
MINUSCA, the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic and the national
19-18856

3/16

S/2019/852

internal security forces (comprising the national police and gendarmerie) launched
Operation Sukula to arrest key criminal gang leaders in B angui’s third district.
Rumours about the Operation and the incitement of hatred triggered violence between
Christian and Muslim communities, affecting 16 children. Tension in the aftermath of
Operation Sukula extended to Nana-Grébizi and Bamingui-Bangoran prefectures.
10. With regard to LRA, after a surge in violence by the group in 2016, its activities
decreased during the remainder of the period under review. The decrease could be the
result of operations carried out by the African Union Regional Task F orce before their
departure, the arrest of key LRA leaders or the presence of other armed groups who
took advantage of the vacuum left by the departure of the Task Force.
11. In a significant development, on 6 February 2019, as a result of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation led by the African Union, the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic was signed
between the Government and 14 armed groups. The Agreement, which prohibits,
inter alia, grave violations against children, established a monitoring and verification
system headed by the African Union and supported by the Agreement ’s guarantors
and facilitators. 1 In contrast to past agreements, the presence of MINUSCA allows for
greater support to implementation of the Agreement, including through the
sanctioning of violations. 2 A new Government was subsequently established on
22 March with 13 ministerial posts allotted to members of nine armed groups.
Representatives of armed groups were also appointed to posts in the Presidency and
the Prime Minister’s office. A decree on 24 March appointed, inter alia, Ali Darassa
(UPC), Bi Sidi Souleymane (also known as Sidiki) (3R) and Mahamat Alkatim (MPC)
as military advisers to the Prime Minister in charge of the Unités spéciales mixtes de
sécurité, new temporary security units established by the Agreement that will bring
together ex-combatants and members of the national defence and security forces.
12. Despite encouraging steps in the implementation pro cess, armed groups
generally continued their illegal activity in violation of the Agreement, and reports of
killings, sexual violence and attacks against humanitarian workers were received. The
President of the Central African Republic came under criticism for including in his
Government as part of the peace deal leaders whose armed groups are accused of
committing grave human rights violations. Moreover, the absence of State authority
outside Bangui also nurtured an environment conducive to grave violation s against
children. While MINUSCA and its partners supported the redeployment of State
authority throughout the country, those civil servants who resumed duty often did so
only temporarily, owing to insecurity and the lack of infrastructure. That in turn
prevented schools and other basic services from being fully operational.
13. In addition, though criminal courts were operational in Bouar and Bangui by
June 2019, the criminal court in Bambari operated on an ad hoc basis. Few
perpetrators were held accountable for grave violations against children and impunity
continued to prevail.
14. The United Nations continued to work with international partners, in particular
the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States, to ensure
that the Agreement will lead to transformative change at the local level. In the past,
the lack of a political agreement had hindered the implementation of the national
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme agreed
__________________

Guarantors include the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States;
facilitators include Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and Sudan, and MINUSCA.
2
Refers to the enforcement role of MINUSCA as a facilitator of the Agreement. According to
article 35 of the Agreement, guarantors and facilitators are committed to applying “punitive
measures” if signatory parties violate the Agreement.
1

4/16

19-18856

S/2019/852

between the Government and the armed groups in 2015, which obstructed the
unconditional release of all children associated with armed groups. The Agreement
offers a powerful tool to advance those processes.

III. Grave violations against children
15. Between January 2016 and June 2019, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting verified grave violations against 1,364 children (650 girls, 714 boys), 138
attacks on schools and hospitals and 342 incidents of denial of humanitarian access
to children throughout the country.
16. Compared with the statistics presented in my previous report ( S/2016/133),
which covered a five-year period, there was a decrease in the killing and maiming of
children, the recruitment and use of children as soldiers, rape and other forms of
sexual violence against children and attacks against schools. However, the numbers
of attacks against hospitals almost doubled and abductions of children increased by
more than 7 per cent. Incidents of denial of humanitarian access also increased by
20 per cent, peaking in September 2017. The recruitment and use of children was the
most prominent violation, and also reached a peak in 2017.

A.

Recruitment and use
17. During the reporting period, 473 children (144 girls, 329 boys), some as young
as 6 years old, were verified by the country task force as having been recruited and
used by armed groups. The main perpetrators were ex-Séléka factions, which
recruited and used 299 children (90 girls, 209 boys): 63 p er cent of the total number
of cases. Specifically, the ex-Séléka factions consisted of UPC (105 boys); FPRC
(33 girls, 51 boys); MPC (27 girls, 28 boys); FPRC/MPC (16 girls, 7 boys); ex -Séléka
rénovée (12 girls, 4 boys); MNLC (2 girls, 12 boys); and RPRC (2 boys). The
remaining cases (174) were attributed to LRA (32 girls, 44 boys); anti -balaka
(10 girls, 63 boys); the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain (FDPC) (11 girls,
4 boys); 3R (1 girl, 5 boys); PK5 groups (3 boys); and RJ (1 boy). In addition to being
combatants, children were used as porters, informants and cooks. Most girls were also
used for sexual purposes.
18. The number of children recruited in 2016 (74) almost doubled compared with
2015 (40) due to a surge in LRA activities in the east and south-east of the country
(Haute-Kotto, Basse-Kotto, Haut-Mbomou and Mbomou prefectures). In 2017, the
recruitment and use of children peaked dramatically, with ex-Séléka as the main
perpetrator, responsible for 243 of the 299 children recruited. The division and
erupting conflict between UPC and the FPRC-led coalition in 2016 and 2017 over the
control of key mining locations in the Ouaka and Haute-Kotto prefectures, and clashes
between anti-balaka and UPC in the Mbomou prefecture, became extremely violent.
In that context, recruitment campaigns were conducted by the armed groups,
including through the targeting of children, to reinforce their ranks. Consequently,
most of the children were verified as associated with the armed groups in the Ouaka
and Haute-Kotto prefectures, both of them ex-Séléka strongholds.
19. In 2018, a significant decrease was documented with regard to the number of
children verified as having been recruited and used (75, mostly by anti -balaka (34)
and ex-Séléka factions (27)). That downward trend could be partly attributed to efforts
made to foster peace on the ground, in which MINUSCA supported the negotiation
and development of local peace agreements resulting in the creation of greater
humanitarian space and a significant reduction in violence. Nevertheless, Mbomou
prefecture, where anti-balaka established a stronghold and recruited and used children

19-18856

5/16

S/2019/852

from within the community, was the area affected most. The country task force
received testimonies of children claiming that anti-balaka commanders were using so
called “vaccination” campaigns (symbolic scarring to protect from bullets) to attract
children in territories under their control in Basse -Kotto and Mbomou prefectures. In
Haute-Kotto prefecture, MINUSCA witnessed 20 children associated with anti-balaka
at six checkpoints along the Pende, Kalanga, Gbama, Balenguere, Ouaga and Makili
axis. All children were scarred, carried locally made weapons and wore amulets.
20. During the first half of 2019, a total of 25 children (3 girls, 22 boys) were
verified as having been recruited and used by armed groups. However, the numbers
are believed to be underreported as the country task force received credible reports of
alleged mass recruitment of children up to June 2019.
21. Most armed groups recruited children from their own communities through false
promises of integration into the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic or
through abduction. The need for revenge and security, as well as the lack of access to
education, were also common factors that attracted children to armed groups. With
regard to LRA, the group carried out its recruitment mainly through the abduction of
children during attacks against their communities.
22. During the reporting period, the protection of a 16-year-old boy who had
escaped from a PK5 group was particularly challenging. The child was tortured and
subjected to death threats because he had witnessed serious crimes. Following
advocacy on the part of the country task force, the authorities placed th e boy under
special protection measures for nine months prior to his relocation outside the country
Detention of children for their alleged association with armed groups
23. During the reporting period, 16 children (2 girls, 14 boys) aged 13 to 17 year s
were arrested and detained by national authorities for their alleged association with
anti-balaka (1 girl, 5 boys); UPC (4 boys); LRA (1 girl, 3 boys); 3R (1 boy); and
FPRC (1 boy). They were detained for periods ranging from three weeks to two years.
As of June 2019, 14 children had been released and handed over to child protection
partners for reintegration. As of the time of writing, the cases of two boys arrested in
2017 and 2018 for their association with UPC were pending before the juvenile
criminal courts.
24. MINUSCA, on behalf of the country task force, advocated for the release of
detained children and for alternatives to detention through placement in host families.
UNICEF partners provided psychosocial support and food while the children were
detained.

B.

Killing and maiming
25. During the period under review, the country task force verified 324 children as
having been killed (187: 70 girls, 117 boys) or maimed (137: 42 girls, 95 boys), some
as young as 4 months old. That represents a significant decrease compared with my
previous report (922 child casualties). While my previous report covered a longer
period, the overall decrease remains noteworthy.
26. However, child casualties increased gradually from 66 children in 2016 to 104
in 2017 to 114 in 2018. Forty children as young as 6 months old were killed or maimed
in the first half of 2019. The majority of those casualties were attributed to ex -Séléka
factions (148): 46 per cent of the total. Specifically, the factions included UPC (81),
FPRC (20), FPRC/MPC (15), MPC (10), unidentified ex-Séléka (13), MNLC (5),
RPRC (3) and FPRC/UPC (1). The remaining child casualties (176) were attributed
to anti-balaka (66), 3R (15), PK5 groups (10), LRA (3), RJ (1), FDPC (1) and national

6/16

19-18856

S/2019/852

security forces (1), and unidentified armed elements (71). Casualties were also caused
by unexploded ordnance that killed five children and injured three others.
27. Most children were killed or maimed by shootings, arson, machete wounds and
stabbings during attacks against their communities, due to the community’s ethnic
and/or religious identity. For instance, in October 2018, anti -balaka-associated
militias used machetes to kill 12 children from two Fulani families outside Zemio
(Haut-Mbomou prefecture). On 13 June 2018, three armed UPC combatants opened
fire on an internally displaced persons camp in Ippy (Ouaka prefecture) killing a
15-year-old boy and causing serious injury to a 17-year-old boy.
28. Children were also affected during retaliatory attacks between armed groups.
For example, in October 2016 in Kaga Bandoro, such attacks between the ex -Séléka
factions and anti-balaka resulted in the killing of six children, one attack on a clinic
and the killing of two teachers and one medical worker. In 2017 in Ouaka pref ecture,
in spite of the Ippy agreement that created a new alliance between various armed
groups, 15 people, including 2 children, were killed when UPC/MPC and FPRC
attacked a hospital in which anti-balaka elements were hiding.
29. Ouaka, Nana-Grébizi, Mbomou and Haut-Mbomou prefectures were
particularly affected by violent confrontations between the FPRC -led coalition and
UPC around Bambari, and between FPRC and anti-balaka in Nana-Grébizi prefecture,
as well as anti-balaka activities in the Mbomou prefecture.

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
30. The country task force verified that 291 children, including 2 boys, had been
victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence, a considerable decrease compared
with my previous report (513), although the scale of sexual violence affecting
children is believed to be underreported. The decrease is possibly explained by sexual
violence not being reported for fear of stigmatization and marginalization; a lack of
access to holistic services for victims or the absence of programmes for victims of
rape and sexual violence in many areas; widespread impunity, with perpetrators
continuing to live in the community; insecurity in areas controlled by armed groups;
and logistical and access constraints for the country task force and partners.
31. Despite the overall decrease, the number of children subject to sexual violence
increased from 55 in 2016 to 138 in 2017 owing to widespread violations and
indiscriminate attacks against civilians, during which children were often exposed to
sexual violence. In 2018, the number of cases dropped to 62, and 36 cases were
verified during the first half of 2019.
32. Overall, ex-Séléka factions were the main perpetrator of sexual violence against
children (138), accounting for 47 per cent of the total. Specifically, the factions
included MPC (40), FPRC (37), FPRC/MPC (21), unidentified ex -Séléka (15), UPC
(12), MPC/RJ (9) and MNLC (4). The remaining cases (154) were attributed to
anti-balaka (48), 3R (15), FDPC (12), LRA (9), PK5 groups (7), RJ (5), Uganda
People’s Defence Forces (3), Siriri (1) and unidentified armed elements (45), as well
as Government forces (8), including the Armed Forces of the Central African
Republic (5), police auxiliaries (2) and customs authoritie s (1).
33. Sexual violence against children was often in the context of other grave
violations, such as recruitment and use, or abduction. For example, a total of 143 girls
were sexually abused during their association with armed groups. In addition, thou gh
only two cases of rape against boys, perpetrated by UPC, were verified in 2017 and
2018, it is believed that the number of cases involving boys is much higher. Sexual

19-18856

7/16

S/2019/852

violence against boys is underreported owing to social stigma and inadequate services
for male victims.
34. Of note, more than 9 per cent of the victims (29) were gang -raped, while others
were targeted according to their religious and/or ethnic origin by elements belonging
to ex-Séléka factions (13), namely UPC (5), MPC (3), FPRC (2), unidentified
ex-Séléka (2) and FPRC/MPC coalition (1), as well as by 3R (2) and anti -balaka (1).
In September 2017, in a village in Basse-Kotto prefecture, an undetermined number
of UPC elements abducted a 17-year-old boy and gang-raped him over two days. The
incident took place during an attack by UPC in which sexual violence was used
against the community, including men and boys, as a form of punishment. On
2 October 2017, 3R elements armed with AK-47s gang-raped a 17-year-old girl
during an attack on Bocaranga (Ouham-Pendé prefecture). Four elements of the group
dressed in military attire stopped the victim on the road to Koundjouli village,
dragged her into the bush, threw her baby on the ground and raped her in turn. The
victim received medical assistance from an international non-governmental
organization.
35. During the reporting period, only five perpetrators of sexual violence against
children were arrested, including one member each of the armed groups anti -balaka,
UPC and FPRC, a police auxiliary and a soldier of the Armed Forces of the Central
African Republic. The UPC and anti-balaka members were sentenced to 6 months and
10 years of imprisonment, respectively. The police auxiliary and the FPRC member
were in detention pending trial at the time of writing, while the soldier was released
by the military prosecutor, reportedly for lack of evidence.

D.

Abduction
36. The country task force verified the abduction of 276 children (105 girls,
171 boys), a 7 per cent increase compared with my previous report (257). Abductions
increased from 98 in 2016 to 101 in 2017, before declining to 62 in 2018 and 15 in
the first half of 2019. In addition, reports of the abduction of 11 children in 2016 and
12 children in January 2019 could not be verified. Abduct ion was used mostly as a
means of recruitment (97 per cent of the cases), and in some instances for ransom
(five girls) or sexual purposes (eight girls).
37. Overall, LRA was responsible for the highest number of abductions, affecting
114 children (39 girls, 75 boys), accounting for 42 per cent of the total number,
followed by ex-Séléka factions (67: 34 girls, 33 boys). Specifically, the ex-Séléka
factions consisted of MNLC (9 girls, 16 boys); FPRC (12 girls, 8 boys); MPC (8 girls,
4 boys); MPC/RJ (3 girls, 1 boy); FPRC/MPC (2 boys); UPC (2 girls); and
unidentified ex-Séléka (2 boys). In addition, abductions were attributed to anti -balaka
(55: 28 girls, 27 boys); FDPC (7 boys); PK5 groups (7 boys); 3R (3 boys); RJ (1 boy,
1 girl); and unidentified armed elements (1 girl, 20 boys).
38. In 2016, the intensification of LRA activities in the east and south -east of the
country (Basse-Kotto, Mbomou, Haut-Mbomou and Haute-Kotto prefectures) led to
the abduction of 84 children (29 girls, 55 boys), accounting fo r more than 85 per cent
of abducted children that year. The children were used as porters, to loot goods and
in other support roles. All 29 abducted girls endured sexual violence while in
captivity. In April 2016, an LRA combatant defected with his “wife”, a 15-year-old
girl. Upon presenting themselves to the authorities in Mbomou prefecture, they were
arrested. The girl was released two weeks later. However, the male adult LRA
escapee, who was himself abducted in Uganda when he was 12, died in 2018 during
the lengthy extradition process that would have enabled him to return home.

8/16

19-18856

S/2019/852

39. In 2017, there was a peak in the number of abductions by anti -balaka (37), who
accounted for the highest number of cases, followed by LRA (20). Forty -five percent
of the children were abducted during the fourth quarter of 2017 in Haute -Kotto and
Haut-Mbomou prefectures during attacks against communities by rival groups. For
example, anti-balaka abducted 25 children during four offensives against UPC
strongholds in Haute-Kotto prefecture in October 2017 and a Fulani settlement in
Ouham prefecture in December 2017. The children have not returned.
40. In 2018, and during the first half of 2019, there was a 42 per cent decrease in
the number of verified abductions compared with 2017 and 2016, predominantly due
to a decrease in LRA activities. Ex-Séléka factions were the main perpetrators,
responsible for 38 abductions, and included MNLC (25), FPRC (9), MPC (2) and
FPRC/MPC (2), while LRA abducted 11 and anti-balaka abducted 10. As an example,
on 20 April 2018, near Paoua (Ouham-Pendé prefecture), suspected MNLC elements
abducted 10 Fulani boys who were subsequently used in support roles. The boys
escaped after four days in captivity.

E.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
41. The already weak education and health systems remained deeply affected by
continued fighting and intercommunal violence, depriving hundreds of thousands of
children of their fundamental rights to education and basic health care. Schools and
hospitals were attacked, destroyed, burned, looted by armed groups or used for
military purposes, and education and health personnel were threatened and killed.
42. A total of 138 incidents of attacks against schools (74) and hospitals (64) were
verified over the reporting period, representing a small increase compared with my
previous report (131 attacks: 98 on schools and 33 on hospitals). Overall, while
attacks against schools decreased, attacks against hospitals increased by 48 per cent.
Attacks against schools
43. Attacks against schools have steadily increased since 2016 (8), with a peak in
verified incidents in 2018 (34). Most incidents of attacks on schools were attributed
to ex-Séléka factions (51), accounting for 69 per cent of the total number. The
ex-Séléka factions involved were UPC (19), FPRC (10), FPRC/MPC (10), MPC (7),
unidentified ex-Séléka (4) and RPRC (1). Other perpetrators were anti-balaka (7),
3R (5), RJ (3), LRA (2), PK5 groups (1) and unidentified armed elements (5). The
country task force documented a pattern of deliberate and systematic attacks on
schools, used as a form of reprisal. Almost half of the attacks occurred in 2018, of
which more than two thirds (26) were committed by ex-Séléka factions in the Ouaka
prefecture during confrontations between armed groups. For instance, on 21 March
2018, during clashes between UPC and anti-balaka in Seko, UPC elements looted and
removed the rooftops, windows and doors of six schools in Tagbara and Seko villages.
44. In addition, 35 incidents of use by armed groups of schools were verified, most
of which were attributed to ex-Séléka factions (31). Armed groups generally
established their bases in schools, used benches, roofing, windows and doors as
firewood and destroyed teachers’ materials before leaving. The country task force’s
continuous engagement with armed groups to vacate schools resulted in a decline in
the practice from 2016 (22) to 2017 (3). For example, following advocacy by
MINUSCA at the start of the school year in September 2017, six schools were vacated
by MPC and FDPC in Ouham and Nana-Mambéré prefectures. Earlier advocacy
enabled the evacuation of schools in Bakala and Mourouba by UPC, and in Mbrès by
FPRC. Previously the schools had been looted and used during hostilities. The school
in Bakala was reportedly used by UPC for the alleged summary execution of 27 men

19-18856

9/16

S/2019/852

and boys accused of being anti-balaka members. The number of schools used for
military purposes increased to six in 2018, and three others were verified during the
first half of 2019.
45. Decisive steps were taken by the MINUSCA Force to implement the Mission ’s
directive to protect schools and universities, issued in December 2015. MINUSCA
used the directive as a tool for advocating with armed groups to vacate schools in
coordination with the Education Cluster.
Attacks against hospitals
46. Attacks against hospitals gradually increased throughout the reporting period,
from 16 in 2016 to 19 in 2017, and to 22 in 2018. Seven incidents were verified in
the first half of 2019. A total of 30 attacks were committed by ex-Séléka factions
(47 per cent), including FPRC (9), FPRC/MPC (8), UPC (6), MNLC (2), unidentified
ex-Séléka (2), MPC (1), RPRC (1) and MPC/RJ (1). The remaining attacks (34) were
attributed to anti-balaka (18), LRA (3), a mixed unit consisting of gendarmerie and
police unit (1), FDPC (1) and unidentified armed elements (11). The attacks included
the killing of six medical personnel, an unknown number of patients and the looting
of medicine and supplies. For instance, on 24 May 2017, anti-balaka entered
Bangassou hospital looking for Muslim patients in retaliation for the death of one of
their elements. They took two Fulani women, who were subsequently killed. On
20 June 2017, FPRC attacked Bria hospital and abducted two injured anti-balaka
elements in retaliation for the death of an FPRC element.
47. On 14 July 2017, in Andjirocho, a neighbourhood on the outskirts of Bria, a
male nurse who was returning from having evacuated an injured patient to Boungou
(Haute-Kotto prefecture) was stopped by FPRC elements who slit his throat. In
another instance, on 4 August, anti-balaka clashed with armed Fulani men in Gambo
hospital (Mbomou prefecture), resulting in the killing of six medical personnel from
a national organization and the looting of the medical centre.
48. More than one third (22) of the total number of attacks during the reporting
period occurred in 2018. Armed groups targeted hospitals and medical personnel,
sometimes killing them, to prevent the delivery of medical assistance to rival groups
and communities. Of those incidents, 74 per cent (17) occurred in the east during
fighting between the FPRC-led coalition and UPC in Ouaka and Haute-Kotto
prefectures, and anti-balaka against UPC in Mbomou prefecture.

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
49. During the reporting period, 342 incidents of denial of humanitarian access to
children were verified, an increase compared with my previous report (284). Incidents
increased steadily throughout the reporting period, from 72 in 2016 to 101 in 2017,
and to 120 in 2018. Forty-nine incidents were verified in the first half of 2019.
Incidents included the forceful entry and looting of humanitarian compounds, the
harassment of humanitarian workers at checkpoints and physical assault, including
the abduction and killing of humanitarian workers, which have had a significant
impact on the delivery of assistance to hundreds of thousands of children.
50. Incidents attributed to ex-Séléka factions (113) represented one third of the total,
and included FPRC (33), unidentified ex-Séléka (26), UPC (23), MPC (17), MPC/RJ
(6), FPRC/MPC (6) and MNLC (2). The remaining incidents were attributed to
anti-balaka (95), LRA (9), FDPC (4), 3R (3), RJ (1) and unidentified arme d
individuals (112), while Government forces, namely the gendarmerie, were
responsible for 5 incidents.

10/16

19-18856

S/2019/852

51. In 2016, most of the incidents occurred in the Nana-Grébizi, Haute-Kotto,
Ouham-Pendé and Ouham prefectures, where there was active conflict and int ense
armed group activities. National and international non -governmental organizations
temporarily suspended activities in Kaga Bandoro, Batangafo and Bocaranga for
several weeks following the killing of and threats against their personnel. The country
task force was unable to determine if the incidents were directly authorized by the
commanders of the different armed groups. Incidents were generally perpetrated by
members of armed groups and unidentified armed individuals in need of supplies to
survive. However, LRA-related incidents targeted humanitarian workers for their
communications equipment in order to strengthen its communications capacity, which
weakened the early warning systems of concerned communities.
52. In 2017, there was a surge in incidents of denial of humanitarian access.
Humanitarian workers were targeted by armed groups for financial gain in the north west and to prevent the provision of humanitarian assistance to civilian populations
from “rival” communities in the south-east. Fourteen humanitarian workers were
killed. For example, on 7 September 2017, anti-balaka looted the bases of
international non-governmental organizations and damaged vehicles, which resulted
in the temporary suspension of humanitarian activities in Batangafo (Ouha m
prefecture), affecting 28,000 internally displaced persons. In Kabo (Ouham
prefecture), the only two operational non-governmental organizations were forced to
leave in December 2017 following attacks and the killing of a driver by MPC .
53. In 2018, incidents of denial of humanitarian access increased further (120),
particularly in the prefectures of Ouham and Nana-Grébizi. Perpetrators included
unidentified armed elements (57), ex-Séléka factions (33), anti-balaka (29) and LRA
(1). Six humanitarian workers were killed, 23 were injured and 5 were abducted.
Twenty-five non-governmental organizations and international organizations
temporarily suspended their activities across the country during the year. In July 2018,
there was a particularly stark rise in criminal activities targeting humanitarian
workers in Kaga Bandoro. The majority of the incidents were perpetrated by
unidentified armed individuals (20), who were suspected to be MPC elements
expressing discontent over the redistribution of financial i ncentives received by the
armed group leaders during a meeting held in August in Khartoum to address peace.
54. In early 2019, 49 incidents were verified, including the killing of two
humanitarian workers by UPC and unidentified armed elements. Ex -Séléka factions
were the main perpetrators (18) while 17 incidents were unattributed.

IV. Release of children and programmatic response
55. During the reporting period, a total of 8,651 children (2,596 girls, 6,055 boys)
were released from armed groups, including 6,383 children (1,768 girls, 4,615 boys)
separated as a result of the direct engagement by the country task force on monitoring
and reporting with armed groups, except LRA. The number of children separated
decreased from 3,897 in 2016 to 1,816 in 2017, and decreased again to 569 in 2018.
The drastic drop in 2018 could be attributed to challenges in engaging with armed
groups, as they were less focused on matters concerning children. Nevertheless,
following the signing of the Political Agreement for P eace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic in 2019, ex-Séléka factions in Kaga Bandoro presented lists
of identified children to the country task force for verification, which led to the
separation of 101 children from FPRC (34), MPC (35) and ex-Séléka rénovée (32).
56. Of a total 6,383 children, 66 per cent (4,263) were separated from anti -balaka,
followed by RJ (934), FPRC (554), UPC (212), MPC (185), RPRC (159), ex -Séléka
rénovée (55), FPRC/MPC (19) and the Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la
19-18856

11/16

S/2019/852

paix (2). In addition, 2,268 self-demobilized children (828 girls, 1,440 boys) from
anti-balaka (1,803) and RJ (465) were identified by the country task force and entered
reintegration programmes implemented by UNICEF partners.
57. Reintegration programmes were rolled out throughout much of the country, and
consisted of medical screening, family tracing and reunification, psychosocial
assistance and educational or vocational training. However, the reintegration of
children faces enormous challenges, owing to insecurity in those locations where
children associated with armed groups are identified and where they should receive
immediate support or be reunified with their families. Other challenges also include
the lack of functioning schools, persistent stigmatization, the refusal by communities
to accept their children and the lack of funds and partners. As a result, one in four
children released since 2014 have not been enrolled into reintegration programmes.
58. In order to increase opportunities for employment, vocational training activities
in different sectors were identified, including manual water drilling, handheld water
pump construction and baking, expanding the choices of training for boys and girls.
According to testimonies from children who have benefited from them, the new
opportunities allow them to look forward to the future. The existing job market
remains the main challenge in relation to the employment of those young people.
59. Victims of sexual violence were cared for through referral systems set up within
the context of child protection and gender-based violence assistance. UNICEF support
for the reintegration into school of child victims of sexual violence has been done
within the framework of emergency protection and education interventions. In 2018,
UNICEF launched a protective learning environment initiative, through which 600
teachers from 182 schools were trained in the methodology of the initiative. Through
the initiative, the targeted schools developed – together with the community – plans
for the protection of 27,300 children. Teachers and communities are equipped to detect
cases of sexual violence at school or in the community and to provide basic
psychosocial support and refer cases to services when they are available .

V. Progress and challenges addressing grave violations
against children
A.

Action plans and dialogue with armed groups
60. Different approaches to engage with parties to conflict were adopted by the
country task force on monitoring and reporting. Given that the ex -Séléka factions
maintain a strong chain of command, dialogue with FPRC, MPC, UPC and RPRC has
taken place through their relevant commanders. However, the loose and localized
command structures of anti-balaka resulted in having to manage a dialogue with local
commanders across several locations. Therefore, while the country task force has
been actively engaged with the ex-Séléka factions for the purpose of action plans, that
has not taken place with anti-balaka, given their loose command and control.
61. In 2017, MINUSCA succeeded in advocating with FPRC and UPC to issue
command orders to stop child recruitment and the use of child soldiers. On 13 May,
FPRC issued a command order requesting its “generals”, officers and
non-commissioned officers to identify all children within their ranks, separate them
and hand them over to MINUSCA and UNICEF and grant unlimited access to the
United Nations so it could verify the presence of children in their respective bases.
On 27 May, FPRC appointed four child protection focal points, who have prepared
lists of children for separation and sensitized FPRC elements on child protection.
Similarly, UPC issued a command order on 25 September, facilitating the release of
212 children from the group during the period under review. Both command orders

12/16

19-18856

S/2019/852

were successfully used by the country task force as an advocacy tool to obtain the
release of children. As a result of a four-year dialogue, FPRC and UPC each signed
an action plan to end and prevent all grave violations against children in June and
August 2019, respectively.
62. Similar engagement with MPC resulted in the signing of an action pl an to
prevent and end grave violations against children in May 2018. Following its
signature, MPC appointed four zone commanders as child protection focal points,
with whom the country task force continued to work to identify children for
separation. On 14 May 2019, MPC issued a command order and nominated six
additional MPC child protection focal points.
63. There were also challenges with regard to maintaining dialogue with armed
groups to end and prevent grave violations, owing to the division, multipli cation and
dissolution of armed groups, as well as the spontaneous forming of coalitions, which
hampered the identification of the chain of command and the attribution of violations
to individual armed groups.
64. In order to strengthen its advocacy with armed groups, the country task force
engaged with other stakeholders, such as representatives of local authorities.
Furthermore, as recommended by the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
of the Security Council (see S/AC.51/2016/3), the country task force worked with the
representatives of the Central African Religious Platform, who recorded public
messages for the 2016 International Day against the Use of Child Soldiers, or “Red
Hand Day”, campaign that targeted the leadership of armed groups, encouraging them
to end child recruitment and use and release the children within their ranks. In 2017,
religious leaders also played an important role in enabling the release of five abducted
girls held hostage by an armed group in Bangassou (Mbomou prefecture).

B.

Strengthening the legislative framework and accountability
65. In a positive development, following advocacy efforts by MINUSCA, the
Government ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict on 21 September 2017. The
Ministries of Justice and Human Rights, and the Ministry for the Promotion of
Women, Family and Child Protection, held a workshop in June 2018 to operati onalize
the Optional Protocol, and consequently developed a handover protocol for the
treatment and transfer of children associated with armed groups as a first step to
protect those children. At the time of writing, the handover protocol was under
revision to ensure that it reflected updated national legislation.
66. After strong advocacy conducted by civil society, with the support of UNICEF,
in March 2019 the Ministry for the Promotion of Women, Family and Child Protection
submitted a draft law on the protection of children to a national commission on law
and texts for review. The country task force and other child protection actors
contributed to the elaboration of the draft and ensured the inclusion of provisions
criminalizing the recruitment and use of children and strengthening their protection
by considering them to be primarily victims. At the time of writing, the draft law was
under consideration by the Government and submission to Parliament was pending.
67. In addition, child protection standards were integrated throughout the
development of transitional justice processes. For example, all individuals entering
the Central African defence and security forces were screened by MINUSCA,
including for grave violations against children, to ensure that t hose responsible for
such violations would not be allowed into the forces.

19-18856

13/16

S/2019/852

68. The Special Criminal Court was inaugurated in 2018, which will enable the
prosecution of perpetrators of grave violations against children. Moreover, a
commission on truth, justice, reconciliation and reparations, which has not yet been
established, is expected to shed light on the patterns of grave violations against
children and address the needs of victims while facilitating the reintegration of
children into their home communities. The reintegration aspect is particularly
important in instances where fear and/or suspicion exists towards children suspected
of having committed crimes. Children aged 15 to 18 years are not expected to be
brought before the Special Criminal Court for serious crimes.
69. The Government has made efforts to prosecute crimes committed against
children through ordinary civilian courts. Twenty-four perpetrators, including
civilians and members of parties to the conflict, were arrested, 23 were charged an d
4 were sentenced to imprisonment ranging from 18 months to life for rape and murder
of children. Impunity, however, remains a concern in the Central African Republic.
70. In 2018, two anti-balaka leaders, Alfred Yekatom, also known as Rambo, and
Patrice-Edouard Ngaïssona, were transferred to the International Criminal Court in
The Hague on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity, including for the
recruitment and use of children under the age of 15. The latter was arrested on
12 December by French authorities in Paris, pursuant to an International Criminal
Court arrest warrant, and subsequently transferred to The Hague.

C.

Advocacy and mainstreaming of child protection
71. In November 2016, following an international conference on child disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration under the leadership of the President of
the Central African Republic, UNICEF became a member of a national strategic
committee for disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration. During
negotiations that led to the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in Bangui in 2019, my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and MINUSCA leadership advocated
for the inclusion of child protection provisions in the peace process to better account
for the needs of children affected by the armed conflict. In the Agreement, the
signatory parties recognized that children and women have been the most affected by
the conflict and committed to preventing and ending grave violations against them,
including child recruitment and use, sexual violence, attacks against humanitarian
actors and attacks against schools and hospitals. Violations of the Agreement,
including violations affecting children, are monitored and reported through the
monitoring mechanisms foreseen therein.
72. MINUSCA provided training on child rights and child protection to 2,263
members of the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic, the police and the
gendarmerie, with a focus on juvenile justice and their responsibilities with regard to
protecting children in the context of armed conflict. Similarly, 956 members of armed
groups were trained on child protection and their obligation to protect children in
territories under their control. More than 16,000 community members and leaders as
well as members of civil society were sensitized on child rights to enable them to play
a greater role in protecting children at the community level and facilitate early
warning with regard to preventing child rights violations.
73. The country task force trained 956 child protection actors, including members
of international and national non-governmental organizations and the United Nations
country team, to strengthen their capacity to monitor, verify and document grave
violations against children.

14/16

19-18856

S/2019/852

74. MINUSCA trained more than 5,000 MINUSCA military, police and civilian
personnel on child protection. Particular emphasis was placed on reporting grave
violations against children, the United Nations zero -tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, the prohibition against using child labour and the protection
of educational institutions by United Nations peacekeepers.
75. In December 2018, the MINUSCA Force Commander issued a directive on child
protection, which is currently being rolled out by the MINUSCA Force with the
support of its Child Protection Section. At the time of writing, a police
commissioner’s directive on child protection was under preparation.
76. In May 2019, my Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict
travelled to the Central African Republic, where she met with senior government
officials, representatives of the armed groups that signed the Agreement,
representatives of criminal groups in Bangui’s PK5 neighbourhood, members of the
diplomatic community, United Nations partners, religious leaders and civil society.
At a meeting in Kaga Bandoro with MPC, FPRC, ex-Séléka rénovée and anti-balaka,
the Special Representative encouraged armed groups to swiftly adopt and fully
implement action plans to address grave violations against children. Two action plans
were signed by FPRC and UPC in June and August 2019, respectively. She also
advocated with the Government for the development of a national plan to prevent
grave violations against children and launched her campaign, entitled “Act to Protect
Children Affected by Armed Conflict”. On 20 May, my Special Representative briefed
the Security Council on the outcomes of her visit.

VI. Sexual exploitation and abuse and response
77. Of the alleged and confirmed identified victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
reported between January 2016 and June 2019 to MINUSCA concerning MINUSCA
personnel, 149 were children at the time of the incident, and 125 alleged victims came
forward in 2016 regarding alleged incidents which reportedly took place during 2014
and 2015. Of those 125 alleged victims, allegations of sexual abuse were substantiated
for 15 children, were not substantiated for 48 children and 62 cases remain pending a
determination from national investigations. A victim-centred approach was adopted,
enabling most child victims to access services and education and vocational training.
A post of Field Victims’ Rights Advocate was appointed at MINUSCA to ensure that
a victim-, gender- and child-sensitive approach was used to address the rights of
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.

VII. Observations and recommendations
78. I am concerned by the ongoing high levels of grave violations committed against
children in the Central African Republic, in particular the recruitment and use of
children and the increase in attacks against hospitals, the abduction of children and
the denial of humanitarian access. I urge all parties to the conflict to immediately end
and prevent all grave violations and abide by international humanitarian and human
rights law.
79. I welcome the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and urge all signatories to reinforce their efforts to
implement its provisions, including its specific provisions to protect children and end
and prevent grave violations against them.
80. I welcome the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and urge the

19-18856

15/16

S/2019/852

Government to rapidly integrate it into its national laws and swiftly adopt the draft
law on the protection of children, which includes the criminalization of child
recruitment and use. I also encourage the prompt adoption by the Government of the
protocol for the handover of children associated with armed groups to civilian child
protection actors.
81. I welcome the transfer of anti-balaka leaders Alfred Yekatom and PatriceEdouard Ngaïssona to the International Criminal Court. I remain concerned, however,
by the prevalence of impunity for perpetrators of grave violations against children
and urge the authorities to swiftly hold perpetrators accountable. I also call upon the
Special Criminal Court to integrate all grave violations against children into its
prosecution strategy.
82. I am alarmed by the increasing incidents of denial of humanitarian access to
children, including attacks against humanitarian workers. I urge all parties to ensure
safe and unimpeded access by humanitarian actors to children in need to enable the
provision of needed humanitarian assistance and basic social services.
83. Sexual violence against children must end. I urge the Government to redouble
its efforts to prevent and respond to that crime, including by holding perpetrators
accountable. Programming for survivors of sexual violence must take into
consideration the specific needs of girls and boys.
84. I welcome the signing by MPC, FPRC and UPC of action plans to end and
prevent grave violations against children and ask for their immediate and full
implementation. I call upon other armed groups to also adopt and implement time bound action plans with the support of the United Nations.
85. I welcome the release from armed groups of more than 8,600 boys and girls and
urge all armed groups to immediately and unconditionally release all children still in
their ranks. In particular, I urge those participating in the national disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme to share lists of associated
children and facilitate their separation before and during the implementation of the
programme. In that regard, I strongly encourage the Government to nominate a child
protection focal point within the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme to ensure that the needs of those children are fully
addressed. Furthermore, I call upon the Government and development actors to
support innovative vocational trainings that match the needs of the country ’s labour
market, particularly outside Bangui. I urge Member States and the donor community
to invest in long-term community-based prevention and sustainable reintegration
programming targeting the most affected and at-risk children.
86. I take note of the limited resources for child protection in the Central African
Republic and I call upon the international and donor communities to support their
work and efforts. I also encourage the Government to ensure that the Ministry for the
Promotion of Women, Family and Child Protection receives adequate resources and
funding to address child protection concerns, and I appeal to donors to provide
financial and technical support to the authorities in that regard.
87. I encourage the Government, parties to the conflict and civil society to develop
a strategy at the national level, in line with Security Council resolution 2427 (2018),
to prevent all grave violations against children. I call upon the donor community to
support resource mobilization for the implementation of that strategy.
88. I reiterate my commitment to preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse by all United Nations personnel. In response to the allegations brought to my
attention, I urge the Member States concerned to conduct thorough and prompt
investigations, which the United Nations stands ready to support.

16/16

19-18856
