174

General .Aanmbly-'lldrty-fomtb SUllon

Commissioner in his efforts to provide vital humanitarian assistance, especially through voluntary repatriation, local integration and resettlement,
Welcoming the conclusions and achievements of the
Conference on the Situation of Refugees in Africa, held
at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from 7 to
17 May 1979, and further welcoming the request to
translate the principle of "burden sharing" into action,
Noting with satisfaction the practical results in terms
of additional resettlement places and financial contributions thus far achieved as a consequence of the Meeting
on Refugees and Displaced Persons in South-East Asia,
convened by the Secretary-General and held at Geneva
on 20 and 21 July 1979,
1. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the efficient manner
in which they continue to discharge their many responsibilities in assisting refugees and displaced persons;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
promote, in close co-operation with Governments, the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations, durable and speedy solutions to problems of refugees and displaced persons wherever they occur;
3. Urges Governments to intensify their support for
the humanitarian activities of the High Commissioner
by, among other things:
(a) Facilitating the accomplishment of his tasks in
the field of international protection, in particular by
granting asylum to those seeking refuge and by scrupulously observing the principle of non-refoulement;
(b) Considering accession to relevant international
instruments, notably the 1951 Convention relating to
the Status of Refugees 58 and the 1967 Protocol 59 relating to the Status of Refugees;
(c) Facilitating his efforts to promote durable solutions through voluntary repatriation or return and assistance in the rehabilitation of persons returning to their
countries, integration in countries of asylum or resettlement in other countries;
4. Further urges Governments:
(a) To strengthen their support for the High Commissioner's efforts on behalf of refugees and displaced
persons;
(b) To provide increased opportunities for durable
solutions to the problems of refugees and displaced persons, in particular those who are in Africa, Asia and
Latin America;
5. Calls upon Governments to continue to contribute generously towards the financing of the High Commissioner's activities in order to attain the objectives of
his humanitarian programmes.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979

34/61.

Situation of African refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of
bis Office, 60

Taking note with satisfaction of the conclusions of
the Conference on the Situation of Refugees in Africa,
held at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from
7 to 17 May 1979,
Taking note of the resolution on the situation of
refugees in Africa and on prospective solutions to their
problems in the 1980s adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirtythird ordinary session, held at Monrovia from 6 to 20
July 1979, and endorsed by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its sixteenth ordinary session, held at Monrovia
from 17 to 20 July 1979, 61
Deeply concerned about the constantly deteriorating
living conditions and the ever-increasing number of
African refugees,
Expressing its appreciation of the hospitaiity and assistance provided to the large number of refugees on
the continent of Africa,
Noting with deep regret the inadequacy of the assistance provided to the growing number of African
refugees,
Stressing the evident necessity to allocate assistance
proportional to their number and needs,
Emphasizing the need for increased financial support
from the international community to provide adequate
care for the large number of refugees in Africa,
I. Fully endorses the recommendations adopted by
the Arusha Conference on the Situation of Refugees
in Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the
work they have done in the care of African refugees;
3. Calls attention to the urgent need for increased
resources to care for the ever-growing number of African refugees which to date is about four million;
4. Appeals to all Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to intensify their activities and programmes in support of
African refugees;
5. Stresses the urgent necessity for consideration by
the international community of ways and means by
which a constant flow of resources to the Office of the
High Commissioner can be secured for the implementation of long-term programmes;
6. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies to assist the High Commissioner in
giving the widest possible dissemination of information
on the plight of the African refugees;
7. Requests the High Commissioner to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the
contributions made by his Office towards the implementation of the recommendations of the Arusha Conference on the Situation of Refugees in Africa;
8. Further requests the High Commissioner to make
every effort to mobilize additional resources for African
refugees in collaboration with the specialized agencies
concerned and non-governmental organizations and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.

58

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 150.
lbid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/34/12) and Supplement No.12A
(A/34/ 12/Add.1).

82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979

59

60

61

A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.727 (XXXIII).
