S/2002/56

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 January 2002
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
The members of the Security Council, recalling the statement by the President
of the Security Council on 31 January 2001 (S/PRST/2001/3) and relevant Security
Council resolutions about peacekeeping, having considered the views expressed,
including in the letters of a number of troop-contributing countries of 30 May 2001
(S/2001/535) and 22 June 2001 (S/2001/626), and recognizing the desirability of
forging a more effective partnership with troop-contributing countries, including by
establishing a new mechanism for cooperation pursuant to section D, paragraph 1, of
annex I to Security Council resolution 1353 (2001) of 13 June 2001, in addition to
the current forms of consultation between the Council, the troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, have given their agreement to the principle of
convening joint meetings of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and troop-contributing countries as an additional mechanism for
strengthening cooperation with troop-contributing countries on specific
peacekeeping operations.
2.
The purpose of the joint meetings of the Working Group and troopcontributing countries is to enable the members of the Council, relevant troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat to engage in a closer and more interactive
dialogue over issues pertaining to peacekeeping operations as outlined in paragraphs
2 and 4 of section B of annex II to resolution 1353 (2001) so as to complement
effectively the ongoing process of consultation meetings pursuant to the abovementioned resolution. At the joint meetings, specific aspects of peacekeeping
operations will be discussed in order to facilitate the work of the Security Council
and the Secretariat by taking into account the views of the troop-contributing
countries in relation to a corresponding peacekeeping operation.
3.
The joint meetings of the Working Group and troop-contributing countries will
be composed of the members of the Security Council and relevant troopcontributing countries as identified by the Secretariat, in consultations with the
Chairman of the Working Group, in particular those contributing at least one formed
military unit or a comparable number of civilian police, as well as representatives of
the Secretariat. In specific circumstances, when the agenda of those meetings
exceeds the limits of the strict interest of the troop-contributing countries on the
ground, the Working Group may invite other significant actors to attend the joint
meetings when the Working Group deems their participation to bring added value to
the discussion at hand. The Secretariat is encouraged to provide military, political,
humanitarian and other briefings and advice as appropriate.

02-21172 (E) 140102

*0221172*

S/2002/56

4.
The Chairman of the Working Group, bearing in mind that the workload of the
Security Council should not become unduly burdensome, in consultation with
members of the Working Group, relevant troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat, will be responsible for convening the joint meetings of the Working
Group and troop-contributing countries. Depending on the situation in specific
peacekeeping operations, meetings will be held as often as necessary and
practicable. In the case of new peacekeeping missions, joint meetings may be
convened at an early stage in order to consult prospective troop-contributing
countries during the mission planning process.
5.
The joint meetings of the Working Group and troop-contributing countries will
be chaired by the Chairman of the Security Council Working Group or an alternate
Security Council member. The Chairman will invite members of the Working Group
and the troop-contributing countries to participate, indicating the level he or she
deems appropriate for specific meetings. As a general rule, the venue and time of
such meetings will be published in the Journal of the United Nations. The
procedures adopted for the joint meetings should be kept as flexible as possible to
allow for interactive discussion by the participants.
6.
The Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations will be responsible for reporting to the Security Council on the joint
meetings. Such communication can take various forms, including oral briefings. The
Secretariat will be requested to provide the necessary assistance in this regard and in
other relevant areas.
7.
The Security Council continues to commit itself to the implementation of
resolution 1353 (2001). The existing formats of meetings with troop-contributing
countries should be continued and improved according to the provisions contained
in that resolution. Such meetings and the joint meetings of the Working Group and
troop-contributing countries should be mutually complementary.
8.
The new cooperation mechanism of the joint meetings of the Working Group
and troop-contributing countries should not prejudice the responsibilities of the
Security Council and its members as set out in the Charter and should not interfere
in the operational responsibilities of the Secretariat for peacekeeping operations.

2
