S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6636th meeting
Monday, 24 October 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . /
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Marinčić
Mr. Garcia
Mr. Zhang Changwei
Mr. Alzate
Ms. Legendre
Mrs. Ntyam-Ehya
Mr. Eick
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Ramadan
Ms. Vaz Patto
Mr. Demin
Mr. Klaas
Miss Allum
Mr. Grant

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-56143 (E)

*1156143*

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Bahrain. Unless I hear any objection,
I invite the representative of Bahrain to participate in
this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to convey, on behalf of the
Government of Ecuador, our sympathy with the sisterly
nation of Turkey in connection with the earthquake that
took place yesterday and to express our condolences to
the families of the victims. We were also saddened to
hear of the passing of the heir to the throne of Saudi
Arabia, Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud,
and shares the sorrow of King Abdullah, the royal
family and the people of Saudi Arabia.
My delegation would like to express its views on
the situation in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine. I should like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing. My country aligns itself with the
statement by the Ambassador of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The Government of Ecuador, which abides by the
norms and principles of international law, particularly
with regard to the pacific settlement of disputes,
wishes to express its concern at the length of time
during which the Security Council has been seized with
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — seven decades. My
delegation is keen to support stability in the region and
has recognized Palestine as a State.
The developments that have taken place in recent
months, including the historic address by President
Abbas before the General Assembly, on 23 September;
the organizing of legislative and presidential elections
in Palestine; and the support of most States Members
of the United Nations for the recognition of Palestine
as a State are further evidence of the fact that the
Palestinian Authority is capable of governing itself as a
State.

2

Another positive step towards peace is the
prisoner exchange between Israel and Palestine, which
is taking place in stages. The international community
welcomed the freeing of the Israeli soldier and of 477
Palestinian prisoners on 18 October.
It is regrettable, however, that the progress
achieved through international efforts, including the
recent statement of the Quartet on resuming and
making progress in direct peace negotiations between
Israel and Palestine, has come to naught because of
Israel’s lack of clear parameters on its settlement
policies. The Palestinian people suffer humiliation,
expulsion and violence at the hands of the continuing
Israeli occupation and are the victims of aggressive and
illegal actions. This has not changed and continues
with impunity.
In addition, the construction by the occupying
military force of the Wall in Jerusalem prevents
Palestinians from having access to hospitals, schools
and their places of work. The Palestinians also suffer
as a result of inadequate public services; schools are
few, and the economy is in ruins. Jerusalem does not
have a production economy, and Israel controls the
entire territory.
The international community must bring pressure
to bear in Israel to end the occupation. It is Israel’s
responsibility to make progress with the negotiations
so as to achieve the two-State solution, in keeping with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and, of course, the
Road Map.
In that connection, we would remind the Security
Council of its historic responsibility to positively
analyse this issue, which for more than 64 years has
posed an obstacle to the achievement of peace and
security in the Middle East and in the eastern
Mediterranean region.
My delegation appeals for a dialogue between the
parties with the goal of ensuring that in the very near
future, the two States of Israel and Palestine can
coexist in the region, living side by side within secure
and recognized borders.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we wish to convey our most

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

sincere condolences to the people and the Government
of Turkey in connection with the tragedy that they have
suffered as a result of yesterday’s earthquake.
Nicaragua, as a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement, associates itself fully with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt in his
capacity as Chair of the Movement.
Nicaragua once again reiterates its most fervent
condemnation of the illegal occupation by Israel of all
of the occupied Arab territories in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon, and demands Israel’s immediate withdrawal.
We condemn the expansionist Israeli policies and
practices of building and not dismantling settlements,
as well as the inhumane blockade of Gaza and the
policy of breaking up the West bank and other
Palestinian territories.
The Security Council is meeting on the eve of a
historic moment that will give undeniable reality to the
existence of a Palestinian State that is recognized and
fully welcomed into our Organization, and represent
the implementation, at long last, of the many
resolutions and agreements calling for the creation of
two States — one Arab and the other Jewish — on
Palestinian territory.
We can no longer tolerate the logic of denying the
very existence of the Palestinian State. That logic is
part and parcel of a policy of corralling the Palestinian
people, and it is based on an unacknowledged
determination to deny all Palestinian citizens their very
humanity. It is extremely urgent that Israel free, as
soon as possible, all Palestinian political prisoners,
who suffer, in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, inhumane conditions, torture, captivity
and indefinite isolation. Israel must put an end to those
violations and comply with its obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law.
Since the victory of the Sandinista popular
revolution, in 1979, Nicaragua has witnessed the heroic
fight of the Palestinian people and the substantial
concessions they have made, which, shamefully, were
responded to by Israel with more illegal settlements,
more humiliation, more deaths, more systematic
murders of Palestinian leaders, more destruction of
homes and more expulsions, including in East
Jerusalem.

11-56143

For all of those reasons, Nicaragua reiterates the
need to put an immediate end to the intolerable
impunity that Israel enjoys, which has been
irresponsibly guaranteed it by the Security Council, in
particular through the indiscriminate use of the veto,
which has become Israel’s greatest accomplice.
It is high time that the Security Council lived up
to its responsibilities and demand that Israel make a
commitment to peace. It is time to abandon threats of
veto. It is time for the international community to
substitute concrete action for rhetoric. Nicaragua thus
calls for the immediate recognition of the Palestinian
State along its 1967 borders by the Security Council
and the General Assembly. Only in this way will there
be a firm and lasting peace that allows both peoples to
effectively enjoy all their rights, putting an end to an
inexplicable injustice. May those who oppose it do so
publicly, and thereby publicly acknowledge their own
shamefulness.
The President: I
representative of Turkey.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me at the outset to
express our gratitude to those who have expressed
condolences and sympathies to my Government and
the Turkish people at this time of loss and suffering
following the devastating earthquake in Turkey. We
have felt the solidarity of the international community
with us. We also want to extend our heartfelt
condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
Saudi people for the passing away of Crown Prince
Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
As the Security Council holds another open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, a longawaited transformation and restoration process is under
way in the region. The quest for democracy in the
region may delayed, but it cannot be reversed. As the
advocate of democracy, pluralism, human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the region, Turkey will not
waver in its support for those who are peacefully
demanding change.
We welcome the conclusion of the rightful
struggle of the Libyan people for freedom, justice and
democracy with a decisive victory. The fate of the
autocratic regime that prevailed for more than four
decades constitutes a bitter lesson that should be taken
into account in all its dimensions within the context of
the ongoing change and democratic transformation
movements in the region. We strongly believe that the

3

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

political process in Libya will be completed in unity
and solidarity through an inclusive approach embracing
all segments of that society.
Meanwhile, we welcome resolution 2014 (2011)
on Yemen, adopted unanimously by the Security
Council, as a timely, constructive and positive step
taken by the international community with a view to
bringing an end to the clashes in that country. Turkey
fully supports the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative.
We reaffirm our wish that the crisis in the country be
overcome through peaceful means as soon as possible.
In that context, Turkey is extremely concerned
about the developments in Syria. We observed with
great concern the ongoing violence against civilians in
Syria. Violence is not the effective to follow. Sectarian
and ethnic divides must be avoided at all cost. The
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people should be
respected.
While many in the region aspire to a better future,
Palestinians in their millions — whether in Gaza, the
West Bank or the refugee camps across the region —
continue to suffer a disastrous fate not of their own
making. This anomaly must be addressed as a matter of
utmost urgency. Turkey rejects violence in any shape
or form, and by any party, as unacceptable and
unjustifiable. We also believe that there can be no
genuine alternative to a negotiated settlement.
There is no doubt that meaningful engagement
that inspires confidence in both Palestine and Israel
cannot begin while settlement activity continues day in
and day out, including in occupied East Jerusalem.
Indeed, Israel’s continuous settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territories and its deliberate
choice for settlements of the regions that separate the
Palestinian territories destroy the basis for peace. We
once again call on Israel, based on its Road Map
commitments, to cease all settlement activity and
return to direct negotiations with the Palestinian side
on the basis of the 1967 borders. That is currently the
only way that will open the path towards the realization
of a two-State solution based on the well-established
principles whereby Israel and Palestine can live side by
side in peace and security.
Palestine has submitted its application for
membership to the United Nations. That historic step
was long in coming. Turkey believes that it is high time
for Palestine to become a Member of the United
Nations and to be recognized by all nations, based on

4

its 1967 borders, as a full-fledged Member State within
the international community.
The very notion of a two-State solution, reaching
as far back as 1947, is the firm and clear basis for that.
Common sense and good conscience dictate that, as
Israel did 63 years ago, Palestine should become a
Member of the United Nations. That will also help
direct negotiations, since it will create political
equality between the two parties. Ultimately, beyond
all the legal or political arguments, it is simply not fair
to hold the State of Palestine hostage to Israel’s
continued intransigence.
Turkey welcomes the recent prisoner exchange.
This is a humanitarian issue and, irrespective of other
developments, Turkey has played its part to support the
talks and to ensure that a fair deal could be struck that
would also help create a positive atmosphere for
addressing other issues.
Meanwhile, the situation in the Gaza Strip
continues to be an embarrassment to the international
community. The inhumane and illegal practices there
must end. Unfortunately, Israel’s unlawful blockade of
Gaza continues. The international community must
ensure that there is accountability both for the blockade
and for Israel’s attack on the humanitarian aid flotilla
last year that left nine civilians dead in international
waters. That is why we envisage mobilizing the
relevant platforms, with the support of Member States,
in order to refer that issue to the International Court of
Justice.
On the other hand, having welcomed the unity
agreement among the Palestinians, Turkey hopes that
the process of national reconciliation can be concluded
soon with the formation of an inclusive and
democratically representative Government that will
take the Palestinian nation to free and fair elections.
In conclusion, let me reiterate once more
Turkey’s strong support for the realization of a just and
lasting comprehensive peace in the region, based on
the two-State solution, as well as our determination to
assist our Palestinian brothers and sisters in attaining
their long-delayed goal of a viable, peaceful and
prosperous State of Palestine that is a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations.
The President: I give
representative of Maldives.

the

floor

to

the

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): First of all, the
Maldives would like to offer its sincere condolences to
the people and Government of Turkey for the recent
tragedy. We are also deeply saddened by the passing of
the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia and would like to
extend our deepest condolences.
The Maldives congratulates Nigeria on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and commends
the work completed to date. We further thank UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing today.
The Maldives has recently undergone a transition
from autocracy to democracy, and we understand full
well the growing pains that come with such a
transformation. Yet we sincerely hope that the situation
in Syria will find a peaceful solution and that the
dialogue process to take place in Cairo will see fruit in
the form of greater democratic reforms and will create
venues for the aspirations of the Syrian people to have
their voice heard in Government.
The Maldives applauded resolution 1973 (2011)
on Libya, and now supports that country’s current
transition to a functioning democracy. Much work
remains to be done by the National Transitional
Council to prepare for elections that will be free, fair
and meaningful in order to realize the aspirations of the
Libyan people. Only with the support and assistance of
the international community will a stable Libya pull
through.
The Maldives believes that the single most
important issue concerning peace in the Middle East is
the recognition of a Palestine State. We do not believe
that there can be a meaningful dialogue without this
acceptance of statehood. For 40 years, the ongoing
peace process in the Middle East has been continually
undermined by the very fact that it rests on an unequal
power relationship. While this dynamic will not change
until real peace is established, we as the United
Nations have an obligation to level the playing field.
We have an obligation to ensure that all elected
Governments have representation that is equal to the
mandate given by their people.
Furthermore, it is clear that Palestine has a
Government that is capable of administering its
country and an Administration that is ready to take on
the full burden of governance. The only way forward,
therefore, is through the international recognition of
Palestine as a State with a view to Palestinians
negotiating their own interests and concentrating on

11-56143

developing their own socio-economic infrastructures
while being at peace with Israel.
After 64 long years of inaction, the time to move
forward is now. Let me conclude with an appeal from
the people of the Maldives to support three generations
of Palestinians who have lived their lives under the
yoke of occupation. The Maldives strongly calls on all
States, especially the members of the Security Council,
to prevail against a history of failure and stand up for
the dignity of these men and women by supporting a
free and independent Palestinian State.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): First of all, on behalf of
the Government of Malaysia, I wish to convey our
condolences to the Government of Turkey at the tragic
occurrence of the earthquake in Turkey yesterday. We
also wish to offer our condolences to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia on the passing away of the Crown Prince.
Let me now congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council.
Secondly, I wish to align my delegation with the
statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
For more than half a century, the international
community has yearned for a peaceful and just solution
of the Palestinian issue. Decades of strife and politicolegal arguments have made the quest for a solution
ever more elusive. The United Nations, including the
Security Council, has churned out over 180 resolutions
on Palestine, at last count. However, we are still
grappling with this task today, as no tangible outcome
has been produced. That is partly due to our inability to
bring into effect the very resolutions that we have
adopted at all levels of this Organization.
Malaysia fully endorses the application of
Palestine to become a Member of the United Nations,
as we feel deeply for the people of Palestine, whose
forefathers inhabited the land for virtually the last two
millennia. All of us have to support Palestine in
exercising its natural and inalienable rights, including
the right to self-determination, in the establishment of

5

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

an independent State of Palestine, based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
This support is in accordance with the two-State
solution and takes into account the security concerns of
both parties. In the light of the fact that more than two
thirds of the States Members of the United Nations
have recognized the State of Palestine, we call on the
Security Council to expedite this application at the
earliest opportunity. The Security Council has the
moral, political and legal responsibility to ensure that
Palestine is admitted as a Member of the United
Nations without further delay. There is no reason for
the Council not to do so.
In addition, we call on Israel to immediately fulfil
all of its obligations, including refraining from
provocation. The recent Israeli settlement plans in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are deplorable and are illegal under
international law. Such provocative acts have put the
two-State solution in jeopardy. We therefore call on
Israel to fulfil its international obligations by
completely stopping its settlement activities and to
abrogate all policies and practices that contravene
international law and minimum standards of
internationally accepted basic human rights, including
the immediate lifting of the unlawful blockade of Gaza.
Although the recent agreement between Israel
and Palestine for the swap of over 1,000 Palestinian
prisoners is a step towards achieving peace, we should
not forget that 5,000 Palestinian civilian prisoners,
including children, women and elected officials, are
still imprisoned or arbitrarily detained by Israel. Even
more worrying are the extremely poor, undignified and,
in some cases, life-threatening conditions under which
the Palestinian prisoners are being detained in Israeli
prisons and detention centres.
Malaysia calls on Israel to stop this mistreatment
of Palestinians and to observe appropriate standards
related to the treatment of prisoners. Further, we also
call for the release of all Palestinian prisoners, as such
release is essential for creating a climate of mutual
trust, which is necessary for the resumption of
permanent status negotiations.
Resolving the issue of Palestine requires the
international community to focus all its energy and
efforts on achieving a comprehensive peace in the
region and restoring the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to an

6

independent State of Palestine. All parties must act
truthfully and sincerely towards achieving these
objectives.
We again urge the Security Council to take
necessary measures, failing which would put the
Council’s credibility as the principal organ responsible
for international peace and security at risk. Now is the
time for peace, and we should not let this opportunity
go to waste.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): Allow me at the outset to
express heartfelt sympathies and condolences on behalf
of the people and the Government of Japan to the
people and the Government of Turkey for the
tremendous losses and damage caused by the
earthquake. Japan is ready to extend as much
assistance as possible for the recovery and
reconstruction of Turkey, in cooperation with the
international community.
I would also like to convey the deepest
condolences of the people and the Government of
Japan to the people and the Government of Saudi
Arabia on the sad demise of His Royal Highness the
Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia.
Japan fully understands the earnest aspiration of
Palestinians to build their own State and strongly
supports a two-State solution under which Israel and a
Palestinian State would live side by side in peace,
security and mutual recognition. Japan supports the
vision that under a two-State solution the borders
should be defined through negotiations, based on the
1967 lines, with mutually agreed swaps, in a way that
will achieve the peaceful coexistence of a viable
Palestinian State and Israel with secure and recognized
borders.
Through a two-State solution, the Palestinian
people will exercise their right to establish an
independent State; Israel will enjoy a greatly enhanced
security environment; and both parties will be able to
launch full-fledged efforts at cooperation for their
mutual prosperity.
A two-State solution can be achieved only
through sincere negotiations between the parties
concerned. Japan has consistently encouraged both
sides to resume direct negotiations, in cooperation with
the efforts of the international community. In this
connection, Japan strongly supports the Quartet’s
23 September statement, including the timetable it sets

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

out, and pays respect to the vigorous endeavours of the
members of the Quartet. Japan welcomes the
announcement that separate meetings will take place
between Quartet members and the respective parties on
26 October in Jerusalem. We strongly expect that these
meetings will be a step forward towards the resumption
of direct negotiations.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People is gratified to see you,
Madame, assume the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Knowing the commitment of
your country, Nigeria, to promoting the ideals of the
United Nations, I should like to offer you my warm
congratulations.

Japan has been closely watching the discussions
in the Council’s Committee on the Admission of New
Members.

I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Nawaf Salam, Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations, for
the exemplary manner in which he steered the work of
the Council last month. I express my deep thanks to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his informative briefing.

Japan welcomes the recent agreement between
Israel and Hamas for the release of Gilad Shalit and of
the Palestinian prisoners held by Israel. We hope that
this agreement will contribute to the building of
confidence between the parties and lead to the early
resumption of direct negotiations between them.
Japan does not recognize any measures that
prejudge the outcome of final status negotiations and
associates itself with the Quartet in calling on both
sides to refrain from any provocative actions. Both
parties must abide by their obligations under previous
agreements, most importantly the Road Map.
Japan reiterates its strong call to Israel to fully
freeze its settlement activities in the West Bank and in
East Jerusalem. In this connection, Japan deeply
deplores the recent series of announcements by the
Israeli Government of plans for construction of new
housing units in East Jerusalem. At the same time, we
call upon the Palestinian Authority to continue its
efforts to improve security and fulfil its commitments
to cease violence and work against incitement.
Japan has been supporting the efforts of the
Palestinian Authority to establish statehood and is
committed to continuously providing assistance in that
regard. Japan is also keenly following Palestinian
efforts to establish a unified Government.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Abdou
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset to offer my condolences to our colleague from
Turkey and to the Turkish Government and people,
who have been put to the test by the earthquake that
struck a portion of that country. I also convey our
sympathies to the Saudi people, who have just lost
their Crown Prince.

11-56143

The Committee remains firmly committed to the
holding of political negotiations with a view to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. However, such negotiations must
begin on a sound foundation in order to avoid repeating
the mistakes of the past. To be frank, negotiation is not
an end in itself. In particular connection with the
region under discussion today, negotiation should lead
to a permanent solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict if the protagonists are all willing to reach one.
Our Committee therefore shares the frustration
expressed here today in this forum with regard to the
current stalemate in the peace process.
We are nevertheless encouraged by the renewed
efforts of the Quartet to pave the way to constructive
negotiations. In that connection, the statement of
23 September, in which the Quartet proposed a series
of measures and a time frame that would make it
possible to reach a lasting peace agreement by the end
of next year, contains a number of positive elements,
including a return to the 1967 borders with land swaps,
as well as the minimum requirement of complete
cessation of settlement construction and the
dismantling of outposts. We hope that the Quartet and
the parties will make good use of these principles and
will apply them in practice, clearing the difficult path
to the resumption of credible and productive
negotiations.
While commending the visible efforts of the
Quartet to return to serious talks, the Committee
believes that, at this time of upheaval, it will be
possible to consider a new series of Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations only if the principles and other parameters

7

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

are generally agreed by the parties and guaranteed by
the Quartet.
Although our Committee strongly supports the
resumption of negotiations, we cannot lose sight of the
considerable gap that exists between the political
process and the situation on the ground. In fact, there
have never been so many Jewish settlements on
Palestinian land. Since the Council’s most recent
public debate on this issue (see S/PV.6590), Israel has
approved the construction of 900 housing units in the
Har Homa settlement and 1,100 at Gilo, without
counting the disclosure in October of the plans for
Givat Hamatos, a vast and entirely new settlement of
2,600 housing units in the city of Jerusalem. There are
also 1,600 units at Ramat Shlomo, 277 at the Ariel
settlement and 100 at Beit Aryeh. The Israeli
Government has even created a new committee in order
to legalize illicit settlements under Israeli law, while at
the same time accelerating the demolition of housing
units and the displacement of Palestinians, with 990
persons affected in the month of September alone.
Our Committee has echoed the international
community’s unanimous condemnation of the Israeli
settlements. We must tirelessly recall that these
settlements are contrary to the provisions of
international law and the Road Map. They jeopardize
the peace efforts and are a long-term threat to the bases
of a two-State solution. The recent escalation in the
coordinated campaign of provocation, desecration and
violence carried out by extremist settlers must
particularly be condemned. Unfortunately, the Israeli
authorities are not responding to this campaign with
the rigorous penalties appropriate to such incidents.
The Security Council and the high contracting
parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
should take firm and immediate measures to ensure
that international law is respected and to prevent these
iniquitous acts from further escalating the violence. It
is high time to provide protection for Palestinian
civilians against the twofold threat of the establishment
of settlements on their land and the excessive violence
of the colonists.
I am pleased to note that, since my last statement
to the Council (see S/PV.6590), the Palestinian
Authority has continued to carry out its programme of
institution-building for a functioning State. The
Committee has taken note of the request for the
admission of Palestine to membership of the United

8

Nations, which the Security Council is currently
considering. We call on the Council and the General
Assembly to grant this request. The Committee also
endorses President Abbas’ call on the General
Assembly to ask countries that have not yet done so to
recognize the Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Furthermore, we express our serious concern over
the situation of Palestinian political prisoners.
Although the Committee welcomes the recent
exchange of prisoners between Israel and Hamas,
mediated by Egypt, the Committee calls for the release
of all prisoners languishing in Israeli jails.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an extremely
sensitive issue of great concern to tens of millions of
people in the region and beyond. In the weeks and
months to come, the international community should
make greater efforts to resolve this issue,
demonstrating its political courage and a heightened
awareness of its responsibilities. There is a great deal
at stake, but we cannot allow another failure. We urge
the Council to take action on initiatives to achieve our
common goal: the creation of two States living in
peace and security within safe and internationally
recognized borders. In that regard, I assure the Security
Council of the Committee’s full cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I thank you, Madame, for
giving me the floor for the first time in my new
capacity.
The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
country of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania; as well as the
Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
statement.
At the outset, let me express our deep
condolences and sympathies to the people and
Government of Turkey for the tragic loss of life in
yesterday’s earthquake, as well as to the people and
Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the
passing of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan
Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
The events taking place throughout the Middle
East and Northern Africa in the past months have taken

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

on truly historic proportions that will not only shape
the future of the entire region, but also have
repercussions far beyond the countries concerned. The
fundamental changes witnessed across the Arab world
have made the need for progress in the Middle East
peace process all the more urgent. Recent events have
indeed shown the necessity of heeding the legitimate
aspirations of peoples in the region, including those of
Palestinians for statehood and of Israelis for security.
The statements delivered by President Abbas and
by Prime Minister Netanyahu at the United Nations a
few weeks ago (see A/66/PV.19) were different in
many ways, but they coincided in their shared
expression of the need to return to negotiations, of
support for a two-State solution and of desire for a
peaceful and comprehensive resolution of the longstanding Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The European Union (EU) reiterates its appeal to
the parties to resume negotiations under the terms, and
within the timelines indicated in, the Quartet statement
of 23 September. The European Union welcomes the
positive statements of both parties in that regard. The
European Union underlines the Quartets crucial role in
facilitating the resumption of direct talks between
Israel and the Palestinians, and recalls its readiness to
support all efforts to bring the parties back to the
negotiating table. In that regard, the European Union
reaffirms its clear positions with regard to parameters,
principles and issues, including the conclusions of the
Foreign Affairs Council in December 2009, December
2010, May 2011 and July 2011, as well as the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union at
the Security Council on 21 April (see S/PV.6520). The
European Union fully supports the Quartet’s call on the
parties to refrain from provocative actions and to
respect the obligations of both parties under the Road
Map.
The European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton,
hosted a meeting of the Middle East Quartet envoys on
9 October in Brussels to follow up on the 23 September
Quartet statement. As a result of that meeting, both
parties will be invited to another meeting with the
Quartet envoys on 26 October in Jerusalem. At that
meeting, an agenda for negotiations and working
methods will be discussed.
The European Union deplores the recent Israeli
decisions to advance settlement expansion in the Gilo

11-56143

and Givat Hamatos settlements, which run counter to
the Quartet’s efforts. The European Union deplores
steps to legalize, under Israeli law, houses in West
Bank outposts. The European Union reiterates that
settlements in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, are illegal under international law,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a
two-State solution impossible. All settlement activity,
including in East Jerusalem, should cease immediately.
New construction plans should be abandoned. The
European Union also calls upon both sides to avoid
steps that run counter to the Quartet’s efforts to restart
negotiations.
The European Union remains one of the major
supporters and contributors to the Palestinian Statebuilding efforts led by President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad. The European Union welcomes the
outcome of the reports stating that the Palestinian
Authority is above the threshold for a functioning state
in the key sectors studied by the United Nations, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and
that Palestinian institutions compare favourably with
those in established States. The European Union
expects the Palestinian Authority to continue its
institution-building efforts and to uphold current
standards in terms of transparent and efficient public
finance management.
The European Union remains dedicated to
continuing its support to the Palestinian Authority’s
successful State-building efforts. The current fiscal
crisis of the Palestinian Authority risks putting in
danger the achievements made so far in institutionbuilding. The European Union therefore underlines the
necessity of providing predictable and further support
to the Palestinian Authority, and calls for equitable
burden-sharing by the international donor community.
The EU supports the organization of a new donor’s
conference in Paris, in the context of a relaunch of the
peace process.
The European Union welcomes the release of
Israeli Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit. His return home
after five years of captivity puts an end to the long
ordeal that he and his family have endured. The
European Union hopes that his release and the related
prisoner exchange will have a positive impact on the
Middle East peace process, and encourages both sides
to continue taking de-escalating steps.

9

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Gaza Strip remains of
particular concern for the European Union. The
crossings must be opened to allow for the flow of
humanitarian aid, imports and exports of commercial
goods and the movement of people between Gaza and
the West Bank, while addressing Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. The further dismantling of the
restrictions on access and movement in the West Bank
and Gaza is key for allowing for increased investments
and the development of the economy and
infrastructure. The European Union recalls its
readiness to assist in the reconstruction and economic
recovery of Gaza in close partnership with the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government, in
line with resolution 1860 (2009) and on the basis of the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access.
In conclusion, with regard to Syria, the European
Union condemns in the strongest terms the ongoing
brutal repression led by the Syrian regime against its
population, as well as the widespread human rights
violations, including the killing, mass arrest and torture
of civilians, peaceful protesters and their relatives that
may amount to crimes against humankind. It also
condemns actions aimed at inciting inter-ethnic and
inter-confessional conflict, as well as recent targeted
assassinations of renowned political figures such as
Mashaal Tammo. According to the Deputy United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, more
than 3,000 people, including children, have died since
the beginning of the unrest. The European Union
deplores those deaths and expresses its condolences to
the families of the victims. The European Union
demands that the Syrian authorities put an immediate
end to the violence in order to prevent further
bloodshed. Those responsible for, or associated with,
the repression must be held to account by the
international community. President Al-Assad must step
aside to allow a political transition to take place in
Syria.
The European Union is deeply disappointed that
the Security Council has not yet been able to adopt a
resolution on the current developments in Syria, even
after months of ongoing brutal abuses by President
Al-Assad and his regime. The European Union will
continue to press for strong United Nations action to
increase international pressure, and urges all members
of the Security Council to assume their responsibilities
in relation to the situation in Syria.

10

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Madame President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.
My delegation extends its deep condolences to
the Government and people of Turkey and to the
families of the victims of the earthquake that struck
Turkey on Sunday. We also express our deep
condolences to the Kingdom and people of Saudi
Arabia on the passing away of their Crown Prince.
The Vietnamese delegation wishes to thank you,
Madame President, for convening this important debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, on United Nations Day. I would
also like to extend my appreciation to Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his comprehensive briefing.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
For more than 60 years the region of Middle East
has seen many wars and much bloodshed. Millions of
Palestinian people remain displaced from their
homeland, live under dire circumstances due to the
blockade and are subject to violent attack in many
forms. The Palestinian people continue to be denied
their fundamental and inalienable rights of selfdetermination, first and foremost among them the right
to create an independent and sovereign State of
Palestine.
More than a decade ago when the General
Assembly met in 1988 to consider the question of
Palestine, the Palestinian side presented a plan to
advance peace. New circumstances have created new
hopes for a just and durable peace settlement in line
with the legitimate interests of all parties. Palestine
made difficult decisions and, in the words of President
Mahmoud Abbas, “decided to adopt the path of relative
justice” (A/66/PV.19). A clear illustration is the
Palestinian agreement to establish the State of Palestine
on only 22 per cent of the territory of historical
Palestine.
However, the peace process soon reached a
stalemate because Israel still refused to become
engaged on issues buttressed by international law and

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

numerous United Nations resolutions, and intensified
the building of settlements on the territory of the State
of Palestine. While we recognize the legitimate
concerns of all parties, we trust that the realities of the
Middle East over the past six decades now show that
those concerns should and can be promoted only in the
framework of earnest negotiations covering all of the
aforementioned issues.
Viet Nam closely follows developments related to
the peace process in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, and strongly supports the
struggle and rights of the Palestinian people and all
efforts for peace in the region. Given the prolonged
stalemate and the continued serious encroachment on
the rights of the Palestinian people, and given the
strength of the internationally recognized achievements
of the Palestinian authorities and people in building
their State, President Mahmoud Abbas, on behalf of the
State and people of Palestine and in the exercise of
their inalienable rights, has submitted the State of
Palestine’s application for full membership in the
United Nations. Viet Nam supports the will of the State
and people of Palestine.
Viet Nam also supports negotiations between the
parties concerned and welcomes renewed efforts by the
Quartet, the League of Arab States, countries of the
region and the United Nations to help to promote
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on all core issues. We
call for intensified efforts by the international
community, in particular the Security Council and the
Quartet, to address the current political and
humanitarian crisis and to promote a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the Arab-Israeli conflict
on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425
(1978), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the
Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet Road Map, which emphasize, among
other things, the principle of land for peace and the
right of all States in the region to live in peace and
security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to convey our
deepest condolences to the Government and people of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the passing of His

11-56143

Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence and Aviation. We also extend our condolences
to Turkey in the wake of the recent earthquake, which
exacted a heavy toll.
In his regular briefing this morning, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe
underscored the growing suffering that the Palestinian
people continue to endure as a result of the Israeli
authorities’ ongoing policies of aggression and
occupation. The most serious issue is the Israeli
Government’s continued campaign to expand its illegal
settlements in the heart of Palestinian cities and
villages; its demolition, destruction and confiscation of
Palestinian homes, properties and land; and its
continued siege of the Gaza Strip. We condemn all of
those dangerous Israeli practices, which have
exacerbated the deteriorating humanitarian plight of
the Palestinian people and caused them to hit rock
bottom. Those practices have also been a direct reason
for the failure of the peace negotiations thus far and the
growing state of tension, frustration and instability in
the region.
We warn that the continued disregard of the
international community for such Israeli actions and
unilateral measures will only encourage Israel to
pursue its practices aimed at entrenching its occupation
of Palestinian land and property. That is especially true
of its actions in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, whereby it aims to
change the city’s demographic, historical and religious
nature.
The United Arab Emirates demands that the
international community, and especially the Security
Council, fully assume their responsibilities now more
than ever before. Those include the adoption of all
necessary, serious and effective measures to compel
Israel, the occupying Power, to immediately cease all
settlement activities in the Palestinian territories,
nullify all illegal decisions and measures it has taken
unilaterally in that regard, and urgently lift its siege of
Gaza.
We hope that the international community will
enhance the scope of the humanitarian, economic and
financial aid offered to the Palestinian people and their
National Authority so that they can overcome the great
challenges they continue to face.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council is of
special political significance, as it is follows the

11

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian Authority’s request for the admission of the
State of Palestine as a full Member of the United
Nations. The United Arab Emirates supports that
historic request and entitlement of the Palestinian
people, especially in view of the fact that the
Palestinian Authority has fulfilled its obligations in
establishing the institutions of Palestinian statehood, as
recognized by the Quartet and other relevant
international organizations.
The United Arab Emirates also hopes that the
Council’s deliberations will lead it to take the
unanimous decision to recommend to the General
Assembly the acceptance of the Palestinian application
as soon as possible, and in a manner consistent with the
positions of the vast majority of the world’s countries,
which have officially recognized an independent State
of Palestine based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and on the basis of the
resolutions of international legitimacy, the Madrid
Peace Conference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
vision of the two-State solution, as stipulated by the
General Assembly in its resolution 181 (II) partitioning
Palestine into two States, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Accepting Palestine’s
request for admission as a full Member of the United
Nations does not at all mean closing the door to the
continuation
of
the
Israeli-Palestinian
peace
negotiations; rather, it would mean a positive step
towards supporting efforts to soon resume peace
negotiations.
The halt in the negotiations led by the Quartet is
due primarily to Israel’s failure to abide by the
Quartet’s work plan. Therefore, the urgent and
unconditional resumption of those negotiations is
contingent above all on making Israel fully and
immediately cease all illegal settlement activity
throughout the Palestinian territories, especially East
Jerusalem. It will also require a commitment to a clear
and specific time frame for those negotiations so as to
reach a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement
based on the two-State solution.
We closely followed the most recent prisoner
exchange between the Palestinian and Israeli sides. We
welcome the efforts made by the sisterly Arab Republic
of Egypt in that regard. We demand that Israel
immediately and unconditionally release the thousands
of prisoners who continue to be held under dire and
illegal conditions in Israeli prisons and detention

12

centres. We also stress the importance of the adoption
by the international community of the concrete
measures necessary to guarantee the protection of
Palestinian civilians and ensure accountability for all
illegal measures and flagrant violations committed by
the occupying Power, in contravention of international
humanitarian law and the rights of the Palestinian
people.
In closing, we hope that the Security Council will
not again hesitate to take the necessary firm measures,
under its mandate and responsibilities, to support the
efforts to revive a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela would like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing. We support the statement made by His
Excellency Ambassador Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Since 1948, the date of the declaration of the
Israeli State, the Palestinian people, humiliated and
exploited by the occupying Power, have been expelled
from their lands. Today, entire generations of
Palestinian citizens continue to pay the high price of
exile, alienation and the systematic undermining of
their human rights.
The historic decision of the Palestinian
authorities to request the Security Council to support
its international recognition as a State with full rights
in the United Nations is a claim for justice and
reaffirmation of the Palestinian people’s right to selfdetermination. The Government of the United States
has launched a campaign to frustrate recognition of the
Palestinian State, making it conditional on the
relaunching of direct talks between Israel and
Palestine, facilitated by the Quartet. In that way, it
seeks to delay or to block the international historic
demand calling for the establishment of that State.
The
Bolivarian
Republic
of
Venezuela
diplomatically recognized the Palestinian State on
27 April 2009. Palestine has all the international legal,
political and moral criteria to qualify as a sovereign
State, in line with international law. After so many

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

decades of delay, Palestine has established itself as a
subject automatically by law in the international
community. Through the building of an unjustifiable
and racist wall, the imposition of neocolonial
settlements, the brutal and ongoing blockade of the
Gaza Strip and institutionalized violence, Israel is
blocking the paths towards a negotiated settlement
between the parties.
The Government of Israel currently has in its
prisons more than 6,000 prisoners, including more than
280 children, some less than 12 years old. We are
dismayed that there are children among those deprived
of liberty. That makes clear the inhuman nature of the
Government of Israel and those who defend such
practices. Such actions, aimed at changing the
demographic composition, the nature and the
configuration of the Palestinian territories, are in
violation of international humanitarian law and the
relevant resolutions of the Council and the United
Nations.
The Government of Israel has long undermined
the principles of the United Nations. International law
prevents Israel from invoking conquest and
colonization, calling it natural expansion. Therefore,
Venezuela once again calls on the Security Council to
take the necessary steps to ensure that the State of
Israel respects all relevant resolutions and its
obligations under international law.
Venezuela reiterates its full support for the
recognition of the Palestinian State by the United
Nations on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It also supports compensation
and the consequent return to their homeland of 50 per
cent of the Palestinian population who find themselves
dispersed throughout the entire world, in line with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
We pay tribute to the tireless efforts being made
by the Government of President Bashar Al-Assad to
preserve the unity, integrity and stability of his country,
besieged by imperialism. The stability of Syria is
fundamental to peace in the Middle East.
Venezuela reiterates the need for Israel to
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan, pursuant to
resolution 498 (1981) and in respect of resolutions 242
(1968) and 348 (1974). We renew our call to the State
of Israel to respect the sovereignty of Lebanon and to
avoid further conflict such as took place in July 2006.
Only through direct negotiations between the parties,

11-56143

under the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006), can
constructive solutions be achieved.
There is no excuse for the expulsion of the
Palestinian people from their own lands, the frequent
indiscriminate bombardment of Lebanon and the
occupation of the Syrian Golan by Israel. They are
flagrant violations of the fundamental principles of
humanitarian and international law, unparalleled in
modern history.
As our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Nicolás
Maduros Moros, said when he read out the message of
the President of the Republic, Hugo Chávez Frías,
before the General Assembly on 27 September:
“Venezuela hereby affirms its unconditional
solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
unlimited support for the Palestinian national
cause, including, of course, the immediate
admission of Palestine to the United Nations as a
full Member State.” (A/66/PV.29)
It is time for the liberation of the Palestinian
people, which will come about with the support of the
peoples of the world. In his message, President Chávez
optimistically predicted that Palestine will live and be
victorious. We wish free, sovereign and independent
Palestine a long life.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me first to express my condolences to
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its people and
Government on the passing of the Crown Prince. We
would also like to convey our condolences and our
solidarity to the people and Government of Turkey,
who have been struck by the recent painful earthquake.
Both countries are sister nations and neighbours of my
country, and all that happens in either country also
affects us as if it were happening in Syria. The opposite
is also true.
My delegation wishes to express its great
appreciation to you, Madame President, for having
convened this open meeting to address the situation in
the Middle East. This is an important topic, which we
debate with the aim of putting an end to Israel’s
occupation of the Arab territories and its aggressive,
inhumane and systematic violations of the rights of
those who live there, in contravention of international
law and international humanitarian and human rights

13

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

law. These practices continue with the full knowledge
of those who claim to protect those laws.
All of us here know that the item on the agenda
today, “The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question”, is primarily concerned with the
Arab-Israeli conflict and the question of Palestine, and
not with other matters that do not fall within the
historical definition of the item’s title. Unfortunately,
instead of merely focusing on the content and objective
of this agenda item, attempts are made to introduce
other, unrelated subjects in order to weaken the agenda
item under discussion, silently ignore the question of
Israel’s commitment to ending its occupation of the
occupied Arab territories, and minimize the importance
of the application to the Council for the full
membership of Palestine in the United Nations. In this
context, we note that the facts show that the events,
crises and tensions in our region are closely linked to
the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Today’s exercise arises from efforts to lessen the
international political and diplomatic pressure on Israel
and certain countries that oppose Palestine’s just
demands — supported unanimously by the
international community — seeking first and foremost
the creation of a Palestinian State and an end to the
settlement activities. Some countries are attempting to
destabilize the region, which would lead to regional
war and have a catastrophic effect on all the States of
the region, without exception.
How can they do this? The answer is simple.
They are inciting various Arab States against one
another, under varying pretexts. They are also
attempting to change the reality of the Arab world by
opening up internal Arab fronts, which in the final
analysis can serve only Israel’s interests. And in regard
to the so-called Arab Spring, the question we should
ask is how we can reconcile the beauty of the notion of
spring with the bloodshed, war, aggression, hostilities
and interference in the internal affairs of other
countries. Is this the definition of spring?
We meet today at an important moment in the
history of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is unacceptable
and incomprehensible that the Security Council should
remain idle in the face of Israel’s inhumane and
aggressive policies. In this context, the Council today
has a significant opportunity to prove that it can play
its part, as set forth in the Charter, by accepting the just
and internationally supported request of Palestine; by

14

recognizing an independent Palestinian State within the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital;
and by granting it full membership of the United
Nations according to international law developed
within this Organization through nearly 1,000
resolutions.
Along with implementing policies that are
contrary to international law, Israel, the occupying
Power, refuses to return the occupied Syrian Golan to
Syria and refuses to respect the resolutions of
international legitimacy adopted on this matter,
especially resolution 497 (1981), which states that the
annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan is null, void
and illegal. Israel continues to practice terror and
oppression against the Syrian authorities under
occupation in the Golan. Furthermore, the occupying
forces are waging an ongoing campaign to break the
ties that link those within the Syrian Golan to their
homeland by building the racist wall of separation east
of Majdal Shams, in line with the new Israeli political
and security policy to undermine any possibility of
peace negotiations, including over the occupied Syrian
Golan.
We have transmitted to the Secretary-General and
the Council official complaints in this matter, calling
on the United Nations, particularly the Council, to
shoulder their responsibilities and take measures to
compel Israel to immediately halt its blatant violations
of international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, particularly resolution 497 (1981). Today,
unfortunately, we reiterate that those calls have not
been answered. We were again offended by the absence
of any mention in the Under-Secretary-General’s
briefing of the occupied Syrian Golan.
The achievement of just, comprehensive and
lasting peace can come only with Israel’s full
withdrawal to the 4 June 1967 borders and with the
creation of an independent Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We must also address the
matter of the Palestinian refugees, as stated in General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. We cannot have
partial, phased or delayed solutions to this question.
Peace in the region is at a dark impasse due to the
arrogance of Israel, supported by the United States and
certain European nations that provide unlimited
support. This has created a deep sense of frustration
and anger among the Arab and Palestinian peoples.

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

The only obstacle to peace in the region is Israel,
and Israeli officials admit this themselves. One
example among many are the remarks by Major
General Uri Saguy, former head of military
intelligence, who took part in the 2000 Shepherdstown
talks organized by Bill Clinton, in his recently
published book The Frozen Hand: Why Israel Fears
Peace with Syria More Than War, Mr. Saguy contends
that Israel has done everything it could to destroy any
settlement with Syria, and that former Prime Minister
Ehud Barak aborted the peace process with Syria. We
all know that President Clinton addressed this topic in
his memoirs, revealing Israel’s responsibility for the
failure of the negotiations with Syria.
We are very concerned and regretful when we see
certain permanent representatives speak on the subject
of the Middle East and my country’s situation with
similar animosity and provocativeness, calling for an
uprising against our country’s legal Government so as
to foment chaos and destabilization and manipulate our
people’s destiny. We find it strange that those countries
that falsely proclaim their desire for Syria’s security
and stability refuse to encourage national dialogue or
serious ongoing comprehensive international reforms
in Syria within six months. Along those lines, we
would note that to follow up the recent comprehensive
reforms in Syria, in recent days my country has
established a committee to draft a new, advanced and
modern constitution that will reflect the aspirations of
the Syrian people. In a few days, a preparatory
commission on national dialogue will be established by
presidential decree. It will be presided over by Syrian
President Bashar Al-Assad himself.
While my delegation will not use this opportunity
to reply to statements made by some colleagues, we are
nevertheless convinced that today’s agenda item has
nothing to do with their manipulation and manoeuvres,
whose aim is merely to distract attention from the
tension resulting from Israel’s continued occupation of
territories in Palestine, southern Lebanon and the
Syrian Golan. While the world turns a blind eye to the
daily crimes of settlement activities and the violation
of law and hundreds of Security Council resolutions,
my country strongly condemns the diplomatically
inappropriate comments made by the observer of the
European Union and a number of other speakers on the
subject of my country and its political leadership.
My country respects the principles and ideals of
the United Nations and its role as a legal point of

11-56143

reference. We will therefore abstain from responding to
the comments to which I have referred, which are
beyond the realm of political, diplomatic and courteous
convention
and
violate
the
principle
of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Member
States. My delegation will not proceed in that manner
against representatives who have judged or criticized
our country or characterized the regime in negative
terms. Out of respect for our colleagues and for the
Security Council, we would prefer to proceed in
keeping with appropriate diplomatic and political
language.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): A debate on the situation
in the Middle East and the Palestinian question on
United Nations Day, 24 October, is highly symbolic.
The bid for Palestinian statehood goes back to the
United Nations partition plan of 1947, and even
further. In 1949, Norway voted in favour of admitting
Israel as a Member State of the United Nations. At the
time, we based our decision on the declarations and
explanations provided by Israel. Israel had persuasively
explained why recognition and membership should not
await the resolution of the outstanding final status
issues.
Since then, Norwegian policy has been based on
the vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security. Norway therefore
stands ready to recognize a Palestinian State.
Meanwhile, we support all international efforts leading
to a comprehensive agreement on the outstanding final
status issues, including the recent efforts of the Middle
East Quartet to resume substantive talks between the
two parties.
Norway has consistently stood by Israel and its
inherent right to self-defence in accordance with
international law. We have also supported the
Palestinian right to statehood and the building of the
Palestinian Authority.
At its last meeting in September, the donor
support group for the Palestinian Authority affirmed
the success of Palestinian institution-building. The
performance of Palestinian public institutions was
scrutinized by the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the United Nations. Their joint
conclusion was that the Palestinians were fully capable
of running a State. Prime Minister Fayyad has

15

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

succeeded in what he promised two years ago, namely,
establishing the necessary institutional foundation for
achieving international recognition of Palestinian
statehood.
In September, President Abbas reiterated before
the General Assembly the need to resolve the final
status issues through negotiations (see A/66/PV.19).
Moreover, he ensured the General Assembly of the
Palestinian Authority’s commitment to comply with the
Charter of the United Nations, relevant United Nations
resolutions, democracy, the rule of law and human
rights.
We take note of the Palestinian application for
United Nations membership, which the Security
Council is now considering. We await the result of the
Council’s deliberations. If, in due course, the
Palestinian authorities decide to go before the General
Assembly, Norway will consider all legitimate
demands put forward. The recognition of statehood and
accession to United Nations membership are issues that
are best addressed in the main United Nations bodies
here in New York.
A main obstacle to an effective Palestinian State
and full institution-building remains the occupation
and the continued building of Israeli settlements on the
occupied land. Norway is deeply concerned by the
grave effects on peace and security of recent plans such
as those for Mordot Gilo and Givat Hamatos, as well as
other planned settlement expansions. Such measures
are rapidly changing the territories around Jerusalem,
in East Jerusalem and in the West Bank. They
undermine negotiations and may soon render the twoState vision unattainable. The Secretary-General, the
General Assembly and the International Court of
Justice have all rejected the legality of such unilateral
actions.
Norway welcomes the agreement on the release
of Gilad Shalit and the exchange of prisoners. The
family’s long wait is now over. Norway’s position all
along has been that Shalit’s imprisonment was
unacceptable, and we have been among the countries
actively working for his release. We expect that
agreement to have implications for the situation in the
West Bank and Gaza over the next few weeks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, on behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom
of Morocco, I wish to extend our deep condolences to
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on its loss of Crown
Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. Our deepest
condolences and sympathy also go to Turkey following
the earthquake that occurred there yesterday.
We extend our gratitude to the President of the
Council for convening this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
We also thank Mr. Lynn Pasco for his valuable and
comprehensive briefing.
Morocco aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Egypt, Kazakhstan
and Qatar on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Group of
Arab States, respectively.
Today’s meeting is taking place only a few weeks
after Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas
delivered his historic address at the General Assembly
(see A/65/PV.19), in which he requested the full
membership of the State of Palestine in the United
Nations, including recognition of its sovereignty on the
basis of the 4 June 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Based on our belief in justice
and legality as they relate to the question of
Palestine — as we stated during this year’s general
debate (see A/66/PV.25) — my country renews its
determination to fully and effectively support the
request made by the Palestinian leadership on behalf of
the Palestinian people. We hope that the current
Security Council consultations on this issue will
culminate in the prompt achievement of that goal,
especially considering that there is universal consensus
on the two-State solution — the States of Palestine and
Israel — as well as recognition by many international
organizations, especially by this Organization, that the
Palestinian institutions and infrastructure are prepared
to shoulder the responsibilities of an independent State.
The Palestinian question is at a historic and
crucial crossroads, which requires the international
community to act responsibly in order to achieve the
legitimate demands of the Palestinian people. The
impasse in this long peace process does not bode well.
It could have a negative and adverse impact on peace
and security in the whole region.
That deadlock is the inevitable natural outcome
of the policies of force, intransigence and imposition of

16

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

the status quo pursued by the occupying Power. Instead
of dealing in a positive way with the plethora of
international initiatives to revive the peace process, the
Israeli authorities have intensified their efforts to
change the demographic composition of the occupied
territories by intensifying their settlement activities,
arbitrary arrests, home demolitions and displacement
of Palestinian people — including the confiscation of
their property, their collective punishment and the
excessive use of force against them. The most recent
chapter in this devious scheme was Israel’s declaration,
on 14 October, authorizing the construction of 2,610
new illegal Jewish housing units in East Jerusalem, in
an attempt to fragment the new Palestinian State and
isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank.
Like the Secretary-General, we are deeply
concerned about this dangerous and illegal escalation,
which runs counter to all international laws,
instruments and norms. As Chair of the Al-Quds
Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, along with the
Kingdom of Morocco, strongly condemns all attempts
to alter the demographic composition of East Jerusalem
and change its religious, cultural and historic character.
The Security Council has reiterated time and
again that all unilateral actions taken by Israel in East
Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian territories
are illegal. It is time that the Council implements its
own resolutions and puts an end to such Israeli
practices. The international community, including the
United Nations, has the responsibility to take
immediate action in accordance with its legal, political
and ethical obligations vis-à-vis the Palestinian people,
in order to allow them to enjoy their full, legitimate
rights. In that connection, we support regional,
international and American Administration efforts, as
well as those of the European Union, which, in the
Quartet statement of 23 September, pledged to revive
the peace process, within a specific time frame, as a
last option and crucial hope and on the basis of
international instruments and terms of reference, as
well as United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
process, international law and the Quartet’s own Road
Map.
The Palestinian Authority and the international
community have unquestionably acted with great
responsibility and complete respect for negotiations as
the basis for efforts to achieve a comprehensive and
fair peace. We are convinced that the stability and

11-56143

security of the entire Middle East is inextricably linked
to the ability of Palestinians to exercise their political
and legal rights. That includes the right to establish an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, as well as the withdrawal of Israel from all
other territories occupied since 1967.
The Kingdom of Morocco enjoyed the trust of the
international community in representing the African
and Arab Groups when it was elected as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for the
period 2012-2013. We will do everything in our power
to enable the Palestinian people to regain their full
rights, including to establish an independent State with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as everything in
our power to maintain stability and security for all
areas and peoples of the Middle East, including Israel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): Thank you, Madame
President, for organizing this important debate and for
presiding over the work of the Security Council this
month. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing.
I wish to convey our deepest condolences and
sympathies to the Government and people of Turkey on
the loss of life and the destruction of property caused
by yesterday’s earthquake in eastern Turkey. We also
convey our deepest condolences to the Government
and people of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the
passing away of Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud.
When a peace process becomes as long-drawnout and protracted as has been the case with the IsraeliPalestinian question, there are times when the parties
involved feel frustrated. It is essential for both parties
to recommit themselves to the noble objective of
reaching a durable solution.
In that regard, Uganda reiterates its call on the
Israeli and Palestinian parties to muster the necessary
courage to resume negotiations towards a peaceful
settlement based on a two-State solution — Israel and
Palestine living side by side peacefully and within
secure borders.
We welcome the Quartet statement issued in New
York on 23 September, in particular the six steps it
proposes and the call on the parties to resume
negotiations with a view to reaching a final agreement

17

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

by the end of 2012. Uganda encourages both Israel and
Palestine to resume negotiations without further delay.

the urgent, unconditional and full lifting of the cruel
and illegal blockade of Gaza.

We also welcome the agreement reached on the
exchange of prisoners, brokered by Egypt and
Germany, which was announced by Israeli and
Palestinian leaders on 11 October. We consider this as
an important gesture that can foster greater
cooperation.

The ovation received by President Mahmoud
Abbas’s address to the General Assembly at its 16th
plenary meeting, on 23 September (see A/66/PV.19),
when he announced the presentation to the SecretaryGeneral of a letter of request for Palestinian
membership in the United Nations, is evidence of the
support by the international community for the
Palestinian cause and a recognition of its rights as a
State. Cuba fully and strongly supports that request for
full membership in the United Nations.

The continuation of settlement activity, or any
other actions that can hamper progress, should be
avoided.
On the situation in Gaza, we remain concerned
about the dire humanitarian conditions and we reiterate
our call for a complete lifting of the blockade on Gaza.
Finally, at this critical juncture, it is important for
the Israeli and Palestinian parties, with the support of
the international community, to step up their efforts
towards the attainment of a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to congratulate you, Madame President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.
We express our deep condolences to the people
and Government of Turkey for their losses from the
earthquake. We likewise express profound condolences
to the people and Government of Saudi Arabia on the
passing away of His Highness the Crown Prince.
Cuba associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
It is regrettable that there continues to be no
progress in the situation in the Middle East region, in
particular with regard to the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem. The region is still
marked by instability and insecurity. The illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories
remains the main obstacle to reaching a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution in the region.
Cuba demands the immediate cessation of the
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories, the
settlement activities in Palestinian territory, the
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of military
force against the defenceless civilian population, and

18

The Security Council must rule on this matter
without further delay, and it must do so positively, as is
the manifest wish of the overwhelming majority of the
States Members of the United Nations.
As the Security Council continues its
deliberations, the days go by and thousands of
Palestinian political prisoners, including children,
women and elected officials, suffer humiliations in
Israeli prisons. Since 27 September last, thousands of
Palestinian political prisoners have been on a hunger
strike, protesting the deterioration of their conditions in
detention and the actions of the occupying Power.
Regrettably, the Israeli prison authorities have
responded by taking additional punitive measures
against the strikers.
The letters dated 10 October 2011 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of
the Security Council (S/2011/629) state that:
“Israel has continued its inhumane treatment of
Palestinian prisoners and detainees via a series of
illegal and harsh measures, such as collective
punishment, which includes forcing them to live
in unsanitary and unhygienic conditions; denial
of health care; restrictions on family visits;
solitary confinement for long periods of time,
with some held in isolation for at least 10 years;
deprivation of the prisoners’ right to education;
forced night-time searches of prisoners’ cells; and
denial of due process. In addition to such
measures, in violation of the prisoners’ basic
human rights, the occupying Power continues to
subject Palestinian prisoners and detainees to all
forms
of
psychological
and
physical
maltreatment, such as cuffing their feet and
hands, measures of humiliation and intimidation,

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

forced interrogations
torture.”

and,

in

many

cases,

The international community, particularly the
Security Council, cannot remain indifferent. The
Council and the General Assembly must take practical
measures to ensure that Israel puts an end to those
policies, which are carried out deliberately, in violation
of international humanitarian law and of human rights,
including the Geneva Conventions.
Cuba reaffirms once again that all such measures
and actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, represent violations of international law
and agreements and of the Charter and resolutions of
the United Nations. Cuba demands Israel’s full
withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967.
Cuba reiterates once again its position in favour
of a just and lasting peace for all peoples of the region
of the Middle East that will put an end to the
occupation of all Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 and guarantee the exercise of the selfdetermination of the Palestinian people by establishing
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Ali (Bangladesh): Madam President, I should
like to begin by thanking your country, Nigeria, and
you personally for steering this very important open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. At the
outset, I express our sincere condolences at the demise
of the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia. We also express
our condolences at the loss of life and property in the
recent earthquake in Turkey.
I convey our appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.
The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the representatives of Egypt
and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, respectively. In addition, I wish to briefly
make certain points that Bangladesh believes to be of
importance.

In order to achieve a lasting solution in the
Middle East, it is very important to address the key
issue, which is the prolonged and illegal occupation of
the Arab territories by Israel. We believe that the
occupying Power should immediately cease its
continued settlement activity, which remains the key
blockage to the resumption of direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine.
We commend President Mahmoud Abbas’s
leadership of the Palestinian Authority and the
continued Palestinian State-building efforts, especially
in the areas of governance, the rule of law and human
rights, livelihoods, productive sectors, education and
culture, health and so on.
We are concerned, however, at the destruction by
the occupying Power of properties, homes and
economic institutions, and the construction of the Wall,
contrary to international law, in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem, which have hampered the already critical
socio-economic situation that the Palestinian
population faces. We are also worried because of the
Israeli military operations and the continuing Israeli
policy of closures and severe restrictions on the
movement of people and goods, including
humanitarian personnel as well as food, medical, and
other essential supplies, in the Gaza Strip, which are
causing civilian casualties, and we therefore call for
maximum restraint with respect for international
humanitarian law.
We express our concern at the inhumane
treatment of Palestinian prisoners languishing in Israeli
jails. My delegation is pleased, however, at the recent
Egyptian-brokered prisoner-exchange deal under which
Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit has been released in
exchange for more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners.
My delegation believes that the Fourth Geneva
Convention,
the
relevant
General
Assembly
resolutions, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the principle of land for
peace and the Madrid Conference terms of reference,
which guarantee Israel’s withdrawal from all occupied
Arab and Palestinian territories back to the line of
4 June 1967, the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative are the best guides for achieving a two-State
solution.
The principled support of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination from all

11-56143

19

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

corners of the globe, both bilaterally and multilaterally,
has been an essential pillar of Palestinian resilience
over the decades. My delegation welcomes in this
regard Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’s speech
of 23 September 2011 (see A/66/PV.19) before the
General Assembly and his formal submission to the
Secretary-General of an application for United Nations
membership. It is also heartening to note that more
than 130 countries have recognized the State of
Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders. It would
therefore be morally befitting for this body to
unanimously respect the will of the majority of the
Member States and to endorse the application of
Palestine.
Let me now turn to the situations in Lebanon and
in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights. We call upon the
concerned parties to fully respect the sovereignty of
Lebanon and to cease continuous breaches of
resolution 1701 (2006). We further demand that the
occupying State immediately halt its actions to alter the
legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights in accordance with resolution
497 (1981).
In conclusion, let me reiterate the long-standing
position of Bangladesh that the continued illegal
occupation of Palestine over the past six decades is the
root cause of violence, unrest and destabilization in the
region. Let me also reiterate our full support for a
lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region, both
Arabs and Israelis, and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side and in peace with all its neighbours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): Let me first turn to
the situation in Syria and Yemen before discussing the
question of Palestine.
With regard to Syria, we were very disappointed
by the veto on the draft resolution presented to the
Council earlier this month (see S/PV.6627). We are
concerned that the use of the veto in such cases is not
conducive to peace and security in the region. On the
contrary, it can further undermine international efforts
while the situation continues to deteriorate. We call
upon the Council to revisit the situation in Syria as
soon as possible.

20

With regard to Yemen, we welcome the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2014 (2001) last Friday (see
S/PV.6634).
Iceland
strongly
supports
the
condemnation of human rights abuses and calls for the
end of violence. We also welcome the Council’s
reference to Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women, peace and
security. We urge the Government of Yemen to
implement the resolution in full.
The Security Council has found itself at the
centre stage of the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict by having been entrusted with the application
of Palestine for membership in the United Nations. The
Council’s deliberations on the application take place in
an environment where peace negotiations, which have
been ongoing for almost two decades, are at a standstill
with no tangible results. We speak of an environment
in which there is not a viable plan in sight that might
draw the parties back to the negotiating table and in
which the current situation is unsustainable, because an
occupation is inherently unsustainable.
At the same time, under the difficult
circumstances of the occupation, the Palestinian
National Authority has successfully implemented its
economic and development programme and has now
demonstrated clearly, by improving infrastructure and
through institution-building, that Palestine can stand on
its own feet. Their efforts and accomplishment have
been applauded by the international community,
including the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank.
In July, Iceland informed the Council of its
intention to support the Palestinians should they decide
to bring their case to the United Nations. In his
statement during the general debate in September, the
Icelandic Minister for Foreign Affairs informed the
General Assembly of the determination of the Icelandic
Government to fully recognize Palestine (see
A/66/PV.26). I am pleased to inform the Council that
the Government of Iceland has taken steps at the
domestic level towards the recognition of Palestine by
putting forward a proposal for a parliamentary
resolution on the recognition of Palestine as an
independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders. That proposal is currently being discussed by
the Foreign Relations Committee of our Parliament.
As many others have said before us, we see no
contradiction between Palestine seeking membership in

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

the United Nations and the Quartet-led peace process,
which we fully support. Let me reiterate Iceland’s
position that it is of the utmost importance that a
negotiated agreement should be based on the two-State
solution, where both parties can live in peace with their
neighbours.
Iceland urges the members of the Council to
contribute to the realization of the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people by recommending to the General
Assembly that Palestine be accepted as the 194th State
Member of the United Nations. That would allow
Palestine to follow in the footsteps of the numerous
other Member States that owe their freedom and
independence from colonialism to this very
Organization and to the determination of many of its
Members to ensure that the principles on which the
Organization was established override other interests.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Tarar: (Pakistan): Thank you, Madame
President, for convening today’s debate. We also
extend our compliments to the delegation of Nigeria
for its able leadership of the Security Council.
We express our deepest condolences and
sympathies to Turkey on the human and material toll
exacted by the earthquake.
We mourn the passing of His Royal Highness
Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Crown Prince, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
by the Permanent Representatives of Egypt and
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.
Precisely one month after the general debate,
during which our top leaders reiterated their collective
objective of finding a lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, today’s meeting of the Council
comes amidst renewed hope for lasting peace in the
region. The impressive march of the Palestinian people
towards statehood has reached an important milestone
with the application for United Nations membership.
We hope that the Security Council will conclude
favourably its deliberations on Palestine’s application.
Affirmative action by the Security Council and by the
General Assembly will set the foundation for a lasting

11-56143

solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It will be a
step towards rectifying the historical injustices suffered
by the Palestinian people.
The agreement reached between the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities on prisoners also bodes well for
prospects for peace. We felicitate the families of all
prisoners released as a result of that agreement, which
proves the all disputes and differences can be resolved
amicably through negotiations. It is our sincere hope
that the agreement will not only lead to the release of
more Palestinian prisoners but that it will also
reinforce the value of finding mutually acceptable
compromises.
For lasting peace in the region, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council and the Middle East Quartet
to honour their longstanding commitments to a final
settlement and to work in tandem to achieve that goal.
The Quartet’s statement of 23 September was positive
in intent. However, the Quartet’s initiative was
neutralized by the Israeli decision to build new
settlements in the occupied territories. This is cause for
serious concern. Settlement activity is a clear violation
of international law and a manifestation of Israel’s
expansionist policy. Settlement activity and the peace
process are mutually exclusive. We call upon the
Israeli authorities to cease new settlement activity
unconditionally to help resume peace negotiations. We
also call for an easement in the blockade of Gaza.
I conclude by reiterating our support for the full
membership of Palestine in the United Nations. Only a
strong State of Palestine as a responsible member of
the international community can guarantee peace for
itself and for its neighbours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers to
commend you, Madam President, for convening this
important debate. Let me also express my sincere
condolences to the Government of Saudi Arabia on the
tragic passing away of Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud.
The delegation of Sri Lanka associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
This is a timely opportunity to focus on the
situation in the Middle East, particularly the question
of Palestine, a question that has occupied the attention

21

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

of the Security Council for a long time. The
developments since our last opportunity to discuss the
issue are particularly important.
A peaceful settlement of the Palestinian issue will
be one of the defining achievements of this century. It
will reflect our collective will and responsibility to
help resolve a question that has occupied the attention
of this Council and the United Nations system for
several decades.
While the peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine remains a laudable goal for the United
Nations, it is an existential necessity for the Palestinian
people.
Sri Lanka’s position with regard to the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people remains
consistent. We hope that the application for admission
of the State of Palestine to full membership in the
United Nations will receive sympathetic consideration.
Sri Lanka has consistently supported a peaceful
settlement of the Palestinian issue and called for the
implementation of General Assembly resolutions
regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood and the attainment of a two-State
solution. Our sincere wish is that Israel, Palestine and
their neighbours coexist in peace and harmony.
Realizing the two-State solution would be the greatest
investment in peace in the region in our time.
Sri Lanka has called upon all parties to ensure a
climate conducive to finding a way forward towards
the two-State solution, which is the only sustainable
solution. The key players in the Middle East peace
process have called upon all parties to scrupulously
meet their obligations under the peace agreement.
The resolution of the issue of Palestinian political
prisoners in Israel is critical to a negotiated settlement
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and as a confidencebuilding measure. Sri Lanka welcomes the recent
exchange of prisoners between the two parties. It is a
measure that will generate positive momentum for
peace talks.
My Government is pleased to note the several
important developments that have occurred on the
ground in the midst of continued international efforts
to create conditions for the early resumption of
negotiations by Israel and Palestine. Palestine has been
successfully striving to complete its State-building
programme, which has been endorsed by the

22

International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the
United Nations and others, as well as by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in Brussels in June and in New
York in September. There has been internal
reconciliation between the relevant local political
stakeholders, who have united to pursue their common
aspirations.
It is our sincere hope that the issues before the
Council today will be addressed in a just and equitable
manner that will encourage the search for peace. I take
this opportunity to commend the work that has been
carried out by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, for all
these years amid many odds, to assist millions of
Palestinian people in need, especially the people of
Gaza.
Sri Lanka wishes to reiterate its support for the
Palestinians quest for their legitimate human and
national rights. The Government and the people of Sri
Lanka would like to reassure the Council of our
continued support and solidarity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of Turkey in the aftermath of the severe
earthquake that hit the eastern part of their country.
Our condolences also go to the Government of Saudi
Arabia upon the passing of Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud, who died last Saturday.
We further express our deep appreciation to you,
Madam President, and other members of the Security
Council for arranging this debate at this critical
moment in the history of the struggle of the Palestinian
people. We are grateful also to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his
comprehensive briefing.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the statement
to be made by the representative of Kazakhstan on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).
On 23 September 2011, President Mahmoud
Abbas submitted to the Secretary-General an
application for membership in the United Nations.
Without a doubt, it was a historic occasion. Indonesia

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

is proud to have stood by the people of Palestine and to
continue to stand by them. Indonesia continues to be an
unrepentant advocate of the Palestinian cause because
it is the right thing to do. We call upon this Council to
expedite the process and issue its recommendation
without delay.
Indonesia supports the resumption of negotiations
between the Israelis and the Palestinians, as proposed
by the Quartet on 23 September. That means
resumption of direct bilateral negotiations without
delay or preconditions. There must be a preparatory
meeting between the parties to determine the agenda
and the method to be adopted for the negotiations, as
well as an agreement on a timeframe that will not
extend beyond the end of 2012.
We wish to express our appreciation to those
Member States who have thrown their support behind
the Palestinian bid for membership, including members
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the OIC. We do not
think it is sufficient for anyone simply to express bland
support for the two-State vision, while failing to
provide practical support for the Palestinian need to
obtain what is justly theirs.
Regrettably, the Government of Israel continues
its diplomatic offensive designed to frustrate the
progress of Palestinians. The objective of this offensive
is really to perpetuate the absence of a peace process.
Palestinian membership of the United Nations is
not in contradiction with the two-State solution, nor
does it constitute an obstacle to peace. The true
obstacle to peace lies in the same failed policies of the
Government of Israel, beginning with its settlement
activities.
We support the recent release of political
prisoners by the parties, which we hope will lead to the
resumption of the peace process. It is distressing that
since the Israeli occupation began in 1967, at least
750,000 Palestinian civilians, including women,
children and elected officials, have been detained and
imprisoned by Israel. We draw attention, in this regard,
to last May’s Declaration on Palestinian Political
Prisoners adopted by the sixteenth Ministerial Meeting
of the Non-Aligned Movement in Bali, Indonesia, in
which the Movement called for urgent attention to be
paid to the grave situation of these prisoners. We look
forward to their being set free.

11-56143

Finally, Indonesia reiterates its fundamental
support for Palestine as well as the two-State solution.
We look forward to the resumption of the peace
process without unnecessary delay.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Let me begin by joining with previous
speakers in expressing deep condolences and sympathy
to the victims of the powerful earthquake in Turkey
and their families. My delegation also takes this
opportunity to express deep condolences for the
passing of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan
Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Deputy Prime Minister,
Minister of Defence and Aviation, and Inspector
General of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Furthermore,
my delegation has received the sad news from the
Pakistani Mission on the passing of Nusrat Bhutto,
former Chairperson of the Pakistan’s People Party,
Government minister and the mother of former Prime
Minister Benazir Bhutto. In this regard, my delegation
expresses its deep condolences.
It is my honour to speak before the Security
Council with regard to the Palestinian question. I wish
to thank the Nigerian delegation for its timely
convening of this important meeting of the Security
Council. Allow me also to associate myself with the
statement made by Ambassador Maged Abdelaziz,
Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
More than 60 years have passed since the
international community launched its efforts to settle
the Palestinian and Middle East problem, which was
set off by Israeli occupation of the Arab territories in
1948. Nevertheless, no significant progress has yet
been made. The Palestinian lands and other Arab
territories remain under Israel’s military occupation.
The use of armed force, the expansion of settlements
and the blockade of the Gaza Strip continue to prevail.
This reality urgently requires the international
community to find the earliest possible solution to the
Middle East problem. The core element here is the
solution of the Palestinian question as soon as possible.
There can be no lasting peace and security in the
Middle East and the Arab world unless the Palestine
issue is completely resolved.

23

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

On 23 September, during the general debate of
the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session,
President Abbas of Palestine formally submitted an
application for the full membership of Palestine in the
United Nations. This event of great significance
received overwhelming support from the international
community.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
officially recognized Palestine as a State in 1988, and
since then has extended unreserved support and
solidarity to the struggle of the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State with East Jerusalem as
its capital. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is fully committed to standing firmly with the
Palestinian and Arab people in their struggle for their
just cause until their final victory and the problem’s
final solution. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
unreservedly
supports
Palestine’s
full
membership of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I have the pleasure
to deliver the following statement on behalf of the
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), in my country’s capacity as Chair of the
57-member OIC group.
At the outset, I should like to express to Turkey
our sympathy and deepest condolences over the
devastating earthquake that struck the country on
Sunday, killing residents and causing widespread
damage. Let me also extend our shared sorrow to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia over the demise of His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence and
Aviation. He was known not only for his outstanding
service to his nation, but equally for his remarkable
role in supporting the progress of Islamic solidarity.
The Palestinian question remains a defining issue
of global justice and a pressing challenge for the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular. It is upsetting and painful to watch the
Palestinian people as they continue to await the
transformation
of
the
long-standing
political
commitments and resolutions of the Security Council
into actual practice, which would inspire hope and
confidence in support for rightful causes and in
defence of the values and principles for which the
United Nations Organization was found.

24

Our debate today is of extraordinary importance,
given that it coincides with world awareness of and
attention focused on the Security Council’s expected
decision on the Palestinian bid for membership of the
United Nations. At such a defining time in history as
the Palestinian bid is being considered, we cannot fail
to take this opportunity to appeal to this forum to reach
the constructive and positive decision we are hoping
for. Such a decision, once made, will be a secure
foundation thereafter for the preservation of peace,
security and justice, and enhance the opportunity for a
just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the
conflict in the Middle East, based on the two-State
solution.
It has become very clear that Palestine’s resort to
the United Nations to gain its rights as a recognized
State does not negate the Palestinians’ firm
commitment to resolving the conflict through peaceful
means. Rather, it confirms the principled peaceful
approach that has been repeatedly and clearly
emphasized by the Palestinian President, including at
his most recent speech to the General Assembly (see
A/66/PV.19).
The OIC group aspires to justice and equality in
respect of the rightful cause of Palestine. It also
remains firm in its conviction that the Security Council
must actively contribute to, proclaim and materialize
the Palestinians’ inalienable rights, including the rights
of return and self-determination, as well as their
legitimate national aspirations to freedom, prosperity,
peace and justice in their independent, sovereign State
of Palestine based on pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The OIC also joins the international community
position in reaffirming that all measures and actions
taken by Israel to alter the legal and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan, and to impose
jurisdiction and administration there, have no legal
basis. The OIC reiterates its demand that Israel abide
fully and immediately by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
lines of 4 June 1967, as also reflected in resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Amidst the efforts undertaken by international
actors to revive a credible political process, Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to commit violations,
undertake unilateral actions and impose unlawful
policies in the West Bank. Likewise, the OIC remains

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

deeply concerned over the situation in East Jerusalem,
where Israel persists in intensifying a systematic
process of altering the historical Arab-Islamic identity
of the holy city and changing its demographic
composition. Such violations seek to completely
change the realities on the ground and eventually
isolate occupied East Jerusalem from its Palestinian
surroundings.
Both in the West Bank and in East Jerusalem,
Israel continues to construct new settlement units,
destroying
houses,
displacing
and
detaining
Palestinians, confiscating lands and properties,
building the apartheid wall, and carrying out
excavations underneath the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque. If
left unchecked, those violations will certainly pose a
threat to stability and security, heighten tensions,
undermine the viability of the two-State solution and
have far-reaching negative consequences on the life of
the Palestinians. In that regard, the Security Council
has a vital role to play in compelling Israel to abide by,
and end its flagrant breaches of, international law.
The illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip
remains in force, despite Security Council resolution
1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009. Bearing that in mind,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) cannot
accept any report that would either whitewash attacks
on humanitarian convoys or condone the illegal
blockade against Palestinian civilians. Accordingly, we
call on the Security Council to take responsibility for
putting an end to this illegal blockade on Gaza, for
protecting justice and humanity and for preventing
further human rights violations.
The imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians,
who are being held in 22 Israeli prisons and detention
facilities and who launched a general hunger strike on
27 September, remind the world of one of the many
injustices against the Palestinian people. In that regard,
we demand that the Security Council shoulder its
responsibilities in addressing the practices of the Israeli
Government, which contradict the principles and laws
of the international community, and in pressuring Israel
to release Palestinian political prisoners without any
preconditions. In that context, I would like to welcome
the recent prisoner exchange.
The time has come to acknowledge and adopt a
rightful and historic resolution that recognizes the
independent State of Palestine on the basis of the 1967
borders, an action that would provide the cornerstone

11-56143

for the establishment of stability, prosperity, peace and
security for Palestine, Israel and other neighbouring
countries of the region. We hope that the Quartet will
succeed in implementing the Road Map in accordance
with the agreed terms of reference, as reflected in the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the full
support and solidarity of OIC with the Palestinian
people in their endeavours to regain their legitimate
and inalienable national rights, including the right of
return, the right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this important meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. We also wish to
thank Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
We align ourselves with the statements made by
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and Qatar on behalf of the Arab Group.
The eyes of the international community are now
focused on the Security Council and whether it will
take a historic stand on the Palestinian request for full
membership in the United Nations. That request was
made after a long delay and with due entitlement,
particularly since more than 130 countries,
representing a majority of two thirds of the Member
States, already recognize the Palestinian State.
The peoples and the States of the region have
high hopes that the international community, in
general, and the Security Council, in particular, will
assume their political, legal and moral responsibilities
in supporting Palestine’s request for membership in the
United Nations. They also hope that rights will be
restored to their owners and that the Palestinian people
will realize their right to self-determination and their
legitimate aspiration to have a sovereign State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, within the framework of
the 4 June 1967 borders and in accordance with
internationally legitimate resolutions, in particular the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

25

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

Needless to say, that there is one party that pays
no attention to international legitimacy, nor does it
heed the resolutions of the Security Council, or
international or humanitarian laws. While the entire
world is demanding that the parties return to the
negotiating table and halt all provocative unilateral
activities that undermine the chances of success in the
peace process, Israel persists in its intransigence and
arrogance, and continues its illegal and aggressive
actions through an illegal expansionist settlement
campaign. At the same time, it ignores all appeals by
the family of nations to stop the settlement activity,
revive the peace process and resume negotiations so as
to achieve the two-State solution.
Perhaps the latest decision by the Israeli
Government to build 1,100 new illegal settlement units
on occupied Palestinian territories supplies further
proof of Israel’s arrogance and its lack of seriousness
in reaching out towards the option of peace. In that
regard, we would like to draw attention to the
harassment being suffered by the Palestinians,
including the elderly, children and women, at the hands
of armed Israeli settlers, whose destructive hands have
also reached houses of worship and destroyed
mosques, farms and trees in the occupied territories.
The State of Kuwait appeals to the international
community not to stand idle in the face of the criminal
Israeli actions that violate all international norms,
agreements and instruments. We also call for providing
the necessary protection for defenceless Palestinians in
Palestinian territories.
While we welcome the recent release of a number
of Palestinian prisoners and detainees, we also demand
the release of the remaining prisoners and detainees
and call for the deployment of an international factfinding mission to examine the conditions in Israeli
jails and the extent to which Israel adheres to the rules
of international law.
The blockade imposed on Gaza continues. There
is no doubt that this represents another violation by
Israel of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) and
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 1949.
Instead of protecting Palestinian civilians, the
occupation authorities subject them to collective
punishment, which has exacerbated and led to the
deterioration of the economic, social and humanitarian
situations in the Gaza Strip. The frightening statistics
resulting from this blockade are no longer surprising,

26

such as the unemployment rate, which stands at 65 per
cent. We cannot ignore Israel’s occasional air raids
against populated Palestinian areas, an act that
qualifies as terroristic and should be condemned.
My country renews its demand for Israel’s
compliance with Security Council resolution 497
(1981), which calls for Israel’s withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan and its withdrawal to the line of
4 June 1967. We emphasize that Israel’s continued
occupation of part of the territory of the sisterly Syrian
Arab Republic poses a real obstacle to achieving peace
and security in the Middle East.
In regard to the situation in Lebanon, the State of
Kuwait reaffirms its commitment to stand beside the
sisterly Republic of Lebanon and supports efforts to
maintain its security and preserve the integrity of its
territories. My country also demands that Israel
immediately cease its continued violations of
Lebanon’s territory and air space and that it comply
with Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and
withdraw completely from Lebanese territory.
We would like to stress that the peoples and
States of the region follow the meetings of the Security
Council regarding the Palestinian request for full
United Nations membership with great interest and
hope. Given that all of the international initiatives,
settlements and resolutions call for a two-State
solution, we therefore appeal to the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities and oblige Israel to halt its
illegal settlement activities and to resume negotiations
in order to achieve a two-State solution, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1860 (2009), the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me at the beginning to express my gratitude to you,
Madame President, for having convened this important
meeting at a time of significant developments in the
Middle East and the Muslim world.
Popular uprisings in the Middle East and North
Africa demonstrate a pressing need for change. The
aspiration of peoples to democracy, the rule of law and
independence, as well as their affection for Islamic
values, cannot simply be overruled. We believe that

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

addressing the legitimate demands of the people
through a peaceful political process and away from
foreign interventions is the only way out of crisis and
to avoid violence.
The Palestinian bid to become a full member of
the United Nations will soon come up for decision. For
the past six decades, the Palestinian people have lived
under the most severe pressure and atrocities of the
Israeli regime. All negotiations with the occupying
regime have so far proved futile, while the continued
inaction of the Security Council has made the regime
more audacious in pursuing its inhuman policies. In
past decades, the veto power was used at least 46 times
to defeat draft resolutions condemning Israel. The
question is how to consolidate our efforts in order to
secure the inalienable and inherent rights of the
Palestinians, including their right of return, and to
ensure the establishment of an independent and viable
State in all the Palestinian territories and that the
membership of Palestine, as a full-fledged State, is
realized.
Last week’s release of a noteworthy number of
Palestinian prisoners brought a wave of joy to the
occupied territories and among freedom-loving people
of the world. Yet, there are disturbing reports on the
worsening situation of Palestinian political prisoners
and detainees being illegally imprisoned and detained
by the Israeli regime, in violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law. Hence, we
should not forget that the conditions of the more than
6,000 Palestinian civilians, including at least 280
children and 38 women, as well as 22 elected officials,
who continue to be imprisoned or arbitrarily detained
by the Israeli regime. We hope that the efforts to secure
the release of those prisoners would continue.
In addition to concerns about the deteriorating
situation of Palestinian prisoners, we are disturbed by
reports in recent weeks confirming the escalation of
acts of violence and terrorism against Palestinian
civilians and their properties in the occupied
Palestinian territory perpetrated by illegal Israeli
settlers, many of whom are armed. The burning of the
Qusra mosque, the desecration of mosques in the
Palestinian villages, the uprooting of trees, burning
agricultural land and the constant harassment and
humiliation of Palestinians, including children, on a
daily basis are but a few examples of such a brutality
by settlers. Such illegal actions by Israeli settlers occur
in full view of the occupying forces, who take no

11-56143

action to hold those settlers accountable for their
crimes and continue to offer them impunity and
protection while they carry out such crimes.
These examples constitute further confirmation of
the dire situation that prevails in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
requires the international community’s urgent
attention. The Israeli regime must be held responsible
for its illegal and provocative acts. The international
community cannot continue to stand idly by as the
Israeli regime continues to colonize the Palestinian
territory, allowing its illegal settlers to rampage
unbridled and to incrementally continue its violations
of international law, thereby upholding its record of
war crimes, acts of State terrorism and systematic
human rights violations.
With regard to the situation in Syria, my
delegation wishes to emphasize that, taking into
account the multi-ethnic Syrian society and the
exceptional geopolitical situation of Syria, any foreign
intervention in the domestic affairs of Syria and
fomenting divisions and sectarian differences among
the people would jeopardize peace and stability in the
whole region. The people in Syria realize that the key
to their independence and dignity is to keep their ranks
united and to remain steadfast in their resistance and
struggle against Israeli occupation and aggression.
On Lebanon, the Israeli regime has continued its
violations of the land, sea and air space of Lebanon and
refuses to withdraw from Lebanese occupied villages.
Such occupations and acts of aggression should stop
immediately.
Before concluding, I would like to react to the
allegations against my country in the statement
delivered this morning by the representative of the
Israeli regime. It is no wonder that, by levelling
baseless allegations with regard to terrorism and Iran’s
nuclear programme, the Zionist regime has
preposterously attempted, once again, to misuse the
main debate at this Chamber and to deflect attention
from its long and dark catalogue of crimes and
atrocities, such as occupation, aggression, militarism,
State terrorism and crimes against humanity, as
reflected in the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48) and
the report on the Marmara incident.
On the ridiculous accusation of the so-called plot
to assassinate the Saudi Ambassador in Washington, it
is very clear to us that that story has been ineptly

27

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

fabricated to implicate Iran. That is a pre-planned
scenario, supported by the Israeli regime, on the
assumption that at the end it is its main beneficiary.
With more than 6,000 years of history and civilization,
the Iranian nation has never engaged and will not
engage in such a despicable attempt. Such an
operation, if true in nature, could only be planned and
carried out by such a regime, whose short history is
full of assassinations of its opponents, even highranking officials of other States. So I do not even tax
the patience of the members of the Council to delve
into it and to respond to such baseless allegations made
by the representative of such a criminal regime.
On the nuclear issue, I should say that the Israeli
regime’s clandestine development and unlawful
possession of hundreds of nuclear warheads and a
nuclear weapons arsenal are the only and single threat
to regional and international peace and security. The
Israeli regime has clearly defied the demand of the
overwhelming majority of United Nations Member
States that have, time and again, called on that regime
to renounce nuclear weapons and to accede to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). Regrettably, the inaction of the relevant United
Nations organs in dealing with such Israeli policies and
practices has emboldened that dangerous regime.
Indeed, peace and stability cannot be achieved in the
Middle East, where the massive Israeli nuclear arsenal
continues to threaten the region and beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Madame President, for convening this
meeting. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
At the outset, I would like to offer my sincere
condolences to the King, Government and people of
our sister Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and to the Arab
and Muslim nations on the passing of His Royal
Highness, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence and Aviation Crown Prince Sultan Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud. I also offer my deep sympathies to
sisterly Turkey and its people in the wake of the
devastating earthquake there, which has claimed many
lives and inflicted great material damage.
In every position it has taken on the Middle East,
the Kingdom of Bahrain has supported all efforts
aimed at achieving a peaceful settlement of the Middle

28

East question on the basis of a two-State solution in
which Israel and Palestine live side by side in peace
and security, with Palestine guaranteed as a viable,
independent State within the 1967 borders. We
continue to play an active role on the Arab Peace
Initiative Committee, believing it to be the best
framework within which to achieve a peaceful
settlement.
In his address to the General Assembly during the
general debate, His Majesty King Hamad bin Issa Al
Khalifa of Bahrain said that
“Today more than ever, the international
community has a propitious opportunity to do
justice to the brotherly Palestinian people and to
help them to achieve their legitimate aspirations
by recognizing an independent Palestinian State
on their own national soil, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. That would put an end to an era of
bitter Arab-Israeli conflict, contingent on a
complete Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories to the lines of 4 June 1967 in
Palestine, the occupied Syrian Arab Golan and
the occupied territories in southern Lebanon, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace
Initiative”. (A/66/PV.15, p. 8)
It no longer makes sense to continue to address
the Palestinian question in a routine manner. The
international community must take a bolder step
forward, not only in order to fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people but, more
importantly, to see justice done after so many decades
of occupation and unilateral attempts to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question. The
whole world, and the Quartet in particular, has seen the
Palestinian Authority make repeated concessions in its
efforts to attain its inalienable and legitimate rights,
chief among them the establishment of an independent
and viable Palestinian State, even as the international
situation evolves within this Organization. However,
the fine diplomacy and flexibility demonstrated has
been greeted by nothing but more settlement and
displacement activities, without regard for all the
international resolutions prohibiting such activities.
I remind the Council of what we have already
heard in previous meeting — the Palestinian Authority
is capable of managing State affairs, as has been
acknowledged by the World Bank, the International

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

Monetary Fund, and the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process. The Palestinian Authority
has proved its ability to establish sound institutions and
provide security for a viable State. We pay tribute to
President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad for this achievement, whereby the Palestinian
Authority has attained the goal it set itself two years
ago. This should be considered when the Palestinian
Authority’s request for Palestine’s full membership of
the United Nations is being addressed. We therefore
encourage the Organization, the Security Council and
the international community to accede to their request.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you and your
country, Madame President, on Nigeria’s presidency
this month and commend you on your excellent
management of the Council’s work. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing on the latest developments in the region.
I would like to express my deep condolences to
the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the passing of
Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. May he
rest in peace. I would also like to extend my deep
sympathies to the sisterly Republic of Turkey in the
wake of the earthquake that has claimed hundreds of
lives there.
I would also like to express our great gratitude to
all those who have congratulated Tunisia and its people
on the historic elections held in my country on
23 October, as well as our appreciation for the warm
support they have offered us on their countries’ behalf.
Tunisia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Arab Group by the
Permanent Representative of Qatar, as well as the
statements made by the representative of Kazakhstan
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and by the representative of the sisterly Republic of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The international community finds itself once
more at an important moment in the history of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, especially with regard to the
Palestinian cause. Despite the readiness shown by the
Palestinian side to reinvigorate the peace process and
work to reach appropriate and final solutions to the
outstanding issues, we are once again seeing Israel set

11-56143

up new obstacles that will undoubtedly hinder the
resumption of negotiations and could undermine
international efforts aimed at breaking a stalemate that
has lasted too long and that may lead to the
exacerbation of tension, frustration and violence in the
region.
Here, we note Israel’s recent unilateral actions,
undertaken in complete disregard for and defiance of
united international opinion and the efforts of
influential and active parties in the peace process,
especially those of the members of the Quartet, whose
statement of 23 September (SG/2178) included a time
frame for the resumption of dialogue and negotiations,
and stressed the importance of both sides implementing
their obligations under the Road Map. First and
foremost of those is a complete halt to settlement
activity.
Israel’s
unilateral
actions
include
its
announcement on 14 October of its intention to build
2,610 new housing units in Beit Safafa in East
Jerusalem, destroying Palestinian homes, evicting their
residents and leaving them homeless. Israel has already
demolished 31 residences since the beginning of the
year, leaving 106 Palestinians homeless, including 61
children. Israel’s actions also include the ongoing
Judaization of the holy city of Jerusalem and stripping
it of its Arab and Islamic character, as well as the
continuing isolation of Palestinian territories in order
to create a fait accompli on the ground that suits
Israel’s interests and objectives. Those and other
examples clearly reflect the Israeli occupation
authorities’ ongoing violations of international law and
treaties, including the peace process terms of reference,
the Road Map, the outcome of the Madrid Peace
Conference and the Arab Peace Initiative.
On 14 October, the Secretary-General issued a
statement (see SG/SM/13879) in which he expressed
his deep concern over the continued settlement activity.
He also renewed his call to end such activity and
affirmed that any unilateral actions on the ground by
Israel would not be recognized by the international
community, but would be considered null and void and
without legal effect, pursuant to the Road Map and the
agreements that have been concluded.
During the morning part of this meeting, we
heard clear and honest statements from delegations
indicating that Israel could not continue its settlement
activities. In addition, Tunisia strongly condemns the

29

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

ongoing unjust siege imposed on the Gaza Strip and the
repeated acts of aggression carried out against it. We
also condemn Israel’s oppressive measures to limit the
freedom of the Palestinian people and their rights to
transportation, work, shelter, health and education.
Their tragic suffering has been made worse by the
current unjust policies of the Israeli occupation
authorities.
Tunisia will maintain its principled and firm
position in support of the efforts of the brotherly
Palestinian people to achieve a just, permanent and
comprehensive solution that ends the suffering of our
Palestinian people, restores their national legitimate
right to self-determination and establishes an
independent sovereign State on their land, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The Government and people of Tunisia strongly
support the Palestinian application for full United
Nations membership and consider that as a legitimate
right based on firm historic, moral and objective
foundations. Given the most fundamental rule of
justice and its minimum requirement, a people have a
right to regain freedom lost decades ago. Equally, they
have the right to enjoy sovereignty over their own land.
It is also important that Palestine be granted full
United Nations membership, as international and
regional organizations and financial institutions have
agreed that Palestine possesses the requisite elements
of statehood in terms of administration and institutions
and the ability to manage them. Tunisia therefore calls
upon the members of the Council to support the
legitimate request of Palestine.
Moreover, Tunisia steadfastly supports the
principles of international legitimacy and peace. We
therefore call for support for negotiations and dialogue
to achieve peace. At the same time, we call for efforts
to avoid a return to stalemate and tension, which would
only threaten peace and security in the region and limit
the prospects for the peace to which we all aspire.
As today’s discussion has been on the Middle
East, I renew my country’s call for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan and the remaining
occupied Lebanese territories, in accordance with
international law, so that all of the peoples of the
region can enjoy peace and security and focus their
attention on development and on building a better
future.

30

The Tunisian people have taken to the streets in
neighbourhoods throughout the entire country before
and after Palestine submitted its request for full United
Nations membership. In addition, the interim
Government has continued to clearly express its
unconditional support for the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people. I wish to reiterate here that this
is a principled position that will not be changed, as it
has emerged out of the Tunisian people’s profound
empathy for the just Palestinian cause, as well as out of
our support for the cause of justice throughout the
world.
In a symbolic gesture of great meaning, a blue
chair — to recall the colour of the United Nations —
was designated at the Palace of Conferences in Tunisia,
where the media centre of the most recent elections
was based. The following slogan was raised over the
chair: “Palestine — a Member of the United Nations”.
We hope very soon to see a genuine seat for Palestine
as a sovereign State in this important international
Organization.
The President: I give
representative of the Sudan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to express, to his country and to the
Islamic Ummah alike, the deep condolences of the
people and Government of the Sudan upon the death of
Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. Our
sincere condolences go also to the victims of the
earthquake in Turkey and to their families.
At the outset, my delegation aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
We also wish to congratulate you, Madame
President, for having convened this open debate on the
Middle East and the occupied Palestinian territories at
a time when the international community must, more
than ever, support the choice of the Palestinian people
and their just and legitimate demands — beginning
with the creation of an independent State of Palestine
with Jerusalem as its capital. The delegation of the
Sudan supports the application of Palestine for full
United Nations membership and urges Council
members to support that legitimate request.
It is now time for the international community,
represented by the United Nations and the Security

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

Council, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, to create two States as a
practical solution to the conflict in the occupied
territories. That is especially necessary given that
neither international nor regional mediation efforts, nor
those of the Quartet, have succeeded in resolving the
conflict.

In that context, we note the ministerial statement
of the Non-Aligned Movement, issued last May in
Bali, calling for the immediate release of Palestinian
prisoners. We also point out that those prisoners
include women and children. That should be a priority
issue for the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council.

In the light of Israel’s ongoing illegal and
illegitimate settlement activities aimed at distorting the
facts on the ground and imposing a status quo, the
Security Council is aware of the fact that those
activities have expanded to East Jerusalem, where
more than 1,000 colonialist housing units have been
built with impunity. Also in Jerusalem, the occupation
authorities are depriving the Palestinian population of
their housing, going so far as to deny them
construction permits to rebuild. Moreover, the Holy
City is under siege by virtue of a network of
settlements that has resulted in its isolation from other
Palestinian cities.

Finally, we recall resolution 1701 (2006), on
Lebanon, and other relevant resolutions. We call on
Israel to respect the provisions of those resolutions and
to put an end to its continuing violations of and
encroachment on Lebanon’s sovereignty. We also
condemn Israeli policies seeking to impose legislation
and administrative structures on the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights. In that context, we call on Israel to
implement the Security Council’s resolutions relating
to the Golan, especially resolution 497 (1981), which
calls for complete Israeli withdrawal from the Golan to
the 4 June 1967 borders.

The Sudan strongly condemns any Israeli policy
or practice that seeks to alter the demographic
composition of occupied Palestinian territories. We call
upon Council members to ensure that Israel abides by
its commitments under international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention and its Additional
Protocols, as well as all of the United Nations
resolutions adopted since 1948. Israel has thus far
ignored all of those measures. In that context, I wish in
particular to mention resolution 1860 (2009) which,
inter alia, stipulates that the two parties and the
international community should make every possible
effort to establish a just peace and to create two States
within secure and recognized borders.
It is therefore time for the Palestinian people to
enjoy their legitimate and just right to establish an
independent State after 63 years of suffering
deprivation. We must put an end to the tragedy of
millions of exiled Palestinian refugees who should be
able to live in a State that is a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations.
We welcome recent developments, including the
prisoner exchange and the return of more than 1,000
Palestinian prisoners and detainees from Israeli
prisons. We appreciate the efforts made by the sisterly
country of Egypt in that regard. Still, we do not forget
the fact that thousands of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees remain in Israeli prisons.

11-56143

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our deepest condolences
to the Government and people of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for the passing of His Royal Highness Crown
Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, and we ask God,
in his everlasting mercy and forgiveness, to welcome
him. We also express our condolences to the people
and Government of Turkey for the earthquake that
struck there recently.
I am honoured to address the Security Council on
behalf of the Group of Arab States. I would like to
congratulate you, Madame President, on your
successful presidency of the Security Council. I would
also like to thank you for convening this open debate
and Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Over the past decades, the Council has convened
many meetings like today’s, at which a large number of
statements were made to confirm the importance of
reaching a peaceful, just, comprehensive and
sustainable solution to the Palestinian question and to
achieve peace and stability in a region of great
importance to international peace and security.
However, the Palestinian question is still awaiting that
solution, although we all know that it was proposed a
long time ago and that it consists of the establishment
of two independent States, living in peace side by side

31

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

on the basis of the 1967 borders, in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Road Map. It is time we did what
we all know must be done.
More than 60 years ago in 1947, the General
Assembly adopted its resolution 181 (II) on the
establishment of two States in Palestine. Since then,
however, Israel has only occupied more Palestinian and
other Arab territories and continued to pursue
repressive policies against the Palestinians, violate
their inalienable rights and use excessive force against
them. Despite all the efforts to hold peace talks and the
support that the peace process has received, the
outcome of that process remains hostage to the
intransigence of the Israeli side, which has continued
policies that do not express a sincere desire for peace,
contradicting its claims to the contrary.
That is demonstrated by the insistence of the
current Israeli Government on expanding illegal
settlements in the West Bank, including building new
housing units in East Jerusalem, knowing that those
actions undermine the basic conditions for resuming
genuine peace negotiations and that they constitute a
challenge to the will of the international community,
including resolutions of the Security Council.
At the same time, the Arab countries have shown
a sincere desire for peace with Israel, as evidenced by
the Arab Peace Initiative. The Initiative, however, has
been met only with continued intransigence by
successive Israeli Governments opposed to creating
real conditions for a successful peace process. That
pattern has led to several wasted opportunities, the
most recent of which was the opportunity that arose
last year after the resumption of direct peace talks
between the two sides, strongly encouraged by the
Government of the United States.
Today, we have a real opportunity to take a major
step towards a practical solution for the Palestinian
cause. It would require serious political will and the
Security Council to assume its Charter responsibility
for the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. The Arab Group hopes that the
Palestinian demand for full membership in the United
Nations, which was referred to the Council a month
ago, finds support among all members of the Council
and that Palestine will enjoy the Council’s
recommendation for full membership.

32

The Palestinian State has so far been formally
recognized by more than 130 countries —the vast
majority of States Members of this international
Organization — and States continue to join the list
every day. Member States are becoming aware that
there is no choice but to realize the right of
Palestinians to determine their own destiny and to live
in dignity and security within the borders of their
independent State, also given the fact that the
institutions of the Palestinian Authority are ready to
manage a viable State, as confirmed by relevant
international organizations.
The Palestinian side has stressed that its
application for membership does not necessarily mean
closing the door to negotiations with the Israeli side.
Indeed, we are anticipating the resumption of
negotiations soon, in accordance with the call by the
Quartet in its statement of 23 September (SG/2178).
We underline again that the success of negotiations will
hinge on putting a stop to the construction of
settlements and to all repressive Israeli policies and
practices towards the Palestinians, and on Israel lifting
the unjust, inhumane and illegal siege imposed on the
whole population of Gaza.
We stress our firm rejection of the illegal
measures taken by Israel in occupied East Jerusalem
and its attempts to change the Arab identity,
demographic composition, legal status and religious
character of the city. We stress that all such attempts
are null and void and without legal effect. On the other
hand, it is incumbent upon the Israeli authorities —
who often speak of the need to address security and
terrorism — to act to put an end to the crimes and
terrorism perpetrated by some Israeli settlers, which
have become intolerable.
Last week saw an agreement to exchange
prisoners between the Israeli and Palestinian sides. We
call for the release of all remaining detainees
languishing in Israeli jails, especially minors, women,
the elderly and the ill.
One obstacle to sustainable peace in the Middle
East that threatens stability in our region is Israel’s
nuclear policy and its refusal to accede to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and subject its nuclear facilities to
international monitoring. The Arab Group emphasizes
the importance of holding a conference to establish a

11-56143

S/PV.6636 (Resumption 1)

zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East in 2012, pursuant to the
action plan adopted at the 2010 NPT Review
Conference (see NPT/CONF.201050 (Vol. I)). Parallel
progress must be maintained in terms of content and
timing, leading to the full and total elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction in the region — nuclear,
chemical and biological — in accordance with the
action plan. The Conference should yield concrete
results on the road to achieving that goal.
The Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory and
the Syrian Golan continues. Here we would like to
highlight the relevant General Assembly resolutions
and Security Council resolution 497 (1981), which
emphasizes that the Israeli decision to annex the Syrian
Golan is null and void and without legal effect. The
Arab Group calls for Israel to withdraw from the

11-56143

occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967
and to stop its aggressive practices, which violate
international humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.
The Arab Group demands that the international
community compel Israel to implement its obligations
under resolution 1701 (2006) so as to prevent
violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea and air;
to withdraw from the northern part of Ghajar village,
Shaba’a farms and Kfar Shuba hills; and to accelerate
the demarcation of the Blue Line.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

33
