NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

·SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 6

FOUR HUNDRED AND SECOND

QUATRIEME ~E

No 6

QUATRE-CENT.DEUXIEME SEANCE.

MEETING
Held at Lake S1lccess, New York,
on Friday, 21 !an-,wry 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New~YorkJ
le vendredi 21 j(Jr.~';er lY49, d 15 heures.

Preside'.!: General McNAUGHTON (Canada).

President: Le general McNAt1CHTON (Canada).

Present: The representatives of the fonowing
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Repl1blic.~,
United Kingdo:n, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Cuba, Egypte, Fra.nce, Ncrvege, Repl1blique socialiste soyiHique d'Ukraine,
UniOll des Republiques socia\istes sovietiques,
Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis cl' Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
(S/Agenda <t02/Corr.2)

(5/Agenda <t02/Corr.2)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The Indonesian question.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. La question indonesienne.

2. Adoption de l'or{!t-e du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

2. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda 'Was adOPted.

3. Continuation of the discussion on the 3. Suite de la discussion sur la que!lioD
indonesienne
Indonesian queetion
On the illvitation of the President, Mr. Hood,
representative of AustraUa; Mr. Nisot, representative of Belgium; U Ba Maung, represmtath'e oj Burnla Sir Bmegal Rama Rau, f'epre.
sentative of India; Mr. Van RoiIen, repr!!sentative
of the Netherlands; Mr. Ing18s representative of
tll,e Philippines; and Mr. Palar, representative of
the Rep1<blic of Indonesia, tock their 'places ct
the Council t(J~le.

Sur l'invitation du PresidCltt, M. Hood, rept'fJsentant de tAustratie; M. NisotJ 1'epdsent~1
de la Bdgique; U Ba Maung, repdrentanJ de
la Binnanie; Sir Bencgal Ra'HlrJ Rau, repr,~slJatant
de l'Inde; M. van Roijen, representant des PaysBas; .M. lngtes, representant dus PhilippiJles, et
M. Paiar, reprBsentCVlt de la RfJpubliq1,e d'IwJotlesie, prcllnent place d la table du COlluil.

The PRESIDENT: As usual, the interpretation

.Le PRESIDENT (tradtiit de l' aj~glais) : Comme
de coutume, l'interpt'etation consecutive s~ra reservee ;I\1X dif;cot1r,<; des membres du Conseil,
aJors' que l.es declarations de taus les aut res
.representants feront l'objet de l'interpretation

J

'

J

will be consecutive for members of the Security
Councll and simuha.w:ous for all others:

.

simultan~.

When we aciourned our,last meet.iug Monday,
I stated th<lt I hop~d we would be in il position
to, consider a ~peei.(ic proposal ·on the Indonesian
question at t~,e next meeting of the 'Security
Counc:t. In order. that the. delegations might,
have more time to consult each other and, to'
consult their Governments, and after taking irito~

Ll1ndjdernier~ au moment d'ajourner la seance,
j'ai exprime l'espoir que, 'lprs de sa seance ;;l1i~
"'ante, le .Conseil serait en mesure d'examiner
nne' ptoposli:ion concrete stir la ql1estioil indonof:·
sierine. Afin de d0fi11er aux delegations le temps
de se consulter mttnellement et de consulter
lel1n Gouve:rnements, et apr';'s avoir ente:ldu

2
oonsidcr.ation the OpIniOn of some delegations, 1
fo~~d It necessary to postpone the meeting
onglnally scheduled for Wednesday. The meeting
scheduled for yeste.day was postpo3ed until today
with the consent of all tile members for the same
reason. As a result, we nmv have a specific pro~
posal for our consideration, introduced by the
representatives of China, Cuba, Norway and the
United States [5/1219].
Mr. NlSOT (Belgium) (translated from
Frllnclt): Now that the Indonesian question
seems about to enter tpon a new phase, I feel
bound to draw the COuncil's attentio!1. to certain
conside.rations which seem to me paramount.
The Netherlands Government has been con·
testing the COllncil's compete:1Ce ever since this
question w<'.s sl.lbmitted to the Council. It has
invoked Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter,
which debars organs of the United K ations from
intervening in matters essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of any State and, con~
verse1y, recognize:> the right of any State to refuse
to submit such matters to settlement under the

Charter,
Among the Governments represented here, the
Government of the Netherlands is not alone in
contesting the Council's competence. We a11
remember the very illuminating statement in
which the representative of France, on 24- De·
cember last [392114 meeting], reaffirming what
he had previously maintained, reached the conclusion that the Councilllas no competence in the
matter. He re:.ninded us that Indonesia was still
under Netherlands sovereignty, a fact admitted
by both parties as we:! as by the members of ~e
Council. Mr. Parodi added that the relatiDns m
which the Council proposes to intervene are rdations at municipal and not at international law.
Lastly, he reminded us that inten;ational peace
and secudy, wh\ch are the Council's sole concern, are in no way endangered. On the same
date the representative of Belgium expressed
similar misgivings and reiterated the grave doubts
which his GO\7ernme:lt has always felt as to the
Council's corr.petence in the matter.
The records of our meetings show convincingly
that similar doubts ha-ve been p..xpressed at every
stage in the evolution of the question. In the
circumstances, such doubts appear m.ore than
justified, 50 much so tha:t the representattve ?f the
U.nited S:ates of AmerJ(,<l, Mr. Johnson, dld not
hesitate to make the following statement to t~e
Council on the subject, despite the fact that hIS
Governnment was satisfied as to the Council's
competence [193rd meeting).

l'op-inion d~ cp.rtaines d'entre elles, j'ai cru
necessaire de reporter a plus tard la reunion
qui avait ete prevue pour mercredi. C'est pour
cette raison egalement que la seance qui aurait
d,.) se tenir hier a ete rf'mi~f' :'J. aujourd'hui. avec
~e conSentement de tOl.lS les membres. A la suite
de ces consultations, le COnseil est saisi d'une
proposition precise qui a ete elaboree par les
representan:s de la Chine, ne Cuba, de :a Norvege et des Etats-Unis d'Arneriql1e [5/1219].
M. NIsor (Belgique): A ee momen: DU la
question indonesienne semble devDir entrer dans
une nouvelle pt.ase, je ne crois pas pouvoir m'ab~­
tenir de nppeler a I'aUention du Comeil cer~
taines consideratio:ls qui me paraissent dominer
le debat.
DeptJis le jour ou ceUe question a ete Jlortee
devant le Conseil, le Gouvernement des PaysBas conteste la comC)etence de ce dernier. It
invoqne le paragrapr:e 7 de l'Artide 2 de la
Charte. Cette disposition interdit aux organes
des Nations Unies d'intervenir dans les affaires
qui releve:tt essentiel1ement de la competence
d'un Etat et, inversement, elle reconnait
tout
Etat Membre le droit de refuser de se soumettre,
en ce qui cancerne les affaires de cet ordre, aux
procedures de reglement prevues par la Charte.
Panni les Gol1vcrnements ici repn§senh~s, le
Gouvernement des Pays-Bas n'est pas le settl
a contester la competence du Conseil. Nous avons
toes presents a. I'esprit la lumineuse demonstratio:l par laqllellc, le 24 decembre dernier [392~m~
seance], le representant de la France, continuant
sa positior. anterieure, a conelu a l'incompetence
du Conseil. 12 a rappele, en eifet, que l'Indonesie
relevait ellcore de la souvcrninete des P:l.y".Bas,
ce qui est admis par les deux parties et par les
membres du Conseil. M. Parodi a precise, en
outre, que les rapports dans lesquels le CODse.:!
pretend i::ltervenir sont dl,!s rapports de drn;t
interne, non pas des rapports de droit intern~·
tional. II a rappele, enfin, que la paix et la securite internationales - q:1i, seules, concernent le
Consell - H'etaitnt nutkmcnt en cause. Lt!' representant de la Belgique a exprime de not:veau,
a la meme date, Ies memes preoccupations; il a
redit les doutes serieux que n'a cesse d'eprouver
son Gumeruement quant Do la competence nu
CDnseil e:l la matiere.
11 Sl1ffit de parcGUrlr les proces-verbaux de
nos seances po:..tr se convair,cre que pareils
dOlltes ant ete 6nis a tous les stades de l'evolution de la question. Etant donne Les conditions
dans lesr;uelles se presente l'affaire, ces dontes
apparaissent comme hautement justifies. lis le
sont a. ce point que le representant des EtatsUnis, M. Johnson, bien que son Gouvernemen.t
ftit, pour sa part, convaincu de la competence
du Conseil, n'hesita pas cl faire a ce sujet, au
sein du Conseil, la declaration suivante [193~l'Ie

a

seance J:

"The question of the Council's jurisdiction in
the conslitufon"l issues of thi:! case is a very
real one. Doubts have been expressed about it
by several members of the Council. It is a .question which, in our view, would not be hghtly
brushed aside by this Council. How are we to
support tne rule of law in the wOrld.if we tr~t
lightly the basic law of the Secunty CounCll
itself?

"La question de savoir si le Conseil a la competence voul Ue pour examiner. dans le cas present,
le differend d'ordre constitutionnel, se pose tres·
reellernent Plusieurs mernbres du Conseil 011t
exprime des doutes ce sujet·.
s'agit la. d'cne
question dont le C..onseil ne devrait pas, selon
nous, disposer a la legere. Nons ne pouvons ap~
puyer le prineipe de legalite si nOllS tTaitOI1S .3.
la legere la loi fondamentale du Conseil lUI-

a

n

m~me.

.

3
"The constitutional history of the building of
the federal structure of my own country affords
ample evidence as to how seriously my Government regards proper attention to domestic j l1risdiction. vVe have no less regard for such matters
in the field· of internatiollal affairs.

"L'histoire constituticinnelle de mon pays, qui
montre la fa~on dont s'est ediflee notre structure
£ederale, prouve abondamment l'importance
qu'attache mon Gouvernement a voir la compe~
tence nationale beneficier de la consideration qui
lui revicnt. Notre attitude demeure la meme a
l'egard de te/les questions sur le plan international.
"The view of the United States delegation is
"D'apres la delegation des Etats-Unis, \'on
that there is legitimate room for doubt as to peut ou l'on doit douter de l'habilite du Conseil
the Council's jurisdiction in so far as a settle- a regler, dans la question indonesienne, le diffement of the constitutional issues of the Indonesian rend d'ordre constitutionnel. Mon Gouvernement
question is concerned. My Government would not ne serait pas dispose, dans les conditions actuelles,
be prepared, under the existing circumstances, a soutenir une meSl1re du Conseil qui serait £onto support action by the Council based on the del' sur la conclusion que le Conseil benelicie
conclusion that it has such jurisdiction, Conse- d'une telle competence, En consequence, noUs
quently, we shall be forced to abstain from voting nous verrions obliges de nous abstenir si ran
on any resolution of that nature.
mettait aux voix une n~solution de cet ordre,
"However, we also recognize that the very real
"Toutefoi~, nous 'admettons egalement que,
doubts which several members of the Council pour mettre fin a I'incertitude tres reelle 'exprimee
have expressed regarding the Council's jurisdic- par plusieurs membres dLl Conseil quant a I'habition in the case before us, might ve.ry weB be lite du Conseil a examiner le diHcrend sur les
substantiaUy resolved by an advisory opinion faits de la cause,On pourrait fort hien solliciter,
from the International Court of Justice, While sur le fond, l'avls consultatif de la Cour interthe International Court was deliberating, the nationa1e de Justice. Pendant que deJibererait
Council would of course remain free to take such la COllr internationale, le Conseil conseNerait,
action in conformity with the Charter as it bien entendu, la. liberte de prendre toute meSllre,
might deem necessary to m.aintain international conforme a la Charte, qu'il estimerait necessaire
peace.
au maintien de la paix internationale.
"Taking these considerations into account, the
"Tenant compte de ces observations, le GOI1United States Government believes that the vernement des Etats-Unis estime que. le Conseil
COl1ncil should not besitate, if it judges it wise ne devrait pas hesiter, s'i1 le jugeait bon, a souto do so, to refer the question of its jurisdiction mettre, pour avis, a b Collr internationale de
in tillS case to the International Court for an Justice, la question ne sa.vcir s'il dispose de la
opinion. The United States delegation would be competence voulue pour connaltre de cette affaire.
prepared to support a proposal to that effect."
La delegation des Etats~Unis serait disposee a
appuyer une proposition dans cc sens."
En tenant ce langage, le representant,des Etats~
In uttering these words, the representative of
the United States remained true to the agelong Unis restait fide1e aux traditions SeCUlalreS de son
traditions of his noble and generous country.
noble et genereux pays,
Comme on sait. la delegation beige presenta
As we know, the Belgian delegation submitted
to the Council a draft resolution [5/517] propos- au Consei1 un projet de resolution [S/517J te~~
ing that the question of competence should be dant a ce que la question ~e ~ompeter;~e ~ut
submitted to the Court, without, however, any sownise a la Conr, sans que 1ad IOn conC1ha~nce
suspension of the Council's conciliatory action. du Conseil cessat pour autant d,e se poursut:rr~.
Unfortunately this resolution received only four Malheureusement, cette resolutIOn ne ,rec:uellht
votes, those of the United States, France, the que quatre voix, celles des Etats-Ums, d~ la
United Kingdom and Belgium [195th m,eeting] , France du Royaume-Uni et de la Belglque
and it was therefore not adopted. The question
[195en;e seance], Elle ne fut done pas adop~ee.
of competence remained unsolved. It was de- La question de la competence resta sans solution.
liberately left in abeyance. 11 was expressly Elle fut deliberement laissee en suspenso n
agreed that this question could not be regarded fut expressement convenu que cette q:lest}on ne
as prejudiced by any decisions which the Council pourrait etre consideree comme pr.eJ~gee par
might take in the Indonesian question. Express- les decisions que prendrait le Co~sel1 a prop~s
ing the general feeling of the Council, its Presi- de la question indonesienne; Ex:pnmant le s,entldents have taken a very definite stand on this ment du Conseil ses PreSidents se montrerent
point, even when they represented Governments categoriqtleS sur ~e point, meme.lorsqu'ils reI;rewhich did not profess any doubt as to the com~ sentaient des Gouvernements qUt ne professment
petence of the Council. Such was the case with ancun dotlte sur la competence du ConsdL Tel
the representative of Syria, Mr, El~Khol1ri, and fut le cas du representant de la Syrie, l'.L EIeven more so with the representative of the Khauri, Tel fut surtout le cas d11 repre~entant des
United States of America, Mr. Austin, wbo Etats-Unis, M. Austin, qui insista, dans les ter~
stressed in the clearest terms the reservation as mes les plus c1airs, sur la reserve. de compete.nce
to competence with wh'ich decisions of the Council que les dec:isions du Conseil devment, co~npo~ter.
should be invested, These statements were all the Ces deLlarations sont d'autant plus slgmfic:at:lves
more significant in that one was made on 1 qu'elles ont ete faites, !'une le 1er aoflt 1947,
August 1947 and the other cn 1 NOl'ember 1947 l'al1tre le ler novembre suivant, c'est-~-dire les
~that is to say, on the actual date of the adopjonrs ~lemes Oll furent acloptees les deux reso~
tion of the resolutions which bear those dates, 1utions portant c:es dates, resolntions dont, tout
and which were quite recently invoked in the recemment enc:ore, on faisait etat an sein du
Council [5/459 and 5/5971,
Conseil [S/459 et S/597J.

4

i

The Security CouncJ1 has thus omitted to verify
its competence just where it gives rise to very
legitimate and well-founded doubts. For more
than seventeen months it has been operating on
an ambiguous basis, whereas this ambiguity could
have been removed in the period of six to nine
weeks necessary to obtain the opinion of the
Court. If the Council had taken the precaution
of obtaining this opinion, the question of its
powers would long since have been settled; whatever its attitude had been, it would, if in confonnity with the opinion of the Court, have
received the approval of all those in whom respect
for the Charter is paramount. None of the
parties concerned could have disputed whether
it was regular or not, nor, I am sure, would they
have dreamed of so doing.

Ainsi donc, le Conseil de securite a neglige de
verifier sa competence la. ou elle donne lieu allX
dOlltes les plus legitimes et les plus fondes.
Depuis pIns de dix-sept mois, i1 agit sur la base
d'une equivoque, alors qu'il eut pu la dissiper
dans le delai de six a neuf semaines qui aurait
suffi pour obtenir l'avis de la Cour. Si le Conseil
avait pris la precaution de demander cet avis, la
question de ses pouvoirs se fut trouvee reglee
depuis longtemps; queUe qu'eut ete son attitude, e1le eut recueiUi, etant conforme a l'opinion
de la Cour, l'approbation de tous ceux que domine le souci du respect de la Charte. Aucune
des parties ici en cause n'aurait pu en contester
la regularite et - fen suis sur - n'aurait songe
a le faire.

While the Security Council may be said to
haveinctlrred the risk of overstepping its powers,
it cannot rightly, in what it has done hitherto,
be accused of complete lack of caution. On the
whole it has taken care not to do more than the
exercise of good offices. By its resolution of 2S
August 1947 [S/525 IlJ it offered its good offices
to the parties concerned, who accepted them. It
confinned this offer by its resolution of 28 February 1948 [S/678]. In remaining within the
limits of good ofnces the Council has shown wisdom. The solutions to which its good offices may
lead owe their validity to the fact of acceptance
by the parties concerned. This acceptance of solutions proposed, in particular by the Security
Council, may to a large extent remedy any Glefect
in respect of lack of competence attached to the
measures taken by the Council.

Si 1'0n pent dire que le Conseil de securite a
assume le risque d'exceder ses pouvoirs, il ne
meriterait cependant pas l'accusation d'avoir,
dans son action passee, manque totalement de
prudence. Dans l'ensemble, en effet, il a tenU
jusqu'ici a se maintenir sur le terrain des bons
offices. I1 a, par sa resolution du 25 aout 1947
[S/525 Il], offert ses bons offices aux parties
qui les ont acceptes. 11 a confirme cette offre par
sa resolution du 28 fevrier 1948 [S/678]. Le
Conseil, en restant dans le cadre des bons offices,
s'est montre avise. Les solutions auxquelles peu·
vent conduire les bons offices doivent, en effet,
leur validite a l'acceptation des parties. Or, cette
acceptation des solutions proposees, notamment
par le Conseil de securite, peut, dans une large
mesure, remedier au vice d'incompetence dont
seraient affectees les mesures prises par le
Conseil.

In my opinion, the Council should not depart
from this cautious attitude in its forthcoming
att~pt to fin.d ways. of settli.ng the Indonesian
question. In mternatlOnal pohtics it has mostly
b~en found vain and useless to attempt to act
WIthout the good will and collaboration of the
responsible Governments. Is the Security Council
really in a position to ignore this experience?
Would it not evince its wisdom by confining its
work to the exercise of good offices?

A man sens, le Conseil ne devrait pas se departir de cette attitude prudente dans la recherche,
a laquelle i1 est sur le point de proceder, des
solutions propres a assurer le reglement de la
question indonesienne. L'experience de;ffiontre
que, en politique internationale, H. est, le plus
souvent, futile et vain de pretend re se passer
du bon vQuloir et de la collaboration des Gouver~
nements qui exercent les responsabilites. Le
Conseil de securite est-il vraiment en position
de pouvoir meconnaitre cette experience? Ne
ferait-il pas preuve de sagesse en poursuivantson
ceuvre dans le cadre des bans offices?

The Council should not contemplate other
measures before having made sure, by reference
to the Court, that it is empowered to take them.

Le Conseil ne devrait envisager d'autres me·
sures qu'apres s'etre assure, en en rHerant a
la Cour, qu'il a le pouvoir de les prendre.

Ever since this unfortunate dispute began, the
Government of the Netherlands has been urging
the Council to consult the International Court of
Justice on this question of competence. It has
thereby confirmed that, faithful to the traditions
of its cormtry, which was the cradle of international law, it would be willing to defer to the
Court's opinion; I have no reason to doubt that
the Indonesian authorities too will make it a
point of honotlr' to conform to the Court's
opinion, thus justifying the hope, which I am
sure we all share, of welcoming a duly constituted United States of Indonesia into our organization in the near future.

Depuis le debut de ce malheureux conflit, le
Gotlvernement des Pays-Bas ne cesse de conjurer le Conseil de consulter la Cour internationale
de Justice sur cette question de competence. n
confirme par la que, fidele, 'lt1i nussi, aux traditions de son pays, berceau de la justice internationale, i1 s'inc1inerait devant I'avis de la Cour.
Je n'ai aucune raison de dOllter que les autorites
indonesiennes mettent leur point d'hohneur a
s'y confonner egalement, justifiant ainsi l'espoir,
que, fen suis convaincu, nous avons tous, de
pouvoir, dans un avenir pl'Ochain, acctleillir aU
sein de notre Organisation les Etats-Unis d'Indo·
nesie dument constitues.
On a fait allusion ici a la patience et a la
reserve que le Conseil de sectlrite montre a.
l'egard d'autres conflits annes, autrement meurtriers. On a ajoute qu'eHes contrastaient singu·

Reference has here been made to the patience
and restraint which the Security Council has
shown with regard to other and far more deadly
armed conflicts; and, it has been pointed out, this

5
attitude is in marked contrast to the speed and
severity which, according to some views, the
CCllr1cil ought to display in the pre,ent instance.
r will express no opinion on the sound:1ess of
the attitude taken in the other cases. If I feel
bClmd to recall tne comparison evoked by this
attitude, it is by way of a warning. It would be
the fnd of the Council's prestige and authority
if it wefe ever shown to have two standa.ds of
weight and measurement; to regulate its justice
and its methods by reference to the degree of
force it was likely to encounter; to show indul~
genc:e to the. great Powers and resene its severity
for the small, beCatlSe it counted or. overcoming
their resistance wi60ut difficl1~ty.

lierement avec la precipitation et la sevHte dont,
sdon le vreu de certains, le Conseil devraif f<:.ire
preuve en l'occurrence. re n'emets aucune opinion
sur le bien-fonde de I'attitude observee daus ces
alltres. cas. Si je crois devoir rappeler la comparaison a laql1elle cette attitnde danne lie'.!, c'est a
titre de mise en garde. Cen serait fini dn prestige et de l'autorite dl1 Conseil s'il pOl1vait jamais
etre et3..bli qlt'il a n~ellemerit deux poids et deux
mesur('s, qu'il I"egle sa justice et ses :nethodes
selon le degre de force qll'il s.'attend it renC::lllt~erJ q:J'inddgent atlx g-rands, i1 reserve sa severite paul' les petits Etats, parce qu'il compte
pOllvoir facilement vaincre Jeur resistance.

The Government of 6e Netherlands is challenging the competence of the Council. It does
not do so lightly. Eminent members of the
Council have, as we have seen, admitted tlte
legitimacy of the doubts felt by certain of their
colleagues as to this competence. By disregarding
these dOl1bts, the Council would, instead of
strengthening its position, dea: a mortal blow to
its own prestige, ir.asmuch as it would give the
impression that it feared disavow:ll by an impartial court. An institution Sllclt as ours cannot
lay itself open to a charge of acting arbitrarily
or under the influence of poLtical opportunism.
It would run such a risk if, while contemplatir:g.
mea.sures presupposing 6e demonstration of its
competence, it remained deaf to a request from a
State that the qt1estion should be settled by a
c:ourt in 8ccordance with the criteria of Law ar>.d
justice,

Le Gouve:"!lement neerlandais conteste la competence du Consei!. I1 ne la conteste pas a la
legcrc. Des mcmhres emine'lts du CO'lseit Ol1t
reCOlllltl, nous I'avons vu, la legitimite des dot.:tes
que certains de leurs eollegues eprouvent sur
cette competence. S'il IJassait out~e, le Conseil,
au lieu de s'affirmer allX yeux du monde, porte~
rait Ull coup fatal a son prestige en ce qu'il
creerait l'impression qu'il era-int de se voir
desavoller par une cour irnpartiale. Noire insti~
tution ne pet:.t se mettre dans le cas d'etre accusee
d'agir arbitrairement ou sous I'empire de l'opportunismt: pulUqLte. Elle l"Uurrait ce risqllc si, tOllt
ell envisageant des mCS'.1res prcsupposal:t la de.monstration de sa competence, elle restait sourde
a la demande cl'un Etat tendant a ee que certe
question soit reglCe par line cour, seIon les cri~
teres dll droit et de la justice.

Altho'..lgh I deplore as much as anyone the
tnrn taken by events, r have deliberately avoided
e:x:pressbg any views 0:1 the subs:ance of the
matter or on the merits and den:erits of the
respective attitudes of the parties concerned. My
object has been to draw the Council's a~tention
to the dangers inh~rent in the tendency shown
by certain speeches made hc:re. These are grave
dangers, not mere:y for the small Sta:es but
still more for the future of our Organization.
I have tried to show that this future can be
assured only by scrupulous respect for the
Cllarter. The Cha;·ter is a contract which we
have all accepted, but which :las its limitations.
If we allowed those lirr-itatiolls to b~ exeeeded
in an)' individual case, we should open the door
to worse abuses, and sooner or later each one of
us, particularly lhose that arc not great Powers,
would suffer the heavy consequences.

Quo:que je deplore plus qtle quincC<l1que la
tOllrnure prise par les cvcnements, c'est a dessein
que j'ai evite de m'exprimer sur le fond de l'affaire, COffime sur les merites et demerites des
positiolls prises de part et cl'autre. Mon Jut a et€:
d'appeJer l'attention du Conseil sur 1es dangers
inherents a la tendance que reve1ent certnins
c1iscOllrs prononces ici. Ces dangers son: graves,
non se:.tlement pOllr les petits Etats, mais encore
pour l'avenir de notre Organisation. rai vOltlll
montrer que cet avenir ne sauta;t etre assure en
dehors du respect scrupuleux. de la C~arte. La
Charte est un contrat que nons a:vons taus
aceepte, mais qui comporte des limitations. Si
nous souffriDns que, dans qllelque cas particllJ:er,
il hit parte atteinte a ces limitations, oous ouvririons la porte aux pires abus et, tot ou tard,
chacun de nOllS, surtout s'il n'est 'pas un,. granrle
PUlssarrce, en sub:rait les dures consequences.

Mr. ALV,AREZ (Cuba) (translated from Spanisk): T:,e delegation of Cuba, together with the
delegations of China, .Korway and the United
States of America, has :he honour to submit a
draft resolution [S/1219] for the consiGeration
of the Security Council, with a view to re8ching
a just and lasring solution of the dis;mte between
the Republic of Indonesia and the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, while observing due respect for
the fundamental rights of both par.ies.
The delegation of Cuba s'.1ppor':.s this joint
resolution because :n our opinion it embodies all
the elements-with the possible exception of one
-which must be taken into aceouut in accordanCe wi~h the aims and principles of the United
Nations Charter.
On 14 J~(1l1ary {400th meeting] We expressed
the opinion that a purely academi: declaration

M. AUAItEZ (Cuba) (traduit de l'e.rpag1lO1):
La delegation de Cuba a l'honneur, avec les dtU~~
gations de la Chine, de la Norveg-e et des Etatsonis d' Amerique, de soumettre a l'ex;t.men du
Consei: de securite un projet de resolution
{S/1219] dont le but est d'arriver a. une solution jeste e-: durable dll differend qui separe la
Republi!]l1p. d'Indonesie du RoyaU111e des P,,-ysbas, en tenant compte des droits fond2.l1lentatlx
des deux parties.
La delegation de Cuba a donne son adhesion
a ee projet de resolution COiTIlTInn pal'ce que ce
docUll1cnt conticnt tOllS les elements (sauf un,
peut-etre) ~ui, it. son avis, doivent etre pris en
consideration, cO:1formcmem aux prilleipes et
aux buts de la Chmte des Kations Unies.
Dam nctre intervention du 14 j3.'l1vier
[400cme seanC{'] nouS avions clit qne j'on m:

6
would not suffice, and that the resolution adopted -saurait se contenter d'une simple: consideration
by the Council must provide for the following: platonique. Nous avions s01l1igne que la resolution
first the withdrawal of Netherlands a.rmed forces qu'adopterait le Conseil de securite devrait
to the positions fixed by the RCtlville Agreement prevoir: premierement, le retrait des forces
[S/649 AppendiX' XI]; secondly, the immediate arrnees neerlandaises sur les positions etablies
1iberati~n of the 1ndonesian political leaders and par l'Accord dll Remrilll! [5/649, annff:J,:e Xl];
their full reinstatement as official representatives deuxiemement, la liberation immediate des diriof the pwple of the Indonesian Republic; thirdly, geants politiques indonesiens qui recouvl'eraient
the holding of free elections on a fixed da!e, to tOilS leurs droits en tant que rcpresentants offi·
elect a sovereign constituent assembly, With a ciels du peuple de la Republique d'lndonesie;
une date deterview to promulgating the constitution of the Re~ troisiemement, I'organisation,
public of Indonesia and taking a decision regard- minee, d'elections Jibres. en vue ~e designer
ing the integration of the United States of 1ndo- nne assemblee constituante souveralne qui al1riesia; and finally, the withdrawal of armed for~es rait pour tache de promulguer la constitution
from the territory of Indonesia by progressIve de la Republique d'Indonesie et de prendre nne
stages, in such a way that when the duly elected decision concernant la formation d'Etats-Unis
government of the United States of Indonesia d'Indonesie; en fin, le retrait, par phases succesassumes power there shaU be no foreign forces sives, des forces armees qui se trouvent dans
left in the territory, and the designation of a les territoires d'Indonesie, de telle maniere que,
speci£c date by which this withdrawal is to be au moment oll le gOllvernement diiment elu des
completed.
Etats-Unis d'Imlonesie entrerait en fonction,
ancun soldat etranger ne se trouve plus sur ledit
une
territoire, cc resultat devant etre obtenu
date fixee de maniere explicite.

a

a

1n our opinion these points are covered satisfauorily in the joint resolution, except as regards
the withdrawal of Netherlands armed forces.
The CubtLn delegation was of the opinion that
the progressive withdrawal of the armed forces
was essential in order to guarantee the unhindered
development of Indonesian civil authority and
the freedom of thought and action of the Indonesia people. Moreover, we considered it imperative that law and order should be maintained
throughout the territory of 1ndonesia and that
the safety of the life and property of its inhabitants should be guaranteed. For these reasons
we suggested that Netherlands armed forces
should be maintained in such areas as the Committee of Good Offices should d~em necessary,
but under the jurisdiction of its milita ry observers.
Further, we proposed fixed dates for the evacuation of the Netherlands forces. Paragraph 4 of
the joint resolution contemplates a different solution of this question but while, possil)ly, it is more
elaborate, it is, in our opinion, less effective.
Although t~is solution does not fully satisfy us,
we accept It as a compromise between divergent
points of view.

A notre avis, la proposition commune repond

de maniere satisfaisante a tOllS ces points, sal.lf a
celui qni a trait au retrait des forces a.mees
neerlandaises, La delegation de Cuba estimait
que le retrait progressif des force.'!. armees etait
indispensable pour garantir le libre developpement des organismes administratifs de I'Indonesie ainsi que la liberte de pen see et d'expression du peuple indonesien. Mais eIle estimait
aussi qn'il etait indispensable de maintenir sur
le territoire indonesien la legalite et l'ordre, et
d'assurer la protection de la vie et des biens
de ceux [jui y residellt. C'est pour ees raisons
qu'elle avait propose que 1es forces armees neer·
landaises fussent maintenues dans les 10calites DU
la Commission de bons offices estimerait cl':
maintien necessaire, ctant entendl1 que ces troupes releveraient des observateurs militaires pour
l'evacuation des forces neerlandaises. Or, le paragraphe 4 de la resolution commune traite cette
question d'une autre maniere; pwt-etre le fait-i1
de fa~on plus detail1ee, mals, a notre avis, cette
redaction est moins effieaee. Rien qll'elle ne 1l0US
donne pas entierement satisfaction, nous l'acccptons, car nous estimons qu'elle constitue un cornpromis entre les differents points de vue.

Now, can we feel sare that a resolution drafted
in these terms wm bring about an effective and
satisfactory solution 0 f the 1ndonesian question?
We would h<lvC preferred that the contents and
provisions of this draft resolution did not leave
any doubt in Our mind. But whi.1e others may
llave some doubt lest the parties to this dispute
do Mt. fully cot~ply with the provisions of a
rcsolutlOn emanatmg from the Security Council
we ourselves feel no such doubt. It is incon~
ceivab1e that any Member of the United Nations
should think of attempting to cvaue the application of a resolution of the Council, especially
when so much good will has gone into its fashioning, when its text has been drawn up with such
care .and loftiness of purpose that the spirit of
concl1iation inspiring it stands out as a clear
pledge of good faith, impartiality and justice.

Peut-on assurer qu'tme resolution redigee en
ces termes constituera un moyen efficace et satis~
faisant ue resoudre le probleme indonesien? Nous
aurions prHere que ses dispositions ne laissent
aucun doute clans notre esprit. Certains st demandent si les parties voudront mettre en lfuvre
integ)'alement les dispositions cl'nne reso111tiol1
emanant du Conseil de securite, mais Cl.'. prO·
bleme ne nons preoccupe pas. 11 serait ineoneevable Cjue des Membres ue l'Organisation des
Nations Unies puissent penser llTI seul instant
ne pas se conformer Une resolution du Conseil,
surtout si l'on cOl'lsidere la ban ne volonte, le
soin, la hatlteur de vues, l'esprit ell.'. collaboration
avec lesque1s cette resolution a ete redigee, ce
qui, notre avis, constitue tine prenve evidente
de sa bonne foi, de son impartialite et de son
equite.

Mr. ]E:SSUP (United States of America): At
the opening of this meeting, the President reminded us of the remarks he made at the con-

M. ]ESSUP (Etats-Unis d'Ameriqlle) (tradjfit
de l'anglais) : En ouvrant la seance, le President
nous <l rappele les observations qu'il avait faites

a

a

7
CltlS10n of our previous meeting when he suggested that the time had come to end our general
discussion and to focus our consideration upon
a definite proposal. I am glad that at this meeting we can now proceed in accordance with the
view which the President expressed,

a la fin de notre derniihe reunion, ou il aYait
exprime l'avis que le moment etait venu de terminer la discussion gencrale et de centrer notre
etude sur une proposition definitive. Je suis heurenx que, au cours de la rresente seance, le
Conseil puisse poursuivre ~on travail con formement au v~u exprime par le President.

In my statement to the Council on 11 January

Dans la declaration que j'ai faite au Conseil
le 11 janvier courant [398~me seanceJ. j'ai expose les vues de man Gotlvernement sur les
evenements d'Indonesie. II est inl'ltile de les
repeter aujourd'hui, D'alltre part. rai dit dans
cette meme declaration qne, de l'avis de mon
Gouvernement, le temps etait ven\! pour le
Conseil de prendre des mesures appropriees afin
d'aboutir a une solution jl1ste et dmable. Hieo
que le Conseil soit saisi de g\lestions extremement
compliquees, n011S estimons qu'il n'eo a p<JS moins
l'obligation de leur donner tine solution equitable et constructive. C'est dans cet esprit que,
pendant ces delniers jOllrs, n011S aVOllS procede a des consultations avec plusieurs memores
du Conseil et que nous nOIlS sOlTImes efforces
d'aboutir a une vision reflechie dll probJeme aiin
de Iui donner une solution dl1rable. Le representant de Cuba a deja eu l'occasion de sOllligner
que, au cours de ces consultations, nous avons
fait un effort tres sincere pour comprendre dlacun des elements esseotiels dll probleme dont
nons sommes saisis. AU$si nous semble-t-il que,
grace aces pourparlers, nOllS avons n~ussi a
trollver une solution qui oous parait foncierement
juste et qui permettra de regler la situation a.
laquelle le Conseil doit faire face.

[398th meeting], I expressed the views of my

Government regarding what has happened in
Indonesia. It is unnecessary to repeat those views
today. In the same statement, I also expressed
my Government's opinion that the time had come
for the Council to take appropriate action de~
signed to help bring about a just and lasting
settlement of the Indonesian dispute. We believe
that, although the questions with which the
Council is now confronted are incredibly complicated, the Council nevertheless has an obligation
to find a balanced and a constructive answer to
these questions. With this in mind, we have been
consulting with various members of the Council
over the past few days in an effort to arrive at a
considered long-term approach to the problem. In
the course of these consultations, as the representative of Cuba has pointed out, a determined
effort has been made to wrestle with each of the
essential elements in the problem before us. In
our opinion, the consultations have resulted in a
fundamentally sound answer to the situation with
which the Council is confronted.

We have joined with the representatives of
China, Cuba and Norway in working out the
text of a dra ft resolution which represents the
considered views of alI 'of us regarding the most
effective and productive way of dealing with the
present situation in Indonesia. Each sponsoring
delegation will, of course, state its own point of
view, and we have already heard one of the sponsoring delegations do so. I have recognized, as
I am sure all members of the Council will have
recognized, that the representative of Cuba has
well pointed out the fact that this joint resolution
is the result of a joint negotiation and represents
an attempt to meet many different points of view.
I should like, for Ollr part, to elaborate on what
we consider the major premises upon which this
draft resolution is based, for we believe it is
only on these premises that a real solution can be
found.

Nous nous sommes associes aux representnnts
de la Chine, de Cuba et la Norvege pour elnborer
11n projet de resolution qui exprime les opinions
reflechies de chactln d'entre nous sur la manicre
la plus efficace et la plus feconde de faire face
a la situation actuelle en Indonesie. Chacllne
des delegations qui oot participe a la redaction
de ce texte exposera naturellement son prop re
point de vue; rune d'entre eUes I'a d'ailteurs
deja. fait. J'estime - et je suis sur que tous les
membres du Conseil partageront man avis que le representant de Cuba a fort justement
presente cette resolution commune, resultat de
pourparlers et d'efforts communs entrepris pour:
concilier plusieurs points de vue differents. Je
voudrais, pour ma part, exposer les principt;s
fondamentaux dont _s'inspire le projet de resolution, car, a notre avis, c'est sur ces princ:ipes
seulement que l'on peut fonder une solution
veritable.

In the first place, we are convinced that there
is no question but that the Council must continue
to concern itself with the Indonesian question.
My delegation is not able to accept the jurisdiction of the Council which has just been so eloquently stated by the representative of Belgium.
We agree with the recent statement [400th meeting] of the representative of the United Kingdom
that in the light of recent events we now have a
situation in which the Security Council must
feel compelled to make recommendations. As
matters stand, I think the majority of the members of the Council will agree that we have an
obligation to continue our efforUi to assist in
arriving at a solution as a whole. The time has
passed for a piecemeal approach.

Tout d'abord, il ne fait aucun doute pour oous
que le Conseil doit continuer a s'occuper de l;a
question indom~sienne_ Ma delegation ne saur:l1t
accepter les vues quc le representant (le l.a Bdgique vient d'exposer si eloquemment sur la
competence du Conseil. Nous somm~s d'.accor,d
avec le representant du Royaume-Urtt qUt a declare recemment [400eme seance] que, il. l:1 suite
des recents evenements, le Conseil se trollve devant
une situation ou il doit se sentir oblige de £ormuler des recommandations. All point ou nous
en sommes, je pense que la majorite des mcmbres
du Conseil reconnaitra que naus avons le
devoir de poursuivre nos efforts pour aider a
regIer le probleme dans son ensembte. I1 n'cst
plus temps d'envisager ce problt,me d'une maniere frag,mentaire.

8
A second basic premise of ours is that there
were and are two parties before us. Discussions
concerning the legal inequality in their status
have not at any point prevented" the Council irom
dealing with them as parties. The fact that they
both in good faith signed an agreement under the
auspices of our agenc)' is sufficient, apart from
any other consideration, to estabHsh both as
parties with which we can legitimately concern
ouselves, as we have done hitherto. As we understand the factual situation at the moment, however, it is necessary for the Council to seek to
reo-establish the posltion of one of the parties to
a point where it can resume bona fide negotiations
with the other. Naturally, the Council cannot
accept the contention that, in its prl':sent situation,
thl': GoVernment 01 the Republic is able to enter
upon negotiations in any real sense of the word.
Gearly, it must be enabled to negotiate with the
Netherlands freely and thus have a voice in
the discussion of the future of Indonesia.

In the third place, we do not believe that the
Secur~ty Council can place the seal of its approval

on the results of the recent military action. We
all know that the Dutch troops will have to be
withdrawn if the ultimate goal of creating a
sove.reign United States of Indonesia is to be
achieved. VIe do not understand that the Nether·
lands Government has any intention or desire
to maintain its troops in occupation indefinitely.
The problem before us is not whether the troops
should be withdrawn; the real problem is the
method and timing of withdrawal, worked out
in such a way as not to create other and perhaps
even greater difficulties.
In solving a problem of this nature, we all
recognize that there are local conditions which
must be taken into account. Practical matters
such as the maintenance of order and the supply
and deliv-ery of food and other every-day necessities are vital to the success of an operation of
this character. For example, as the records of
the Committee of Good Offices will show, the
problems of providing fer the well-being of local
populations require long and tedious efforts. The
destruction of a single railroad bridge, the burning of a single sugar refinery, can mean that the
population of a particular area is cut off from
vital sources of supply. There may be many
communities whose daily supply of rice depends
on access to areas from which, for all we know,
they are now completely crit off. Where a local
population might have to depend on delivery
of grain by oxcart, a blown-(1p bridge can lead
to the severest deprivation unless such factors
are prov-ided for. We believe the only way they
can be provided for is to approach the problem
of withdrawal realistically and painstakingly.

If we overlook such factors as these, we are
simply not living up to our primary responsibilities. Accordingly, we recognize that these
factors must be brought into balance after full

Notre deuxieme principe fondamenta1 est que
nous etions et que nOllS sommes encore en pre~
sence de deux parties. Les discussions relatives
a l'inegalite juridique de leur situation n'ont a
aucun mOment empeche le Conseil de traiter
chacune d'elles comme partie au differend. Le
fait qu'elles ant toutes deux signe en bonne foi
un accord sous les auspices d'un organe de~
Nations Unies suffit, en dehors de toute autre
consideration, pour les qualifier comme des par~
ties dont nous nous sommes occupes et dont
nous pouvons legitimement nous occuper comme
nous I'avons fait jusqu'i present. Mais, en envisageant la situation de fait, nous estimolls que
le Conseil doit chercher a retablir la situation
de I'une des palties pour lui permettre de reprendre en bonne foi les negociations avec !'autre.
Naturellement, le Conseit ne peut pas accepter
l'affirmation selon laquel1e, dans sa situation
actuelle, le Gouvernement de la Republique est
i meme d'entreprendre des negotiations au sens
reel du mat. Il est evident qu'il doit etre mis en
mesure de negocier en toute liberte avec 1es PaysBas et avoir ainsi voix a la discussion de l'avenir
de l'Indonesie.
En troisieme lieu, nous ne croyons pas que
le Conseil de securite puisse sanctionner 1es resuJtats de I'action militaire recemment dec!enchee,
Nous savons tous que 1es troupes neer1andaises
devront se retirer si on veut atteindre l'objectif
final, qui est de CTt~er des Etats-Unis d'Indonesie
souverains. Nous ne pensons pas que le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas ait l'intention ou le desir
de maintenir indefiniment ses troupes d'occupation en Indonesie. Le probleme qu'il nous faut
envisager n'est pas de savoir si 1es troupes devraient se retirer; le ,'rai probleme consiste a
detenniner les modalitl~s et la date du retrait,
afin de preparer ce retrait de maniere a ne pas
creer de nouvelles et peut-etre de plus grandes
difficultes.
Nous reconnaissons tOllS qu'il y a des conditions
regionales dont it faut tenir compte en reglant
un prob1eme de cette nature. Des questions d'ordre pratique, telles flue le maintien de I'ordre,
l'envoi et la distribution de denrees alimentaires
ainsi que d'autres produits necessaires sont d'une
importance vitale pour la n~ussite d'une operation
de ce genre. Par exemple, comme le prol1ve
l'exemp1e de la Commission de bons offices, l'organisatioll du bien~etre des populations locales
detnLmde de longs et fastidieux efforts. La destruction cl'un pont de chemin de fer, l'incendie
d'une raffinerie de sucre peuvent coupeI' la population de telle ou teUe region de ses sources
vitales de ravitaillement. n se peut qu'il y ait
de nombreuses communautes dont le ravitaillementjournalier en riz depende dn libre acces
i des regions dont, d'apres ce que nous savons,
eJles sont a present compJ.etement coupees. U.
ou la population locale peut avoir a dependre de
la livraison de grain par des chars a bceufs, il
suffit d'un pont qui saute pour entrainer 1es
restrictions 1es plus graves, i moins que I'on ne
remedie par aillellrs a c:es eventua1ites. Nous
crayons que le seu! moyen d'y remedier est de ~e
donner la peine d'envisager le probleme dll retralt
des troupes d'une maniere realiste.
Si le Conseil neglige les factems tels queceux.~
d, il ne sera tout simplement pas a la hauteur
de sa tache essentielle. N ous estimons dont qu'H
faut tcnir compte de ces elements apres avoir

9
consideration of each one of them. This balance
is reflected in the preamble of our draft resolution. In the operating dauses we have directed
the commission to take them all into account before recommending to the parties the circum·
stances under which withdrawal should take
place. The Security Council itself, if its authority
is invoked in the matter, should also take these
considerations into account.

etudie avec soin chacun d'entre eu:.::_ Cette preoc~
cupation s'exprime dans le preambule de notre
projet de resolution. Dans le dispositif, nous
avons charge la commission de prendre ces eh~·
ments en consideration avant de recommander
aux parties les conditions du Tetra!t des troupes.
Le Conseil de securite lui-meme, si on fait appel
a son autorite dans ce domaine, devrait tenir
compte de ces considerations.

We all recognize that in our draft resolution
we have placed a heavy burden on the commission. We have not, on the other hand, sought
to give it any power which the Security Council
ca.nnot delegate. In the final analysis, the responsibility rests with the Council. We are convinced,
hawever, that it is necessary to give our agency
on the spot sufficient authority in the first instance
to enable it ta meet the new situation there.

Nous reconnaissons tous que, dans notre pro·
jet de resolution, IIOllS avons impose nne lourde
tache a la commission. Nous n'avoIls, d'autre
part, cherche a lui donner aucun pouvoir que le
Conseil ne puisse deleguer. En derniere analyse,
c'est au Canseil lui-meme qu'incombe toute la
responsabilite. Mats nous sommes convaincus
qu'il faut donner a notre commission operant sur
place une antorite suffisante, en premiere instance, pour lui permettre de faire face a la nouvelle situati.on qui existe la-bas.

j

En quatrieme lieu, nous estimons que les nego~
In the fourth place, we consider that the negotiations should be assisted by an agency of the ciations devraient avoir lieu avec le concours
Security Council. Both parties have heretofore d'un organe du Conseil de securite. Les deux
accepted such assistance; we assume they will parties ant jusqu'i present accepte eette aide;
continue to accept it. We believe, however, that nous supposons qu'e1les l'accepteront, aussi i
eighteen months' experience has shown that a l'avenir. Mais MUS croyons que dix~huit mois
goal must be set for the consummation of nego· d'experience ant montre qu'il faut fixer un objectiations: a protraction of them will not serve the tif pour que ces negoeiations puissent aboutir;
interests of either party. As the reports of the la prolongation de celles-d ne servirait 1es inteCommittee of Good Offices will show, most of rets d'aucune des parties. Comme le montrent les
the bOlsic issues have already been thoroughly rap ports de la Commission de bons offices, la
explored. In some matters, there has been a large plupart des questions essentiel1es ont deja fait
measure of agreement. It now remains to bridge robjet d'un examen detaille. Sur quelque5 points,
the gap between these areas, and we believe that il y a eu, dans une large mesure, accord. 11 reste
with the assistance of the commission, as des- maintenant a eombler les fosses qui separent ces
cribed in the draft resolution, the gap can be points, et nous sommes convaincus que, avec
bridged.
I'aide de la commission que prevoit le projet de
resolution, le fosse peut etre camble..
Les parties sont en ponrparlers, de maniere
The parties have been negotiatingintermittently over a period of three years. They have intermittente, depuis pres de trois am. Elles ne
not yet arrived at an agreement on the political' sont pas encore arrive-es a un accord sur les quesissues between them. It is clear to all of us, tions politiques qui les separent. Mais it est evi·
however, tllat it is only through negotiation of dent pour chacl1n d'entre nolts que senles des
these political issues that there can be a just'and negotiations sur ces questions politiques peuvent
durable settlement of the Indonesian question. contribuer a un reglement juste et durable de la
Fortumtely, the negotiations which have taken question indonesienne. Fort hetlreusement, les
place so far have produced some measure of negociations qui ont eu Ileu jusqu'a present ont
agreement on the really fundamental issues. abouti a 11n certain accord sur les questions
There are certain basic principles which have vraiment fondamentales. Certains des principes
been inco1'porated in the Linggadjati and RenviUe fondamental1X qui ont ete incorpores dans les
Agreements which undoubtedly will fann a part Accords de Linggadjati et du Renville feront
of any final settlement. Both these instruments, sans aucun doute partle de t0ut reglement defi·
for example, contemplate the creation and estab· nitif de la question. C'est ainsi que ces deux ins1ishment of a federal, sovereign and independ- trtllTIents envisagent la creation d'un Etat fedeent United States of Indonesia. Both contem- ral souverain qui recevrait le nom d'Etats-Unis
plate the inclusion of the Republic as a State d'Indonesie. Tous les deux pn~voient que la
within the United States of Indonesia. Both Republique, en tant que telle, sera incorporee aux
contemplate a union in which the Kingdom of Etats-Unis d'Indonesie. Tous les deux envi~n­
the Netherlands and the United States of Indo- gent une union au sein de laquelle le Royaume
nesia will be equal partners.
des PayswBas et 1es Etats-Unis d'Indonesie jouiront de droits egaux.
In addition to the measure of agreement
reached in these instruments, the parties have
also explored, as the reports of the Committee of
Good Offices indicate, a considerable number of
important iSSlteS regarding the interim period
between the present and the time when the sovereignty is transferred. We believe that future
negotiations should take advantuge af the fact that

Outre l'accord qui fait l'objet de ces deux docu·
ments, les parties ont etudie, comme l'indiquent
les rapports de la Commission de bOllS offices,
1.111 grand nomure de questions importantes conc~rnant la periode de transition qui s'etend entre
le moment actuel et le moment ou la souverainete
sera transferee aux Etats-Unis d'Indonesie. Nons
crayons que de nouvelIes negotiations devraient

10
much ground has already been covered, and we ,benefieier du fait que de nombrenses qllestions
ant deja fait l'objet d'un examen, et notts avons
have sought to reflect this in the joint draft.
cherche a exprimer cette opinion dans le projet
de resolution commun.
En dernier lieu, je pense que nous c:omprenons
Finaity, I think we all realize that it is. essenti~
to any workable settlement in Indonesia that It tOllS que, pour aboutir en Indonesie it une solll~
s1)tmld be the result of agreement on the part of tion qui puisse etre appliquee, i1 es~ essentiel
those concerned; we do not believe a po1it~cal qu'elle so it le resnltat d'un accord entre les intesettlement should or could be successfully Im- resses; nOLts ne pensons pas qtl'Un reglement
posed by one of the parties, or for tha~ matter, politique de la question doive ou puisse etre
through outside intervention. We consider that impose a une partie par I'antre partie, Oll, en
not only must a final settlement ~e negotiat:d, l'occurrence, par l'intermediaire d'une intel'venbut that since a final settlement wIll necessanly tion venant de l'exterieur. Nous estimons que le
affect the future of Indonesia as a whole, the reglement deJinitif doit faire l'objet de negocia~
negotiations must take into aCCollI,t the full inter- tions et que, au cours de celles-ci, il fant prendre
ests of al1 parts of Indo~esi'l.. For this rea~on, en consideration les inten~ts de tontes les regions
we believe the representatives of non-Republlcan de l'Indonesie, etant donne que ce reglement
parts of Indonesia should have an opportunity to affectera necessairement l'avenir de l'ensemble
participate in the negotiations.
du pays. C'est pourqttoi nOlls pensons qu'il fau~
drait donner aux rcpresentants des regions qui ne
font pas partie de la Republiqne d'Indonesie
l'occasion de participer aces negociations.
Le projet de resolution dans son ensemble est
The draft resolution as a whole is an effort to
promote settlement, firstly, by seeking to estab- le resultat d'un effort accompli pour aider au
lish conditions under which free and bona fide reglement de la question. En effet, il s'<tgit tout
negotiations ca:1 take place; secondly, by allowing d'abord de creel' des conditions pl'Opices a des
all concerned to reach whatevcr freely negotiated negodations libres et de bonne foi; en second
settlement they wish; thi rdly, by preserving liell, il faut permettre it tous les interesses d'aboli~
certain basic points of agreement already reached; ti1' a une solution librement negociee et COIl forme
and, fourthly, by making certain provisions it leurs va:ux; en troisieme Iiell, i1 faut mainagainst the possibility of an impasse. Finally, the tenjr certains points fondamentat1x sur lesql.1els
resolution provides a time schedule which, we l'accord s'etait deja fait; et, en quatrieme lieu,
believe, corresponds in all essentials to the il faut prevoir ce!,taines dispositions pOll!, em~
achievement of the goals which both parties have pecher qu'on n'aboutisse it t\ne impasse. Eniln,
again and again declared they desire to achieve. la resolution prevoit nn echelonnement de dates
qtti, it notre avis, doit pennetlre aux parties de
realiser les fins essentielles aU::i:quelles elles ant
declare, a mainte$ reprises, ql1'el1es desiraient
aboutir.
A notre avis, cette resolution commune tient
We believe that this joint resolu~ion meets the
various elements in the problem before us which compte d'un graml nomorc d'e1ements du prothe majority of the members of the Security b1eme dont nous sommes saisis, elements que
Council consider must be taken into account. We la majorite (les memhres du Conseil estime
realize that there are some who would like to necessaire de traiter. Nous sommes conseients
see certain elements dealt with in more detail; que certains desireraient les voir traiter avec
others would like to see them dealt with less plus de details; d'autres voudraient les exaelaborately. The tabling of this draft resolution miner c1'une maniere mains detaillee. En premoves the discussions in the Council into a stage sentant ce projet de resolution, noqs permettons
of concrete examination of a text. A full ex- all Conseil de passeI' a l'examen d'ull texte precis.
change of views on the text should lead to a Un echange de vues tres complet sur ce texte
complete understanding of its intent. If other devrait conduire a une entiere comprehension
suggestions are made, my delegation will study du but qu'il se propose. Si d'autres suggestions
them carefully and will be prepared to exchange sont faites, ma delegation est prete ales etudier
views in regard to them. We also reserve 0111' serieusement et ales discuter. Nons nous reser"
right to discuss particular provisions of the draft vons egalement le droit de discuter certaine$
resolution which has now been tabled if questions dispositions particulieres dl1 projet de r~soltltjon
are raised regarding them.
qui vient d'etre depose si on souleve des qtlestions
it leur propos.
We hope that approach made in the joint
Nous esperons que chacttn reconnaitr.l que,
drafting of this resolution will be recognized by en redigeant lellr projet de resolution commun,
all concerned as an earnest and conscientious les auteurs de ce textc ont bit un effort seriellX
attempt to help reach a solution in Indonesia. et consciencieux pour aider a aboutir a une solu~
...Ve hope also that, when the Council expresses tion en Indonesie. Nous esperons egalcment quc,
its view through the adoption of a resolution, lorsque le Conseil formulera son opinion en
that resolution will command the full support and adoptant une resollltion, cette resolution obtien"
co-operation of both parties, without which this dra le plein appui et la cooperation des deux
or any other attempt could not succeed.
parties, car, sans cet appui et sans cette collaboration, tous nos efforts resteront vains.
Mr. TSIANG (China): The core of the Indonesian problem is the transition of that area from
colonial status to notional independence. The

M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de lJanglais):
Le nceud du probleme indonesien consiste a assUrer la transition de cette region de l'etat de co10-

11
long, protracted negotiations between the N etherlands and the Republic of Indonesia, the arduous
efforts made by the Committee of Good Offices
during the past year, and the numerous sessions
which the Security Council itself has devoted t6
the prulJkrn aB att~st tu Lht universal desire for
this transition to be smooth and peaceful.

Both as a member of the Security Council and
as a neighbour of Indonesia, where large nnmbers of my fellow countrymen live and work,
my cOl1ntry-it goes without saying-desires
above everything else a smooth and peaceful
transition. This is the reason why my delegation
has associated itself with the delegations of Cuba,
Norway and the United States in preser.ting the
draft resolution which is before the Council.
milc wc aim at a smooth and peaceful transition from colonial status to national independence, members of the Security Council are bound
by the principles of the Charter, and we cannot
serve expediency at the expense of the great
principles for which the United Nations stands.

The tenus of this draft resolution will be
found to be in put satisfactory and in part
uns<ltisfactory to both parties to the dispute. As
a matter of fact, in regard to the same particulars, they are not even satisfactory to the same
extent to all the sponsors of the draft resolution.
The drnft resolution represents a co-operative
effort Md, as stlch, it has required from the
sponsors. and will require from the two parties
to the dispute, a lal·ge measure of compromise
and accommodation. I am satisfied, however,
that the draft resoltltion, if passed by the Sl:curity
Council and if accepted loyally by both the
Netherlands and the RepUblic of Indonesia,
WQuld flat only solve this very important and
complicated problem, but in solving it would a1so
strengthen the usefulne~s and the prestige of the
Security Council.
Since the representatives of Cuba and the
United States have already made their statements
on the terms of the draft resolution, I find it
tmnecessary to try to cover the whole ground.
I shall limit myself to those points of the draft
resolution which in my opinion reqnire some
elucidation and empha5is.
In the first place, this draft resolution reiterates the demand of the Security Council for the
immediate release of the political leaders of the
Republic of Indonesia. The authorities of the
Netherlands have hitherto shown some hesitancy
with regard to the full implementation of this
part of the Council's decision in Paris. I must
say frankly that I have never been able to understand this hesitatio:J.
If we are to have a negotiated settlement, we
must have the responsible high officials of the
Republic of Indonesia restored to that freedom
of movement and action which alone can enable
them to discharge their duties. Do the Dutc.h
authorities mean th1.t the:y wish to impcse thelr
own scheme of settlement on the Indonesians?
Do thty wish to get rid of the Republic of Indonesia as a political entity? If I were tc deduce

nie a l't~tat de nation independante. Les negociations prolongees qui se sont deroulees entre les
Pays-Bas et la Republique d'Indonesie, les efforts
intenses de la Commission de tons offices qui se
sont poursuivis pendant un an, le nombre des
seances que le Conseil de securite a lui-meme
consacrees it ce probU:me, temoignent dtl desir
universel de realiser celte transition d'une maniere pacifique et sans heurts.
En tant que membre du Conseil de securite, et
en tant que ,"oisin de l'Indonesie, oil vivent et
trav::lillent un grand nombre de Chinois, man
pays desire plus que tout au monde que cette
transition s'opere d'une manlerc. p<.1cifique et
sanS heurts. C'est pour cette raison que ma delegation s'est assoeiee aux delegations de Cuba,
de la NorvegE'_ t"t de~ Etats-Unis pOUr presenter
an Conseil de sec-urite le projet de resolution
d011t il est maintenant saisi.
Mais, tout en souhaitant que la transition de
l'etat de nation independante
I'etat de co1onie
s'eft'ectue d'llne maniere pacifiquc et sans hel1rts,
les membres du Conseil de secl1rite doivcut se
conformer aux principes de la Charte, et nOllS
ne sallrions, pour des raisons d'opportunite, porter
atteinte aux grands principes de l'Org,anisation
des Nations Unies.
Les partics au differend accepteront sans doute
une partie des termes de cette resolution, alors
qu'ils en rejetteront d'autres. En fait, meme les
auteurs de ce texte ne sont pas. tOllS egalement
satisfaits de certains points de la resolution. La
resolution l'epresente le fruit d'Ull effort de cooperation. AU5si a-t-dle exige de ses a\1teurs, et exigera-t-e1le des deux parties nu differend, un
esprit de conciliation et de comprcmis. Cependant, je suis convaincu que cette resolution, si
elle est adoptee par le Conseil uc securitc et
acceptee loyalement paries Pays-Bas, permettra
de resoudre ce probleme si complique et si
important et renforcera l'utilite et le prestige du
Conseil.

a

Etant donne que les representants de Cuba et
des Etats-Unis ont deja fait conna.itre Jellr opinion sur 1es termes du pro jet de resolution,
j'estime inutile de passel' en revue tOllS les details de cette proposition. Je vais, par consequent, limiter mll declaration aux points du
proiet de resolution qui, a mon sens, meritent
d'e,tre ec1airci5 et soulignes.
En premier hell, ce projet de resolution reitere
la demancle formulee par le Consell de securite
an sujet de la remise en liberte des chefs politiques de la Republique d'Indone~ie. Les autorites des Pays-Bas ont, jusqu'a present, manifeste quelque hesitation
mettre pleinement it
execution cette partie des decisions prises par
le Conseil
Paris, J'avoue que je n'ai jamais
pu comprendre celte hesitation.
Si on vent aboutir
un reglement ql1i soit le
resultat de negotiations, it faut qLle les chefs
responsables de la Republique d'Indonesie retrotlvent leur liberte de mouvement et d'action,
condition indispensable pour leur permeltre de
remplir le'.!rs obligations. Les autorites neerlan~
daises entendent-elles imposer <lllX Indonesiens
leur propre plan de reglement? Desirent-elles se
debarrasser de la Republique d'Indonesie en tant

a

a

a

12
q:.l'entite politique? Si j'avais a tirer les conclusions des declarations faites en public par les
dirigeants des Pays-Bas et, en premier Heu, par
Sa Majeste la Reine, je dirais: non. Mais si je
devais lirr.iter mon attention aux <ides des autorites w~erlandaises en Indonesie, je repondrais:
O·li. Si les Hollandais desirent parvenir a un
reglement qui soit le resultat de negociations,
nous avons le devoir de les aider dans taute la
mesure du possible. Nous devons necessai~ement
nnus abstenir de toute action ou de toute parole
q'li risquerait d'augmenter leurs diffieultes, car,
en effet, ils ont a faire face a de nombreuses
difficultes. Si, toutefois, ils ente:ldent imposer
leur prop~e plan a j'Indonesie sans tenir compte
du desir du peuple indoneaien, mieux vaut cesser
d'examiner ce projet de resolution et etud:er des
moyens d'action plus efficaces afin de faire face
a une crise aussi grave.
En second lieu, le projet de resolution "invite
In the second place, the draft resolution "calls
upon the Government of the Netherlands to in- le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas it faire cesser
sure the immediate discontinuance of all military immediatement toutes operations militaires, invite
operations, calls tlj:-on the Government of the le Gouvernement de la Republique a ordonner
Republic simultaneously to order its armed .ad- en meme temps a ses partisans armes de mettre
herents to cease gue~ril1a warfare, and caUs upon fin aux operations de guerilla, et invite le3 deux
hotl·. parties to co-operate in the restoration of parties a collaborer au retablissernent de la
peace and :he maintenance of law and order paix et au maintien de l'ordre public dans toute
la region intl~ressee".
throughout the area affectecl".
1 have quoted this paragraph verbatim. It is
Ce paragraphe, que je viens de citer mot pour
a very important paragraph. So far as I know, mot, est extremement important Pour autant
no member of the Security Council has tried to que je sache, aucun des membres du COnseil de
justify the use of force in Indonesia. Military securite n'a tente de justifier l'emploi de la force
operations, even s1:ch as might be designated ell Indonesie. 11 faut mettre fin aux operations
under the term 0: dealing with the "roving militaires, meme a celles qui ant pour but avoue
bands", must ;;tulJ. Al.the same time, the Re- ce supprilller de~ "bandes errantes". En mCmc
public should call off guerrilla warfare. The temps, la Repu1::lique devrait mettre fin aux
problem of Indonesia can be worked out only operations de guerilla. Le probleme indonesien
in .?.n atmosphere oj peace.. The use of force by ne peut are resolu que clans une atmosphere de
one party necessarily involves the use of force by paix. L'emploi de la force par l'une des parties
the other party. This chain reaction must be entraine necessairement l'emploi de la force par
stopped once and for all. It is in the interests of I'autre partie. Cette reaction en chaine doit s'arre~
bOlh lhal it should :'c so.
ter llne fois pour tOlltes. n doh ell ctre aim; duns
l'inten~.t des deux parties.
In the third place, this resolufon calls for
En troisieme lieu, cette resolution recomear:y restoration of the civil administration of rn.ande un 'prompt retablissement de l'adm~nistra­
the Republic, beginning with the capital city.
tion civile de la Repnblique, et cela en commensant par la capitale.
In the fourth place, this resolution calls for
En quatrieme lieu, la resolution exige le retrait
the withdrawal of :he NeH.erlands armed forces des forces armees neer:andaises du territoire
from Repu::>lican territory.'
republicain.
En ce qui concerne le retablisseme1Jt de ]'adIn regard to both the I-est oration of civil admir.istratior. and the withdrawal of the Nether- ministrat:on civile et le retrait des forces neerlands Army, the resolntion pays special attention lanclaises, la resDlution insiste fort particulieto the requirements of public security and pro~ rement S'.1r les exigences de la securite pllbligue
tection of life and property. We are not present- et sur la necessite de protegeI' la vie et les biens
'ing 'to the Secuity Council a th,=oretical des habitants. NODs ne presentons pas au Conseil
proposition without regard to local conditions. As de securite une proposition theorique, ne tenant
to the actual conditions prevailing today, this pas compte des conditions locales. Toutefois, les:
resolution does not presume to pronounce judg- auteurs de la resolution ne pretendent pas porter
ment. We have heard speakers here point to a de jugement sur la situation e)(istant actuelle"possible vacuum" should the Netherlands forces men( dans
le pays. Certains orateurs ont
be suddenly, simultane011s1y and totally with- affirme id qu'un retrait simultane, soudain cl
drawn from all parts of Indonesian territory. I total de tClutes les forces neerlandaises stationnees
have also heard sta~ements to the effect that, be- en terri:oire indonesier. pourrait laisser un
fore the recent outheak of hostilities, the Repub~ "vide". D'autre part, j'ai entendu dire que, avant
lie had aLways managed to afford cue protection la recente ouverture des hastilites, la Republique
to life and property. I think it is wise for the avait toujottrs reussi a proteger la vie et les biens,
Sec:uity Council not to judge at this distance des habitants. le pense que le Conseil de seeufrom the scene of action which contention is ,the rite agirait sagement s'it s'abstenait de ponermore correct one. We leave the rate of restora- un jugement, de si loin, sur l'ex~ctittlde de thation of civil adminimation and the rate of with- cune de ces theses. Nous laissons a. nos repre-

the answer from the public statemer.ts of lJ:ttch
statesmen, beginning with the recent statement of
Her Majesty the Queen, I would say "no". If I
were to confine my attentio:1 to the acts of the
Dutcll authorities in Indone~ia, I would answer
"yes". Now, if the Dutch mean to have a negotiated settlement, it :s our duty to help as much
as we can. Certain1}', we must refrain from any
act or 'word which might increase the~r difficulties,
for in fact they have many difficulties. If, however, they mean to impose their own plans on
Indonesia without regard to the wishes of the
Indonesian ?eople, we might as well stop considering this resolution and bstead consider other
mea:1S of action which would be more sui(abj~
for meeting such a grave cO:ltingency,

13
drawal of Netherlands Army to our representa~
tives on the spot. They will make recommenda~
tions to the parties after having consulted them.
Shol11d the recommendations be rejected by either
or both, they are to report immediately to the
Security Council. The provisions of the draft
resolution in reg,ard to the two important matters
of civil administration and stationing of troops
seem to me to be the most practical and, at the
same time the most consistent with the principles
of the Ch;rter. I would add only that under this
resolution the possibility is visualized of having
an area which would be civilly administered by
the Republic of Indonesia but with some Nether·
lands troops standing by ready to lend a helping
hand to the civil authorities in case of any
emergency. Perhaps we presume too much, but
in all civilized communities the mode of action
which we recommend is the normal one. Military power should always be the helpmate of
civil power. I regard this feature of the resolu·
tion as very valuable. When we speak of the
restoration of civil administration, we mean, of
course, restoration under conditions which would
make it possible for the administration to function
effectively.

sentants, qui se trouvent sur place, le SOln de
determiner les modalites du retablissement de
l'administration civile et cenes du retrait de l'armec neerlandaise; ces representants feront des
recommandations aux parties apres les avail'
consuJtees. Si I'une ou I'autre des parties, ou les
deux parties a la fois, en viennent a rejeter ees
recommandations, ils devront immediatement
presenter un rapport au Conseil de securite. Les
dispositions de notre projet de resolution relatives a ces deux importantes questions de l'ad~
ministration civile et de la repartition des troupes
presentent, a mon avis, un caractere pratique et
soot en meme temps compatibles avec les principes de la Charte. Je veux: ajouter simplement
que, aux termes de cette resolution, on envisage
la possibilite de creer une zone dont l'adminis
tl'ation civile serait assuree par la Republique
d'Indonesie, mais ou it y aurait un certain nombre de troupes neerlandai!les pretes a aider les
autorites civiles en cas de necessite urgente. Peutetre sommes nouS trap optimistes, mais, dans
tontes les communautes civilisees, la procedure
que n011S recommandons est consideree comme
normale. Le pouvoir militaire doh toujours appuyer I'autorite civile. J'estime que Cl" point particulier confere une tri:s grande valeur a notre
projet de resolution. Lorsque nons parlons do
retablissement de I'administration civile, nous
entendons, certes, creer des conditions qui permettent a I'administration de fonctionner d'une
maniere efficace.

In the fifth place, we specify that the establish~
ment of an interim federal government, the election of representatives to a constituent assembly,
and the transfer of sovereignty by the Nether~
lands to the United States of Indonesia should
form the topics of a negotiation between the two
parties, with the assistance of our representatives.
These three acts are the great creative acts to
bring about a new and independent Indonesia.
Everybody has understood the great hopes which
the people of Indonesia entertained on these three
points. Because of delays in the past, we have
thought it important to name target dates, providing at the same time for some meaSUre of
elastidty. If we should fail to fix any date, we
would grossly disappoint the Indonesian people.
In that case, the leaders of the Republic would
find it difficult to rally their followers to a course
?f moderation and patier.ce. On the other hand,
!f we did not pl'Ovide some mode of adjustment
In regard to the time-table, we might unwittingly
place .insurmountable difficulties in the path of the
negotlators, as also in the path of the administrators who will have to conduct the elections
a~d in the path of the parliamentary bodies who
wIn have to pass new legislation for the establish~
mellt of the new union.

En cinquieme lieu, nous preeisons que l'etabIissement d'un gOllvernement federal provisoire,
des elections permettant de designer [es representants au sein d'une assemblee constituante et le
transfert de la souverainete par les Pays-Bas
aux Etats-Unis d'Indonesie doivent faire l'objet
de negociatiol1s entl'e les deux parties, avec 1'assistat1ce de nos representants. TeUes sont les trois
grandes Hapes constructives qui doivent aboutir
a la creation d'tme Illdonesie nouvelle et indepcndante. Cbacun cOlnprend les profonds espoirs que
le peuple indonesien nourrit a l'egard de ces trois
questions. Par sl:ite des delais intervenus dans
le passe, nous avons juge important de suggerer
des dates determinees, tout en faisant preuve
d'une certaine sOL1plesse. Si nous ne fixiom pas
de date, le peuple indonesien serait fOrt de'lU,
et les chefs de la Republique eprouveraient alors
de grandes difficultes a rallier leurs partisans i
la cause de la moderation et de la patience. D'autre part, si nous ne prevoyions pas dc possibilites
d'ajustement dans l'executiOll de cc programme
notts pourriol1s, malgre nous, placer des obstaclc~
illsl1rmontables sur la voie des ncgociateurs, des
administrateurs charges d'organiser des ell'ctions
et des organes parlementaires qui. devront vote;
de notlvelles lois en vue de la creation <le la
nouvelle union.

Since tbe Security Council began to deal with
the IndDllesian question, new political entities
?3Ve ~pn1ng up in Indonesia. My understanding
IS ~o the effect that the leaders in the new political
uruts are not al1 of the same school of thought,
Some favOllring the policies of the leaders of the
Republic, while others favour a l.arger meaSllfe
of federalism.

Depuis que le COl1seil de securite a COlnmcnce
l'examcn de la question indonesiennc, de noltvclles entites politigues ont surgi cn Indonesie.
D'apres mes renseignell1ents, les chefs de ccs
nOtlvelles unites politiques n'appartienncnt pas
taus a la meme ecole. Certains d'entr~ eux sont
en, faveur de la politigtte suivie par la Republique
alors que d'autres sont favorables a un fe;jera~
lisme plus large.

I.n an ai~r! memoirs which the RepUblican delegahon submitted to the Netherlands delegation

Dans I'aide~memoire que la delegation de la
Republique a presente a la deh§gation des Pays-

M

14
and to our Committee of Good Offices in the
early part of last November, the Republicans
them5elves advanced the idea that the so-called
federalists should be called into ccnsultation on
the problem of the organization of the interim
government. I am glad that the leaders of the
Republic made the particular concession. I my~
self do not know the strength of the so-called
federalists. They are a political factor in Indonesia today. In this resolution we have provided
for their pCls<>ible participation in the negotiations
on the three great questions.

Bas et a la Commission de bons offices, au cours
de la premiere moitie du matS de novembre dernier, les Republicains eux~memes ant soutenu
la these d'apres laquelle ceux qu'an appelle les
federalistes devraient etre appe1es en consultation
au sujet de ['organisation d'un gOllVernement
provisoire. Je suis heul'eux que Its dirigeants
republicains aient fait cette concession. Quant a
moi, je ne connais pas la force de ceux qu'otl a
appeles les feaeralistes. Mais 11 est evident qu'ils
constituent a present un facteur politlque d'im.~
portance en Indonesie. Dans cette resolution,
nOllS avons prevu qu'ils pourraient participer
aux negociations portant sur les trois questions
principales.

Finally, this resolution provides for a commission vi the United Nations 1.0 assist the two
parties in the negotiations which are to take
place, as well as in the general implementation
of the resolutions of the Security Council.
ThroughOllt the last year, the Republic has
wished for more active participation by the Committee of Good Offices in the negotiations in
Indonesia, whereas the nuthorities of the Netherlands have always tried to limit the scope of our
intervention as well as the efforts of our Committee of Good Offices. The present resolution
takes a middle course. The new commission will
act by a majority vote. It will have the power
to make recommendations to the two parties as
well as to the Security Council.

Enfin, cette resoltltion [lrevoit la creation cl'une
cammiS:Jion des Nations Unies chargee d'aider
1es deux parties clans les negociations futures et,
d'Wle maniere generale, dans la mise en application des resolutions du Conseil de· securite,
Pendant tout le COllfS de l'annee precedente, la
Republiqtte a souhaite ltne participation pIllS
ac:tive de la Commission de bons offices dans les
negociations qui se sont derou1ees en Indonesie,
a10rs que les autol'ites neer1andaises ant constamment essaye de limiter la portee de l'interven~
tion du Conseil ainsi que celle des efforts de la
Commissions de bons 'offices. La presente resolution prend un parti lUoycn. La nouvcllc co:n-mission agira par \'oie de decisions prises a la
majorite. Elle aura le pouvoir de faire des recot11mandations aux deux parties ainsi qu'au Conseil
de securite.

In association with my colleagues from Cllba,
Norway and the United States, I heartily commend this rl'sc1ution to the approval of the emire
Council. I know that there remain questions,
anxieties and doubts Oll the part of the two
parties to the dispute. I can only say that if we
get OVf'f the nf>-xt thrf>f> m,)nths in Indonesia we
shall find the next three years much easier. In
a constrtlctive task of this type, success at the
beg:nning paves the way for future succe5S I
am convinced that once the United States of
Indonesia gets to work it will lmow how to act.

Je desire m'associer a mes collegues de Cuba,
de la Norvege et des Etats-Unis pour recommander cette resolution a l'approbation unanime
du Consei!. Je sais qu'il reste de nombreuses
questions a regler, qu'l1ne certaine anxiete subsistI', que chacune des deux parties au differend
eprouve df's doutes. J ~ dois me homer a dire que,
si noLts franchissons les trois 1l1ois qui vont venit',
les trois annees qui suivront seront beaucollp
plus faciles. Dans une ceuvre cotlstnrctive de
cette natllre, un succes obtenu au debut appelle
de nouveaux succes. Quand les Etats-Unis d'lndonesie seront organises, ils sauront ce qu'ils ont
a faire.

Mr. VAN ROlJEN (Netherlands): Since the
joint draft resolution contained before us in
document S/1219 has been circulated only today,
it is, ()f tC111rse, impossihl", for me to inform
the Council as yet of the attitude et my Government in regard to this document, the text of
which I have cabled to The Hague. It seems
desirable, furt1H~rmore, that my Governmtnt
ShOl:Jd, before taking any decision, have the bene_
fit of the txphmatians and comments which have
been given, and which perhaps remain to be
given, to the Council by the sponsors of the
resohttion. I shall be glad to inform the Council
of my Government's views regarding the draft
resolution as soon as possible.

M. VAN RorJEN (Pays-Bas) (traduit de l'anglais) ~ Etant donne que le texte du projet de
resolution contenLI clans le document 5/1219
n'a ete_ distribl1e qu'al1jourd'hui, i1 m'est impossible d'informer des a pre5ent le Conseil de l'attitude adoptee par lUon Gouvernement 11 l'egard
de Cl' document, dont j'ai communique le texte
par cah1e a La Haye. De plus, il semble que,
'lvant de se prononcer, man Gotlvernemcnt <1evrait benencier des explications et des commen~
taires qui ont ete faurniS, ainsi que de ceux qlll,
peut-etre, seront encore donnes au Conseil par
les autel1rs de la resolution, Je serai tres hel1reL1X
de faire connaitre au Conseil les Vl1es de !nDn
Gouvernemcnt sur le projet de resolution aussitot
que possible.

Yet, while entirely resen'ing my own posttJOn
and that of my Government with regard to (his
draft resolution, there is one point in the doc:u~
ment before us upon which I should like to comment immediately, because I am afraid that, in
itself, it cannot fail to lead to a certain misunderstanding and to arouse ill feeling in Indonesia.

Cependant, tout en reservant ma position et
celle de mon Gouvernement aU sujet de ce texle,
je voud~ais, des main.tenant, formuler quelques
observatlOltS sur un pomt du document dont nous
sommes saisis. En effet, je crain:; fort qu'i1 ne
provoql1e des malcntendus et meme un cert:;,in
malaise en Indonesie. Ii s'agit de la phrase qui

15
It is the sentence in sub-paragraph (a) of para~
graph 4, to which the previous speaker, the
representative of China, has already referred,
and which deals with the Indonesian Federalists,
whose real position and importance have been so
often misunderstood by this Council.
I fully appreciate--and I am sure the Federal~
ists will also fully appreciate---the intentions of
the sponsors in inserting this reference to the
Federalists. 1 must express the fear, however,
that in its present wording it will, instead, make
a painful impression on them, since the reference
is presented as if it were an act of favour and
a concession on the part of the Security Council
that the Federalists "may be permitted"-I repeat, "may be permitted"-"to participate in the
negotiations". Those Federalists represent two~
thirds of Indonesia and about 45 miUion Illdo~
nesians, and they will, I feel, with fuil jL1stification take the.view that, as representatives of
the numerically largest part of Indonesia, they
should be invited by right and not just "be
permitted to participate in the negotiations".

This is all I have to say for the moment.

figure a. l'alinea 4. d) et qui a ete mentionn~e
tout a t'heure par le representant de la Chine
a propos des fe.cteralistes indonesiens, dont le
Conseil a deja si souvent meconnu la position et
l'importance reel1e.
Je comprends aisement, et je suis certain que
les federalistes le comprendront aussi, pourquoi
les auteurs du pro jet de resolution ant mentionne
les f6deralistes. Mais je crains fort que cette
clause, dans sa redac:tion actuelle, ne provoque
plut6t une impression douloureuse. En effet, elle
semble indiquer qu'il s'agit en quelque sorte d'un
geste de favcur et d'une conc:ession de la part du
Conseil de securite qui dit que les federalistes
"pourront ctre autorises" - je repete ces mats
"pourront etre autorises" - "a prendre part
aux negociations". Ces federalistes representent
deux tiers de la population de l'Indonesie, soit
pres de 45 millions d'Indonesiens. It me semble
qn'ils seront parfaitement fondes a demander
que, en tant _que representants de la plus grande
partie des habitants de I'Indonesie, ils soient
invites de droit, et non pas seu1ement" autorises
a participer aux negociations".
Cest tout ce que j'ai a dire pour le moment.

Mr. MAUl<: (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The delegation
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has
studied the draft resolution of the four Powers
and wishes to make the foHowing observations
with regard to its substance.

M. MALIK (Union des Republiques sociali5tes
sovietiques) (fraduil du russe): La delegation
de I'URSS a etudi6 le projet de resolution des
quatre delegations et vent faire la declaration
suivante quant au fond de ce texte.

By rejecting the USSR delegations' proposal
[Sjl148] for immediate steps to put an end to
the Netherlands Government's aggression against
the Republic of Indonesia and to protect the
legitimate interests of the Republic and its people,
the Ang10-American majority in the Security
Council has assumed full responsibility for any
further developments in the Indonesian question.
The Netherlands Government, confident of the
support and encouragement of certain members
of the Security Council, including in the first
rank the United States and the United Kingdom,
ignores the Council's resolutions and continues
its aggression against the Republic. And here,
meanwhile, the long drawn~out bargaining with
the aggressor has been going on. In the- course of
this bargaining, both the aggressor and his pro·
"tectors have made statements about so·called
plans for the settlement of the Indonesian question. Now, the salient feature of these statements is that their substance is practically identi~
eal, which would go to prove prior agreement on
the matter among their authors.

Etant clonne qu'elles ont rejcte la proposition
de la dHegation de l'URSS [5/1148] qui prevoyait des mesures immediates en vue de meUre
fin a I'agression lancee par le Gouvernement
neerlandais contre la Republique d'Indonesie et
de proteger les interets legitimes de cette Republique et de son peuple, la majorite anglo-americaine au Conseit de securite a, par la merne,
assume pleine et enti';re responsabilite de la
fat;on dont la question indonesienne va evoluer
dans l'avenir. Fort de l'appui et de la protection
que lui accordent certains membres dn Conseil
<ie sewrite et, en tont premier lieu, les EtatsUnis et le Royaume-Uni, le Gotlverncment neerI<lndais poursuit son agression contrc la Repu~
blique et ne se soucie guere des resolutions du
Consei!. Quant au Conseil, il s'est livre entre
temps a un marchandage interminable avec
l'agresseur. All cours de ce marchandage, l'agresseur aussi bien que <=eux qui le protegent ont
fait des Mcbratiom sur ce qu'ils appellent des
plans destines .i regter la question indonesienne.
Toutes ces declarations ont ceci de particulier
que leur contenn est presque identique, ce qui
demontre de manit:l"e evidente qu'elles ont ~te
concertees.
Le resultat de tout cela a ele nn projet de
resolution qui fait entierement l'affaire de l'agressenr, qui est acceptable a ses protecteurs et a
ses complices et qui nt; tient aucun compte des
interets legitimes de la Republique et du peuple
d'Indonesie.
Que propose done ce projet? II est dit dans
ses considerations que les deux parties sont toujours fideles allX principes du Renville. Pourtant, les auteurs du projet de resolution euxmemes se rende.nt parfaitement compte que de
telles ttffirmations ne correspondent p<lS a la

The outcome of all this is the said draft resohltion, which fully satisfies the aggressor", is
acceptable to his protectors and abettOis and
ignores entirely the legitimate interests of the
Indonesian Republic and its people.
What is proposed in this draft resolution? It
is alleged in the preamble thal the parties continue
to adhere to the principles of the Renville Agreement. Yet the authors of the resolution them~
selves are quite aware that such assertions fall
wide of the truth. Renewal of military action

16
against the Indonesian Republic by the Nether·
lands Government was a direct violation of the
Renvme Agreement, which, as is well !mown,
provided for an armistice; even certain members
of the Committee of Good Offices have been
forced to recognize this fact in their official re·
ports to the Security CounciL Many representatives on the Security Council and representatives
of the colmtries concerned have also recognized,
during the discussion of the Indonesian question,
the incontestable fact that this Agreement has
been violated by the Netherlands Government.
How is it possible then, to affirm that the Netherlands Governmer.t continues to adhere to the
principles of the Rc-nvillc- Agreement?

realite. C'est precisement en violant l'Accord

OU Renville qui, comme on le ~ait, prevoyait un
annisticf, que le Gouvernement neerlandais a
repris les operations militaires cantre la Republirlue d'Indom~sie. Meme des membres de la
Commission de bons offices ont et(~ obli!!es de
reconnaitre ce fait dans 1eurs rapports ~fficiels
au Conseil de securite. Au cours de \'examen de
1<1 question indonesienne, p1usieurs membres du
Conseil de secl1rite, ainsi que 1es repn~sentants
des pays interesses, ont aussi reconnu le fait
incontestable que le Gouvernement neerlandais
avait viole cet Accord. Comment peut-on, apres
cela, affinner que le Gouvernement neerlandais
continue a s'en tenir aux principes de l' Accord
du Ren·viUe?

Le projet de resolution prevoit, certes, que les
Although the resolution recommends the release of the officials of the Government of the personnalites officielIes faisant partie du GouverIndonesian Republic and. their return to ]ogja- nement de la Republique d'Indonesie doivent etre
karta, the functions and activities of the Govern- liberees et renvoyees a DjoKjakarta. Mais il stiment of the Republic are limited to the city of pule en meme temps que le Gouvernement repu]ogjakarta, while the release of the Republic's blicain ne pourra exercer ses fonctions que clans
officials is recommended primarily so that they la ville de Djokjakarta. Si donc On propose de
may order their armed adherents to cease guer- ' 1iberer les personnalites officielles de la Reparilla warfare against the invader and thus make bliqlle, c'est avant tout pour Cju'elJes ordannent
it easier- for the aggressor to annex the Repub· a leurs partisans armes de mettre fin aux ope]jcan territory occupied by him. .
ratoins de guerilla contre les intrus, ce qui permettrait a I'agresseur de conso1ider son emprise
sur la pa1iie dLl territoire republica\n qu'il occ.upe,
There can be no doubt that such proposals are
favourable and acceptable to the aggressor only.
Under the proposed resolutiOn the liberated Govemm.ent of t~e Indonesian Republic would exercIse Its functlOns, even in ]ogjakarta, under 'L'le
Netherlands occupation regime. Obviotlsly, there
can be no question of free and independent
3ct10n on the part of this Government. Such a
proposal can only cover up aggression and delude
bo~h. the Indonesian people and world public
opinIon. In the same paragraph it is provided
that the Netherlands authorities shall afford to
the Goverrunent of the Republic of Indonesia
such facilities as may reasonably be required by
tha~ Gov:r~ment for its effective functioning.
Thls proVISion makes the actions of the Government of the Republic still more dependent upon
the Netherlands occupation authorities, Instead
of demanding the immediate withdrawal of
Nether!ands troops from the territory of the
Repubhc and thus ensuring for its Government
ful! soverei[!1ty, .freedom and independence of
actlOn and restormg the Republic to its former
status, the resolution first of a1l calls upon the
Government of the Republic to order the cessation
?f all ,resistance to the aggressor and to remair.
In JogJakarta under the supervision of the Neth~rlands atlthorities. That, in essence, is the meanmg. .of th: proposal concerning the release of
po1Jtlcal pnsoners and the exercise of their functions within the boundaries of Jogjakarta.

1n these, circumstances, the posit;on of the
~overnmenl of the Indonesian RepubEc in JogJak~~ta will be no whit different from the present
p~sl~lOn of the Prime Minister and the five other
mlnlsters of the Republic on the 1sland of Bangka.

Des proposition de ce genre ne sont avanta·
geuses et ne sont acceptables que pOur l'agresseur.
Ce1a ne fait aucun doute. En dIet, cette resolution
imp1ique que, IDeme a Djokjakarta, 1es membres
du Gouvernement de la Republique, une fois
qu'ils auront ete 1iberes, auront i exercer leurs
fonctions en se conformant aux exigences d'un
regime d'occtlpation neerlandais. 11 est bien evident que ce Gouvernement ne pourrait prendre
:l.ucune decision libre et independante. Une telle
proposition ne servirait qu'a couvrir I'agressiqn
et a induire en erreur, au moyen de grands mats,
le pellple d'Indonesie et l'opinion publiql1e man·
dia1e. L~ mhne paragraphe du projet de res9lution prevoit que 1es autorites ne~rlandalses
devront donner au Gouvernement de la Repu·
blique d'Indonesie toutes les facilites que cel~i-ei
pauna raisonnab1ement exiger pOllr s'acqUltter
efficacement de ses fonctions, Les alltorites d'ac·
cupation neel"laarlaises re~oivent donc un moyen
de plus de contr6ler l'aetivite du Gouvern~m.ent
de la Republique. Au lieu d'exiger le retralt lrtlffiediat des forces neerlandaises dll territoire de
la Repub1iqlle et d'assurer ainsi au Gouvernement
republica in sa liberte d'action et ses droits souverains, au lieu de rcstaurer la situation que la
Republique avait auparavant, on propose au Gouvernement nfpub1icain de donner tout d'abord
]Jordre de cesser toute resistance a l'agresseur et
de s'installer ensuite a Diokiakarta, sous la sur~
veiliance des troupes neei-1a~daises d'occupation,
afin d'y attend]'e les or,cires des autorites neer1andaises. V oilu a qtloi se reduit. dans son es~ence,
la proposition relative a la liberation des detenus
politiques et a 1eur retour en fonction dans les
limites de Djokjakarta.
Das ces conditions le Gouvernement de la
Republique dJlndones{e se trouvel'ait a Djokjakarta dans Llne situation qui ne differerait'en rI.en
de ceUe ou se trouvent en ce moment, le PrerUle r
Ministre d'Indonesie 'et cinq autres Min~streS
republicains detenus a l'lle de Bangka.

17
Paragraph 3 recommends that negotiations
Le paragraphe 3 contient une recommandation
should be undertaken by representatives of the relative a l'ouverture de negociations entre les
Netherlands Government and representatives of representants du Gouvernement neerlandais et
the Republic of Indonesia. Under what con- ceuxde la Republique d'Indonesie. Dans queUes
-ditions will these negotiations take place? If they conditions Cl'S conversations se derouleraient-can be undertaken at all, they will take place elIes si jamais elles pouvaient etre entreprises?
under the Netherlands occupation regime. It is Elles auraient lieu dans le cadre d'un regime
quite den!" that there can be no g11estion of free d'occupation neerlandais. Il est tout a fait evinegotiations' on a footing of equality between the dent qu'il ne saurait etre qllestion de negociations
representatives of the Netherlands Government sur un pied d'egalite et de liberte entre les repreand those of the Indonesian Republic. In the sentants du Gouvernement neerlandais et les repast, as was noted in the reports of the Com- presentants de la. Republique d'lndonesie. L'expemittee of Good Offices concerning previous nego- rience a montre, et la Commission de bons offices
tiations, the Netherlands systematically made new l'a d'ailleurs confirme dans ses rapports, que,
and exhorbitant demands and delivered ulti- au cours des conv~rSd.tions precedentes, a10rs
matums to the Government of the Indonesian meme que la Repnblique existait en tant qu'Etat
Republic even when the Republic was still an independant, les Pays-Bas ont cherche cl. lUl imw
independent and sovereign State. As long as the poser des conditions de serVltude en presentant
occupation regime is in force, the Netherlands sans cesse de nouvelles exigences et des ultimar.epresentatives will certainly not pay any atten- tums. Maintenant qll'il existe un regime d'occu·
tion to proposals or arguments advanced by the pation, les representants des Pays-Bas ne tienrepresentatives of the Republic. Secure in the dront aucun compte des propositions et des desisupport of their armed troops, they will force derata que pourront formu1er 1es representants
their own unilateral demands and ultimatums on de la Repub1ique. En s'appuyant sur les batonthe Republic. In such conditions, the purpose of nettes des forces annees neerlandaises, ils cherthe proposal to resume negotiations can also only cheront i imposer a la Republique leurs exigences
be to camouflage aggressive acts by the Nether- tmilaterales et lellrs ultimatums. Dans ces condilands and not to protect the lawful interests of tions, la proposition tendant a la reprise des
the Indonesian Republic.
negociations ne sert qu'a masquer I'ag:ression
neerlandaise et ne protege nullement les interets
Jegitimes de la Republique d'Indonesie.
Pou r ce qui est des propositions tendant i
As to the proposal to set up a "United Nations
Commission for Indonesia", this primarily in- ereer une "Commission des Nations Unies pour
volves only a change of name, as the commission l'Ind(ln~sie", il ne s'agit l.i que d'un changement
is nothing more than a new name for the Com- d'etiquette. On se propose simp1ement de desiw
mittee of Good Offices, the composition of which gner la Commission de bons offices pour 1'lndowould remain unchanged. Moreover, any extenw nesie sous le nom de Commission des Nations
sion of the Committee's terms of reference would Unies pour l'Indonesie, sans en changer aucunegive the United States representative, who plays ment la composition. D'autre part, l'elargissement
a leading part in that body, still greater oppor- du mandat de la Commission permettrait au
tunities to intervene in the domestic affairs of representant des Etats-Unis, qui joue a cette
Commission le role principal, d'intervenir encore
Indonesia.
plus 1ibrement dans les affaires interieures de
I'Indonesie.
L'experience montre que, jusqu'a mall1tenant,
Experience shows that so far the purpose of
such intervention has been not to protect the laww cette intervention a eu pour but, non point de
ful interest of the Republic and its people but to protegeI' les interets legitimes de la Republique
cover up the policy of Netherlands agogressors and et du peup1e d'Indonesie, mais de couvnr la
to protect the interests of the American monopo· politique des agresseurs neerlandais et de JClies, which, as we know, ha.ve profitably invested fendre les jnten~ts des monopo1es americains. On
hundreds of millions of dollars in Indonesia and sait, en effet, que ces derniers ont investi des
work hand in glove with the Netherlands aggres- centaines de millions de dollars dans les riches
sors for the sl1ppression of the freedom and entreprises d'Indonesie et agissent la main dans
independence of the Indonesian Republic. Ex- la main avec les agresseurs neerland<lis en vue
perience shows that the Committee of Good d'ecraser l'independance et la liberte de la ReplIOffices has been nothing more than a screen bligtle d'Indonesie. L'experience montre que les
behind which the Netherlands authorities pre- autorites neerlandaises ont profite de l'existence
pared new acts of aggression against the Indo- de la Commission de bons offices pOllr r.1ieux prenesia Republic. This same Committee of Good parer 1es nouveaux ades d'agression qu'ils s'apOffices, given a new title and wider powers, will pretaient cl. commettre contre la Republique d'lnagain be nothing but a screen enabling the Nether· donesie. Cette Commission de bans offices, meme
lands authorities to take advantage of the results si on la baptisait aulrement, meme si on llli accorof aggression by abolishing the Indonesian Re- dait un mandat plus lal-ge, resterait toujours un
pllblic altogether and by continuing their attempts simple ecran a l'abri duquelles autorites neerlan w
to deprive the people of the Republic of their daises pourraient tirer le meilleur paIti de I'agresfreedom and independence and to drive them back sion qu'elIes avaient commise en vue d'aneantir
into colonial slavery.
definitivement la Reptlbllque d'Indonesie. La
Commission continuera a aider les l-Iollandais
dans leurs efforts pour fruster le peup1e de la
Republique de sa liberte et de son independance,
et' pour lui imposer, de nOllveau, le :regime de
servitude coloniale.

18
I"or these reasons, the proposal to set up such
a commission is unacceptable to the USSR dde~
gation. Instead of demanding the withdrawal of
Netherlands troops as first a step towards settling
the conflict between the Netherlands and the
Republic of Indonesia and towards the restoration of justice and the protection of the legitimate
interests of the Repuhlic, tlle authors of the
draft resolution confine themselves to instructing
the commission to submit at some undefined
future date recommendations concerning the
extent to which areas conn-olled by the Republic
under the Renville Agreement may be progressively returned to the administration ef the
Government e£ the Republic of Indonesia.

Even this nebulous proposal, however, has a
n:lmber of qualifying statements, the effect, of
Wllich is tc deprive it of any practical meaning.
Among the3e qualifications is the use of the word
"progressively"-this word calls for quotation
marks-and the statement that the proposed
rneasures shall be "consistent . . . with public
security". There is even a solicitous provision
for retaining Netherlands armed farces in any
area of the Republic under the rretext that they
may "assist in the maintenance of law and order".
Thus we see that the draft resolution does not
Jl!ovide fcr an immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Netherlands treops from the territory of the Indonesian Republic. It leaves the
question of their withdrawal to the disc,etion of
t~e comm:ssion and to the discretion of the
Netherlands occupation authorities themselves.
Such a prcposal call therefore be considered only
as an attempt to strengthen and legitimize the
forcible occupation of the Republic's territory by
6e armed forces of the Netherlands.

Voila. pourquoi la delegatioll de l'URSS ne
creer
saurait accepter la proposition tendant
une commission de ce genre. Les auteurs de ce
projet de resolution 'n'exigent pas le retrait des
troupes :1eerlandaises qui constitue pOurtant une
des premieres mesures necessaires au reglement
du conflit entre Jes Pays~Bas et la Republiqne
d'Indonesie et qui devrait pennettre de retablir
la justice et de dffendre les interets legitimes de
la Republique. Ils se contentent, au contrail'e, de
la commissiO:1 de presenter,
un
demander
moment qui n'est pas specific, des recommandations sur la mesure dans laquelle les regions
de la ~epublique en vertu de ['Acc'ord du
Renville pourront progressivement, etre de
nouveau confiees a l'admi:1istration du Gouver~ement de cette Republique.
Mais ceUe nebuleuse proposition, elle-meme.
est ento'.uee d'une serie de reserves qui la ren;dent, au fond, depourvue de toute signification
pratique, Ces reserves portent notamment sur
le "progressivement" - il convient de mettre ces
mats entre guillemets - sur le fait que toutes
les demandes doivent tenir comp~e des "e.". igences . . . de la "securitl~", et meme prennent
sain de prevoir que les troupes neerlandaises
seront maintenues dans chacune des regions de
la Republique sous pretexte de "contribuer au
maintier: de l'ordre public".
Le projet de resolution ne prevoit donc pas
l'evacuation immffiiate et inconditionnelle du territoire de la Repl1blique d'Indonesie par les
troupes neer1andaises. n laisse la commission et
1es autorites d'occupation m~erlandaises ellesmemes juges de cette CJuestion. En conseque~re,
cette proposition constltut- taut simplement une
tentati\'e pour legitimer et consacrer l'occupa:ion
du terri:oire de lE Republique par les forces militaires m~erlandaises,

a

a

a

La delegation de ]'URSS considere qlle tOl1tes
The USSR delegation hold that all Netherlands
troops must be withdrawn frcm the territory of les trotl:Jes neerlandaises c.oivent etre retirees du
the Indonesian Republic immediately and without territoire de la Republique d'Indonesie imme~
conditions or exceptions and 6at the question of diatement et sans aucune conditicn ni aucune
tnis withdrawal cannot be left to the discretion . excepticn, que cette evacuation ne saurait relever
cf the commission and still less to that of the de la commission et encore mains des autorites
J\Tetherlands mlthorities, whic:l have even tried neerlandaises, qui ont tente de justifier lem·
to excltse their aggression against the Indonesian agression cantre la Repllbliql1e d'Indonesie en
Republic by references te tile "maintenance of invoquant la necessite de "mair:tenir l'ordre
law and order".
public" .
En ce qui concerne le maintien de l'ordre puLaw ani order in the terr.tory of the Indo·
nesian Republic must be maintained not by the blic sur le territoire de la Republique d'Indonesie,
armed forces of foreign invaders, but by the il doit etre asstl!e par le Gouver...ement de la
Government of the Republic itself. ElCperience Republiqlle lui-meme, et non par des occupants
has shown that the Government af the Republic etrangers. L'experiencc Inontre que ce Gouveris capable of establishing and maintaining law nement est carab1e d'etablir et de maintenir
and order without the intervention of foreign l'ordre et la securite sans l'intervention d'agrest:surpers. Ta~e away the N etherlanc.s troops seurs etrallgers. Qu'on retire les forces neerl~­
from the temtory of the Indonesian Republic, daises eu territoire de la Republiql1e d'Indone';le,
~nfer full freedom and sovereign rignts on its qu'on laissc au Gouv<:rnement de celle-ci pleme
Govern':lent, and, beyond any doubt, law and liberte et pleine sOl1verainete, et on verra, ;;ans
order WIll be restored and maintained.
aucun doute, que l'ordre et la legalite seront retablis et assures.
In this connexion, attention must be drawn to
A C~ propos, 11 y a lil:1I de :rde\'er unc decla.t~e attempts of the United Kingdom representa- ration du representant dll Royal1me-Uni [40011111&
t:ve [400tA meeting) to introduce the :dea of a seafice] qui a tente de nous persnader que, le
"dangerous vacuum" which in his opinion might retrait des troupes neerlandaises pourrait aeer
be formed by the withdrawal of the Netherlands un "vide dangereux", etant donne gu'il n'y a
troops and to his assertion that there are no forces pas, su:' le territoire de la RepttbJique, de forces
capable of maintaining order in the territorv of suscepfbles de maintenir l'ordre. L'existellce et
tIle Republic. Tile .existence and activity of gov- l'activit~ de Gouvernements et d'autorites locales

19

ernments and local authorities in a number of
countries of Asia and the three years of existence
of the Indonesian Republic and its Government
have demonstcated that the peoples and authorities
of these countries are very well able to do witho·J.t
foreign occupation troops and are capable of
maintaining law and order in their territory, provided of course that their free and independent
existence is not threatened by aggressive colonial
Powers.

dans une serie de pays de l'Asie, l'experience des
trois annees pendant lesquelles la Republique
d'Indonesie a existe, montrent que les peuples
et les Gouvernements de ces pays peuvent fort
bien se passer des troupes d'occupation etrangeres
et qu'ils sont capables de maintenir chez eux la
h~galite et I'ordre, a condition, bien entendu, que
l~s Puissances colonialistes pratiquant une politique d'agression ne genent pas la libre existence
de ces pays et n'attentent pas a lellr independance.

As to the wish expressed in the draft resolu~
tioD that free and democratic elections should be
held in Indonesia and in the terirtory of the
Republic, no such wish or proposal can have any
real meaning unless the question of the withdrawal of the Netherlands troops from the territory of the Republic is settled beforehand; that
wish is therefore entirely false and hYllocritical.
If the Security Council were to decide that elections in the Republic should be carried out under
the occupation regime, the only result would be
to create false and harmful illusions.

Quant a la recommandation contenne dans le
projet de resolution et tendant a l'organisation
d'elections lib res et democratiques en Indonesie
et sur le territoire de la RepubJique, elle ne saurait avoir, meme si elle prenait la forme d'une
proposition, aUCllne importance reelle tant que
la question du retrait des trOllpes neerlandaises
stationnees en territoire de la Republique n'aura
pas Cte reglee. Cette recommandation constitue,
par consequent, une simple hypocrisie. L'adoption par le Conseil de securite d'une resolution
tendant a l'organisation d'elections dans la Republique, alors meme que celle-ci se trouve placee
sous un regime d'occnpation, ne pourrait que
donner naissance a des illusions faIlacieuses et
dangereuses.

Thus an analysis of the substance of the draft
resolution shows that its verbose pl1Taseology
conceals the following purposes and intentions,
which are unacceptable and contrary to the
Nations Charter: first, to abolish the Indonesian
Republic and to do away with its Government;
and secondly, to make it easier for the aggressor
to consolidate his shaky positon in the country he
hliS invaded,

Ainsi done, il suffit d'examiner quant nu fond
le projet de resolution qui naus a ete presente
pour se relldre compte que cette phraseologie
redondante ne sert qu'a dissimuler des buts et
des intentions inadmissibles et incompatibles avec
la Chute des Nations Unies: en premier lieu,
on vise a supprimer la Reptlblique d'Indonesie
et a. liquider son GOllvernement, et, en second
lieu, on cherche a aider l'agresseur a consolider
sa position vacillante clans le pays dont il s'est
empare.

Such u resolution can be (lescribed only as a
blank refusal to protect the legitimate interests
of the Republic which has fallen victim to militaryattack, Like all the peoples of the world, the
Indonesian people cannot but regard the draft
resolution suhmitted by four delegations, with
the United States delegation in the lead, as the
outcome of the policy of barter and agreement
between the United States of America and the
Netherlands aggressors-a policy which is designed to put an end to the free and independent
existence of the Indonesian Republic and to
deliver it to the tender mercies of the aggressor.

Ce projet constitlle bel et bien un refus detiben~
de proteger les illterc~ts legitimes de la Republique
main armee.
devenue victime d'une agression
Ii est certain que le pel1ple d'Indonesie et les
peuples dl1 monde entier considereront le texte
presente par quatre delegations et, en premier
lieu, par la delegation des Etats-Unis, comme
contenant des propositions inspirees par une politique de marchandage et d'entente entre les EtatsUnis d'Amerique et les agresseurs neerlandais,
par une politique visant a mettre fin a ]'independance de la Republique d'lndonesie et a Evrer
cette derniere aux represailles de l'agresseur.

There is no need to prove the ntdimentary fact
that unless the Netherlands troops are withdrawn
from the territory of the Indonesian Republic
and the Republic itself is restored to its former
status, the adoption of such a resolution by the
Council would mean open approval of the N ether~
lands Government's aggre3sion against the Indonesian Republic.

Le fait est trap evident pour qu'il y ait besoin
de le demontrer: en adoptant une resolution de
ce genre, sans que les troupes neerlandaises
soient retirees du territoire de la Republique
d'Indonesie et sans que le statut interieur de la
Republique ait ete retabli, le Conseil de securite
sanctjonner~it ouvertement l'agression commise
par le Gouvernement neerlandais contre la Repu~
blique d'Indonesie.

The PRESIDEN'r: Unless there are any further
speakers, I propose to adjourn this meeting now,
The draft resolution which we have before us
in document 5/1219 is of such far.reaching
importance that I am sure that the parties, as
well as the members of the Security Council and
others interested, win wish to have sufficient

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): A moins
que d'autres orateurs ne veuillent prendre la
parole, je me propose de lever la seance. Le
projet de resolution dont nous sommes saisis et
qui figure au document 5/1219 revet Une importance telle que les parties en cause, Ies membres du Conseil et Ies autres pays interesses desi-

a

20
additional time to ensure its careful study. I
therefore propOSe that the meeting Qf the Security
CounciL should now be adjour ned until Tuesday,
25 January 1949, at 3 {I.m.
The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m.

reront, j'en suis stir, l'etudier a loisir. Dans ces
conditions, je propose au Conseil de s'ajoumer
jl1sql1'au roardi 25 janvier 1949, a 15 heures.

La seance est levee d 18 h. 05.
