S/PV.8376

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8376th meeting

Friday, 19 October 2018, 10 a..m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Cordova Soria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2018/866)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-33026 (E)
*1833026*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8376

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

to the Agreement, as reflected in the vital role played
by signatory armed groups in providing security at
several election sites in the north of the country. Such
consensus was undoubtedly the key factor that enabled
the election to be held according to the electoral
calendar and without major security incidents, despite
reports of unrest in the centre of the country.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2018/866)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/866, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the
members of the Security Council on the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
(S/2018/866), and to inform them of the latest political,
security and humanitarian developments in the country.
The past three months were marked by the holding
of a presidential election, which, as acknowledged by
all election observers, took place in a generally peaceful
atmosphere. I commend Prime Minister Soumeylou
Boubèye Maïga on his efforts to promote constructive
political dialogue throughout the process. I also
congratulate our colleague the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali, Mr. Annadif, whose
good offices played a crucial role in easing tensions.
The successful holding of the elections
demonstrated the political maturity of the Malian
people and the commitment of the political class to
the democratic process. In a particularly volatile
security environment, the successful organization of
the election also highlighted an important achievement
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali — the consensus reached among the signatories
2/22

19/10/2018

At the same time, the holding of the elections
should have been underpinned by further progress
in the implementation of key institutional reforms,
including the operationalization of interim authorities,
constitutional reform, security sector reform and the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process.
In addition, the important role the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) was forced to play in providing
security at election sites has highlighted the low
level of operationalization of the various Operational
Coordination Mechanism units. Delays in implementing
the Agreement, along with certain crucial but stagnant
initiatives to strengthen political dialogue, such as the
charter for peace and national reconciliation, have also
resulted in a lack of national cohesion, underscored by
a fragmented political landscape. Differences in the
electoral law and electoral register have also increased
the number of opposition challenges to the results.
I remain convinced that ongoing discussions for a
possible postponement of the parliamentary elections
will create a climate of consensus for successful
constitutional review and electoral governance reforms.
The elections will serve as a new litmus test of the
cohesion of Mali’s political class and society and as an
important step towards the consolidation of democratic
institutions. I therefore urge the Government and the
opposition to engage in constructive political dialogue,
based on inclusiveness and bearing national interests in
mind. I also encourage Malian political actors to take
the opportunity afforded by the presidential elections
to build a more representative Parliament by promoting
young people and women as candidates. In that regard,
I welcome the composition of the new Government,
which, in keeping with Malian law, is now more than
30 per cent female.
The pact for peace, as requested by the Security
Council in resolution 2423 (2018) and signed on
15 October by the Government and the United Nations at
the meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
is an essential tool to spur the efforts of the Malian
parties, supported by the international community, to
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

implement the Agreement and give new impetus to the
peace process by focusing on inclusiveness. The pact
does not replace the peace agreement. It underlines the
importance of implementing the main provisions of the
agreement, as stipulated in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the
resolution and in the road map adopted by the parties
on 22 March.
Progress on the implementation of the pact, as
well as on the key provisions of the agreement, will
be brought to the attention of the Security Council six
months after the inauguration of the President of the
Republic. If no progress has been made, those elements,
supported by the work of the independent observer,
will provide a solid basis for considering appropriate
measures, if necessary. In that regard, I welcome the
convening of the high-level meeting on Mali and the
Sahel on 26 September on the sidelines of the general
debate of the General Assembly here in New York,
which enabled us to reaffirm the key role played by
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
including in response to the challenges that have arisen
in the centre of the country. It was also an opportunity to
highlight the complementarity of the political response
in Mali, the support provided to the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
At the same time, I was encouraged during my
visit to Mali by the willingness of all parties to the
agreement to accelerate its implementation. The
creation of a ministry that is specifically responsible
for the implementation of the Agreement, headed by
Mr. Lassine Bouaré, is also a sign of the Government’s
strong commitment to pursuing that goal.
I would like to express to the Security Council my
extreme concern about the security situation in Mali,
especially in the centre of the country — a region in
which, during the two rounds of the presidential election,
almost 80 per cent of the polling stations affected by
a lack of security were concentrated. The SecretaryGeneral notes in his latest report that that three-month
period was the deadliest since the establishment of
MINUSMA in 2013. Some 287 civilians were killed
in targeted attacks, including by improvised explosive
devices or mines and intercommunity clashes between
armed self-defence or violent extremist groups.
That situation continues to restrict the access of
humanitarian actors to those who are most vulnerable
and to limit the scope of action in terms of development

S/PV. 8376

interventions. In addition to exacerbating the situation
with regard to humanitarian development in the
country, as well as human rights, it could perpetuate
a sense of frustration in the Malian population,
which is struggling to see the concrete benefits of
the agreement’s implementation materialize. The
restoration and extension of State authority must,
therefore, be a priority in order to contribute to the
delivery of concrete and measurable peace dividends
on the ground.
In that regard, as requested by the Security
Council in resolution 2423 (2018), MINUSMA and the
United Nations country team have begun developing a
comprehensive strategic framework in support of the
Malian Government’s comprehensive security plan for
the central regions. That framework will enable them
to coordinate their actions in support of governance,
peace and stabilization in order to improve their impact
on the ground in a comprehensive way.
(spoke in English)
Over the past few months, we have also been
witnessing an intensification in violent extremist
attacks in neighbouring Burkina Faso. Insecurity
is spreading fast, across and inside borders, with
consequences ranging from the forced displacement of
local communities to the erosion of State authority and
the sharply diminished delivery of basic social services.
That dire situation threatens not only the security of the
peoples of Mali and the Sahel, but international security
as a whole. We are all running against the clock.
In that context, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, for which
the Secretary-General continues to provide his steadfast
support, remains as relevant as ever. What is needed
is a regionally driven solution to address instability in
Mali and the region, which must be complemented by
initiatives aimed at improving governance, resilience
and development. Yet, if the Joint Force is to achieve
any positive results in its fight against terrorism and
transnational organized crime, it will require sustained
and appropriate support from its international partners.
Moreover, given the inter-operability and
complementarity of the Joint Force with MINUSMA,
it will be important to continue evaluating the impact
of the Mission over and against the progressive
operationalization of the Joint Force. That is an aspect
that will be reflected in the six-month progress report
requested by the Security Council to be submitted in
March 2019.

18-330263/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

Before concluding my remarks, I wish to draw the
Council’s attention to a more hopeful sign in the midst
of this challenging situation. We are indeed pleased to
report that the past months have shown a consistent and
marked decline in the number of peacekeepers killed or
injured, despite sustained attacks by violent extremist
groups. At this stage, while we should not attribute that
decline — at least not exclusively — to the impact of the
implementation of the recommendations of the report
of retired Lieutenant General Santos Cruz, entitled
Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers,
this is, of course, an encouraging trend. However,
we must, of course, remain cautious; we do not know
what tomorrow will bring. We will certainly continue
our efforts to change mindsets and improve training
and equipment, so that our peacekeepers can continue
to deliver the Mission’s mandate in the best possible
conditions for their security and effectiveness.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his very enlightening
briefing. I also welcome the highly appreciated presence
of Ambassador Konfourou in the Council, who will
deliver a statement on behalf of Mali.
I wish to begin my statement by conveying our
wishes for a speedy recovery to the five Chadian soldiers
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) who were
seriously injured when their vehicle passed over an
explosive device yesterday in northern Mali. I also pay
tribute to the memory of Corporal Abdelatif Rafik, who
died under accidental circumstances on Wednesday in
Gao during Operation Barkhane. His death brings the
number of French soldiers who have died in Mali since
2013 to 23. Finally, our thoughts go out to all the Malian
and regional soldiers and MINUSMA Blue Helmets
who have lost their lives in recent months while
combating terrorism and promoting peace in Mali and
the Sahel. Their sacrifice must be heeded by all of us in
our reflections on our obligations.
The election that led to the reappointment of
President Keita was an important moment in Malian
democratic life. I wish to commend the decisive role
played by MINUSMA, both through its good offices
4/22

19/10/2018

and its logistical and security support, to ensure that
the election was conducted in satisfactory conditions,
as has been acknowledged by the Council and all
observers present on the ground. It is now essential that
all Malian political actors move forward, recognizing
the results of the election and working together for
the stabilization of the country. The announced
postponement of the legislative elections for a few
months, following a favourable opinion on the part of
the Constitutional Court, is also welcome. That should
make it possible to implement, in the meantime, several
institutional reforms that will have a direct impact on
those elections.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali must remain the top priority. The
signing of the pact for peace, just a few months after the
adoption of resolution 2423 (2018), is good news. That
document notes, in particular, the commitment of all
Malian parties and international actors to the swift, full
and inclusive work of implementing the agreement. It is
now up to us to support that dynamic by mobilizing all
of the tools available to the international community to
encourage the parties to move forward. In particular,
we hope that the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali will continue
its work in the coming weeks by visiting the country
itself, which will enable it to make contact with all of
the Malian parties, as well as with various international
mediation actors. In that regard, I would like to
commend the work carried out by Sweden as Chair of
that Committee.
But let us make no mistake — there is still much
progress that needs to be made, and urgently. Resolution
2423 (2018) provides a clear framework in that regard
by defining a list of priority measures resulting
from the road map agreed by the Malian parties. Its
implementation will be examined in a report of the
Secretary-General to be submitted every six months
once the Malian President assumes power. That period
has already begun and merits our full engagement. It is
necessary that we act now.
The past few weeks have witnessed the start of a
positive dynamic that we must welcome, encourage
and strengthen. I am referring in particular to the
announcement of the upcoming launch of an accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process for Operational Coordination Mechanism
combatants, the ongoing finalization of the northern
regions development zone, the granting of greater
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

roles for women within the new Government, and the
establishment of a weekly consultation framework
among the various Malian parties under the leadership
of Minister Lassine Вouaré. Those are all indications
that illustrate for us the will of the parties to step up
the pace of the implementation of the Agreement.
Continued progress is clearly needed, especially with
regard to the institutional component and the areas
of justice
​​
and reconciliation. Once again, however, a
positive dynamic has been initiated, and it is essential
that it bear results in the coming weeks.
As the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations recalled earlier, the continuing deterioration
of the situation in the centre of the country continues to
be of great concern to us. The attacks of recent days
illustrate the gravity of the threat weighing on that
part of Mali and, more generally, the Liptako-Gourma
region. We commend the actions taken by the Prime
Minister in addressing that issue and his recent visits to
the region to encourage the return of a State presence
and authority in the centre. It is imperative that the
international community fully support those efforts
so that the Malian State has the necessary additional
resources at its disposal to regain control of the centre.
The redeployment of the Malian armed forces in
that area is one part of the equation. Tools have been
put in place in MINUSMA’s mandate to support that
undertaking since June 2017. It is important that
the Malian authorities and the Mission make better
use of them. We also expect MINUSMA to continue
to implement the new directions in its mandate with
regard to the protection of civilians with the means
at their disposal, while avoiding compromising the
strategic priority of supporting the implementation of
the agreement.
France emphasizes the fact that the stabilization
of Mali and the region can be achieved only through
the complementary and coordinated action of the
various security forces on the ground, which all share
the same goal of supporting the implementation of
the Agreement. The support provided by Operation
Barkhane to the Malian armed forces within the
framework of a counter-terrorist operation within
the three-border region this week exemplifies the
advantages of such an approach based on partnerships.
On another level, the same applies to the operational and
logistical support regularly shared among the various
actors. Resolution 2423 (2018) sent a clear message in
that regard, according to which each entity must play its

S/PV. 8376

individual role within the limits of its mandate, but all
must coordinate and support one another on the ground
in the prevailing difficult circumstances. Let us not
forget that the enemies of peace have not waited for us
to begin cooperating among themselves.
As we collectively expressed in the adoption of
resolution 2423 (2018), the urgency now lies with
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. The six-month period for implementing
the priority measures identified by the Council has
begun. The Malian parties must now concentrate all
their energies to that end. France will issue a press
statement to that effect at the end of this meeting.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation echoes the expression of sympathy
and condolences that the representative of France
offered at the beginning of his statement.
My delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for his comprehensive
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/866) on the latest developments in the political,
security and humanitarian situation in Mali.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the peaceful holding of
the presidential elections on 29 July and 12 August in
Mali, which saw the re-election of the President, His
Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita. As rightly
pointed out in the Secretary-General’s report, those
elections have demonstrated the profound aspirations
of the Malian people for peace, as well as the coming
of age of the political class throughout each stage
of the electoral process. Côte d’Ivoire notes with
satisfaction that the much-feared violence by armed
groups was avoided and did not affect the inclusivity
or credibility of the elections, particularly in the north
and centre of the country. We note the decision of the
Malian authorities, together with the Malian political
class, to postpone the legislative elections, which were
initially scheduled for late 2018, and we encourage
them to ensure the holding of those elections as soon as
possible so as to complete the electoral process, which
will ensure peace and stability.
In order to maintain the positive momentum, Côte
d’Ivoire once again urges the Malian Government and
all political actors to work more effectively, while
overlooking their differences, to preserve peace and

18-330265/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

stability in Mali. In that regard, my country welcomes
the 15 October signing of the pact for peace between
the Government of Mali and the United Nations, in
accordance with resolution 2423 (2018). The pact
aims to give a new impetus to the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Paragraph 7 of the pact stipulates that decisions
reached through international mediation are binding,
thereby strengthening the role of international actors,
including the United Nations. In that regard, my
country encourages the international actors to pursue
their multifaceted assistance so as to achieve peace and
stability in Mali despite persistent difficulties.
Côte d’Ivoire also commends the efforts of the
Government of Mali with regard to the political and
institutional measures undertaken, including the
re-establishment of the Malian Administration. Those
efforts were realized through the appointment of
interim authorities in 21 districts of the five northern
regions, the progressive operationalization of the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
the regions of Kidal and Timbuktu, and the adoption
of the national security-sector reform strategy. My
delegation also calls for the finalization of the vision for
the reconstitution of a new army and of the territorial
police, with a view to ensuring the improved protection
of the civilian population in the north and centre of
the country.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with concern, however, the
Secretary-General’s observations concerning the
persistence of security incidents in central Mali. My
country believes that it is urgent to respond expeditiously
and appropriately to intercommunal violence and
allegations of abuse attributed to members of the
Malian armed forces. To that end, the implementation
of the integrated security plan for the central regions
should be supported by multifaceted initiatives aimed
at strengthening governance, development and, above
all, reconciliation among communities.
To date, MINUSMA is a key pillar of the current
security apparatus in Mali and the region. Working in
complementarity with the various forces on the ground,
namely, the Malian armed forces, Operation Barkhane,
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) and the European missions, provides an added
value in combating insecurity and terrorism in Mali.
It is therefore imperative to strengthen the operational
capabilities of MINUSMA in order to enable it to react
and even predict attacks effectively on its civilian
6/22

19/10/2018

and military personnel and to continue to support the
Malian armed forces.
The worrying spread of terrorist attacks into
certain neighbouring countries is a stark reminder that
combating terrorism and organized cross-border crime
is a regional security issue that requires the coordinated
efforts of all regional and international actors. Côte
d’Ivoire therefore welcomes the unity of the Council
and the international community’s consistent support
for MINUSMA and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It
also welcomes the commitment of all bilateral and
multilateral partners that are working tirelessly to
restore and consolidate peace and stability in Mali and
the subregion.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call
on the parties concerned to work towards providing
basic social services and the operationalization of
programmes to combat poverty and unemployment,
particularly in the northern part of Mali and the Sahel,
which are recruitment and breeding grounds for
terrorist movements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for today’s briefing.
Implementing the mandate of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) is an incredibly challenging task. A
large part of that mandate — with a force of more than
12,000 personnel in a country the size of Mali — takes
the right leader, and MINUSMA found that leader in
Major General Jean-Paul Deconinck. He completed
his command on 2 October, and we are grateful for his
leadership during his time as Force Commander. We
welcome the new Force Commander of MINUSMA,
Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre, and thank
him for his commitment in taking on such a challenging
assignment. Most importantly, we want to thank the
soldiers, police and civilians of MINUSMA, who risk
their lives every day to support the Mission in Mali.
That includes the latest troop-contributing countries,
Canada and Jordan. The United States is grateful to all
troop contributors to the Mission, and we honour their
collective commitments and sacrifices to the effort to
stabilize Mali. We also commend MINUSMA’s efforts
this past summer in supporting the presidential elections.
We are concerned, however, by reports of some
troop-contributing countries not being deployed with
all the equipment that they had committed to bringing.
That heightens the risk to their units and to the overall
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

Mission, and we call on troop-contributing countries
to follow through on their equipment commitments.
We share the Secretary-General’s view regarding the
political progress made in Mali since MINUSMA’s
mandate renewal in June. The pact for peace, which was
finalized this week, the completion of the presidential
elections and the establishment of President Keita’s
Government provide cause for some cautious optimism
in reinvigorating the peace process. But the work must
not stop here. The Government of Mali and the signatory
parties must use that momentum to make clear and
swift gains in implementing the key provisions of the
road map.
Increased reports of violent extremist attacks
against MINUSMA peacekeepers, Malian and
international security forces, and especially civilians,
as well as the growing humanitarian crisis in the centre
of Mali, are extremely unsettling. The heartbreaking
story this week from the village of Telly that gunmen
had killed approximately a dozen civilians reminds
us of the urgency of finding an enduring solution.
This year’s mandate asked MINUSMA to continue
to support the Government of Mali in stabilizing key
population centres in the north, centre and other areas
where civilians are at risk. We call on the Government
and the Mission to protect civilians and strengthen
community outreach mechanisms so as to end the
intercommunal violence that is propagated by selfproclaimed self-defence groups. We also call on the
Malian forces to respect human rights and comply with
applicable international law in all aspects of operations,
and we urge the Government to continue to pursue
accountability for those responsible for past human
rights violations and abuses.
Council resolution 2423 (2018) is clear — signatory
parties must show significant progress or face changes to
MINUSMA after the expiration of its current mandate.
We implore all parties to take that timeline seriously
and show the world their commitment to a peaceful
and stable Mali through the rapid implementation of
the key provisions of the road map stipulated in this
year’s mandate.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin
by thanking the Permanent Representative of Mali,
Ambassador Konfourou, for joining the discussions
today, and let me also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his informative briefing.

S/PV. 8376

We recognize recent progress in the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
and particularly welcome the signing of the pact for peace
in Bamako earlier this week. It is now important that the
parties redouble their efforts to carry out key reforms,
as outlined by the pact and resolution 2423 (2018).
The reforms relating to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, as well as to decentralization and
security-sector reform, the rule of law, social cohesion
and socioeconomic development, should now be taken
forward without any delay. It is also important that
the mixed patrols of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism be able to begin patrolling and that regional
and local interim authorities be made fully operational.
The Council and other partners should continue to
support the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation through established mechanisms.
We call on all parties to take full advantage of that
support, including the independent observer and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) concerning Mali. As Chair of that Committee,
Ambassador Skoog plans to visit Mali later this year.
Inclusivity is essential for long-term stability. We
therefore welcome the commitment in the Pact for Peace
to seeking an inclusive approach to the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.
We hope that the Government will translate that
commitment into further action without delay. As
underlined by the Council in resolution 2423 (2018), the
parties should ensure the full and equal participation
of women in the peace process, including through the
greater representation of women in the mechanisms
established by the Agreement to support and monitor its
implementation, as well as in the upcoming elections.
The continued deterioration in the security
situation, in particular in central Mali, remains of
great concern. We are particularly alarmed by the
increasing number of civilian casualties, now the
highest number during any reporting period since the
deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We are also deeply concerned by the spillover of
insecurity into Burkina Faso and the wider region.
The targeted attacks on civilians and intercommunal
clashes, limited access to humanitarian support and
inadequate access to basic social services and justice
are deeply concerning. Allegations of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law,
reports of widespread conflict-related sexual violence

18-330267/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

and grave violations against children further add to
those concerns. We call on the Malian Government to
increase efforts to prevent and investigate human rights
violations and abuses, including those committed by
the Malian armed forces.
It is now urgent to stem the tide of violence and
carefully assess our joint approach to the protection of
civilians in the central regions. That includes assessing
the approach of the Government, the United Nations
and other actors. Addressing the root causes of the
situation must also be part of that analysis. We welcome
further information on the ongoing efforts in that
regard, including in relation to resolution 2423 (2018)
and the Government’s integrated security plan. We also
commend the efforts of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, and we continue to advocate for
sustained support.
Sweden remains a committed partner to Mali
and the entire Sahel region in their efforts to enhance
security and development and build sustainable peace.
Our broader commitment includes support through the
United Nations and the European Union, and through
bilateral and regional development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance. It also includes a substantial
troop contribution to MINUSMA, where Swedish
Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre took up his
functions as Force Commander of MINUSMA on
2 October. We will continue to strongly support the
Mission, including through continuous engagement
on the commitments made within the framework of
the Action for Peacekeeping agenda. The decline
in the number of peacekeeper fatalities in Mali is
encouraging. It is important, however, that measures
be taken to enhance the mobility of troops, with the
aim of achieving greater operational effect in parallel
with the efforts to strengthen the safety and security
of peacekeepers.
Long-term stability and prosperity in Mali can be
achieved only through a combination of security and
development support. Strategic coordination must
continue to be strengthened within MINUSMA and
the United Nations, as well as coordination with the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and other partners. It is also important
that cooperation be further enhanced between the
countries in the Sahel region and the United Nations,
including the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, so as to further advance the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. The Peacebuilding
8/22

19/10/2018

Commission offers an important forum for continuing
discussions in that regard, including as steps are taken
to transfer certain tasks to the United Nations country
team and other development partners.
During the three years since the signing of the
peace agreement for Mali, important progress has
been made, but much still needs to be done to advance
its effective implementation. We commend all of the
efforts made and continue to urge all parties to take
further steps without delay. Sweden will continue to
offer its full support.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing. We
also welcome the presence of Ambassador Konfourou
of Mali in the Council today. As an observer member of
the African Union, we commend and associate ourselves
with the statement made by the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire and statements that will be made today by other
members of the African troika, namely, Equatorial
Guinea and Ethiopia. We endorse the recommendations
in the Secretary-General’s quarterly report (S/2018/866)
and would like to make the following observations
regarding the situation in Mali.
At the outset, we would like to congratulate the
people of Mali on the peaceful and successful conduct
of their presidential elections. We commend the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for its logistical and
technical assistance to the electoral process, and praise
Special Representative Annadif and the representatives
of the African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), as well as France
and Operation Barkhane, for their important role in
facilitating peaceful dialogue among the political
parties and ensuring stability in the country.
Every effort should now be made to accelerate
the implementation of the remaining provisions of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Kazakhstan acknowledges the progress made in
appointing interim authorities, operationalizing mixed
units in the northern regions and adopting a national
security-sector reform strategy. My delegation also
welcomes the signing of a pact for peace between the
Government of Mali and the United Nations, which we
believe will significantly contribute to the fulfilment of
the Agreement. The genuine inclusion of women in the
peace process and in decision-making is also important
18-33026

The situation in Mali

19/10/2018

for lasting stability. In that regard, we recognize and
appreciate the important work done by the Government
of Mali so far to improve the human rights situation
in the country, and encourage it to continue its muchneeded efforts in this direction.
At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the growing cycle of violence in northern and central
Mali, which has led to a significant deterioration in
the humanitarian situation there. We urge all sides to
comply with the relevant provisions of international
law and call on international partners and donors to
fund the humanitarian response plan for 2018.
Violent extremism and terrorism remain the
main sources of instability. To counter these scourges
with the overall goal of establishing a terrorismfree Africa, we need an approach that links security
and development efforts. The challenges in Mali are
common to all countries of the region and elsewhere
in Africa. I would like to underline that during the
Council’s recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its previous visits to Lake Chad,
West Africa and other conflict zones, we have heard
the desire of host countries to devote more resources
to economic development and the promotion of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), based on
a regional approach. Indeed, a regional approach is
crucially important to progress on the political, security
and environmental fronts. Unfortunately, that focus is
missing from the mandates of almost all peacekeeping
operations, but we understand that there are objective
reasons for that.
In that regard, we welcome General Assembly
resolution 72/279, on the repositioning of the United
Nations development system in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s new agenda for peace and his United Nations
reform programme, one of the main elements of which
is a revamped regional approach. For instance, in
West Africa and the Sahel, we see an obvious need for
introducing a separate team for specifically addressing
the SDGs so as not to overload the existing regional
United Nations offices, and which we believe could
function in close collaboration with ECOWAS. In
that regard, the proposed launch of an SDG centre in
Kazakhstan for our part of the world could serve as a
pilot project that could be further implemented in the
African region.
Priority should also be
reconciliation,
ensuring

given
basic

to

national
services,

S/PV. 8376

resilience-building, a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, good governance and the
rule of law. Equally important are educating children
and employing young people, who together constitute
about 65 per cent of the Malian population. These are
all essential to achieving lasting peace and stability
in Mali.
Combating terrorism and other cross-border
threats in Mali and its neighbours will succeed only
if these measures are implemented comprehensively
throughout the Sahel region as a whole. We support the
full operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel and underscore the importance of
sustainable funding for it. We also call on all parties
in Mali and the countries of the region to make every
effort to implement the recently recalibrated United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, which is a
good basis for strengthened regional cooperation.
With regard to MINUSMA, we welcome the
Mission’s measures to reprioritize its tasks aimed at
expanding its role in advancing the peace process. We
also praise its successful implementation of its action
plan to reduce peacekeeper fatalities. At the same
time, it is critical to address the Mission’s remaining
capability gaps by providing better equipment and
predeployment training that prepares contingents for
the asymmetric conflict situations that Mali presents. It
also important to protect the Malians themselves.
In conclusion, we commend Special Representative
Annadif and all the brave men and women representing
the United Nations for their commitment to peace in
such a hazardous, hostile and challenging environment.
Lastly, we fully support the outcome document
proposed by the Permanent Representative of France.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
very informative briefing on recent developments
in Mali. I would like to focus on three issues: the
political process, the human rights situation and the
security situation.
First, on the political process, we commend the
Malian people for their peaceful and successful holding
of the presidential elections within the time frame
set by the Constitution, despite several anomalies
and some security incidents in northern and central
Mali. Following the re-election of President Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, we welcome his renewed commitment
to the swift and full implementation of the remaining

18-330269/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

key provisions of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. In that regard, we commend
the Government of Mali and the United Nations for
signing a pact for peace, in accordance with resolution
2423 (2018), at the last session of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee in October. The pact represents
new momentum for political reforms in areas such as
decentralization, the security sector and the rule of
law, as well as socioeconomic development based on
greater inclusiveness and with the coherent support of
international and regional partners.
Secondly, the human rights situation remains
alarming. We therefore call on the Malian Government
to prevent human rights violations and abuses,
including those committed by Malian armed forces
when conducting counter-terrorism operations. Full and
timely investigations into all allegations are essential,
as are measures designed to bring perpetrators of these
crimes to account.
We also want to underline the responsibility of the
Malian authorities to take every action necessary to
swiftly investigate and prosecute perpetrators of crimes
and grave human rights abuses against civilians, as well
as those responsible for attacks against humanitarian
workers, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
international forces and Malian defence and security
forces. Taking into account MINUSMA’s crucial role
in stabilizing Mali, we welcome its efforts aimed at
improving the security of United Nations peacekeepers,
which have resulted in a reduction of fatalities and
casualties in the Mission.
The impact of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel on the stabilization of the region cannot
be ignored. We therefore welcome the efforts made
towards operationalizing the Joint Force, including
its police component, which will ensure continuity
between Joint Force operations and the judicial
systems, in accordance with the rule of law and human
rights. We also take note of the appointment of the Joint
Force’s new Force Commander, General Hanena Ould
Sidi of Mauritania, and his assumption of his duties.
In conclusion, Poland commends Special
Representative Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his
excellent leadership, and all United Nations civilian
and uniformed personnel for their continued hard work
in a challenging environment. We also welcome the
10/22

19/10/2018

appointment of Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre
of Sweden as Force Commander of MINUSMA.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for his briefing.
Russia welcomed the successful holding of
presidential elections in Mali in July and August. We
are pleased that the voting took place without serious
violations or incidents, according to African and
international observers. We are grateful to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for its timely provision
of logistics and technical assistance for the preparation
for the elections. We hope that the election results will
contribute to restoring peace and achieving national
harmony in Mali and will enable Malian society to cope
with its ongoing problems and deal more effectively with
the terrorist threat in the Sahara-Sahel region generally.
We note Bamako’s efforts to restore a State
presence in northern Mali. The work on organizing
municipal bodies has been stepped up since the summer
and temporary administrations have been appointed in
most districts. Importantly, the Government has begun
to help to stimulate economic activity in those areas,
which is the best antidote to new social disturbances.
We also note that Malians are making efforts to
reform the security sector. The emphasis here should
be on implementing the 2015 Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement.
Strengthening
confidence-building
measures and collaboration between the country’s
armed forces and the groups under the control of the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and the
Platform should become the basis for restoring peace
and order. We support starting joint patrols in Gao as
soon as possible.
We welcome the signing on 15 October of a pact
for peace between the Malian authorities and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. It is
important that representatives of the Platform and the
Coordination also announced their commitment to the
document. We hope that it represents an additional
guarantee that the parties will implement the road map
and the Peace Agreement, as provided for in resolution
2423 (2018).
While acknowledging the obvious positive
developments in the work of achieving a settlement
in Mali, we should not omit to point out some other
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

and unfortunately less encouraging trends there. We
are concerned about the sharp jump in the number of
terrorist acts in the past three months. Interethnic and
intercommunal conflicts are becoming increasingly
intense in central Mali, and the situation is complicated
by the fact that the presence of the authorities in these
areas is still at a critically low level. In that regard,
we should note the results that MINUSMA has had in
reconciling the hostile parties.
We are also concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. The number of people in need
of help has gone up almost one and a half times over the
past year, a very worrying trend. We call on all outside
donors to fulfil their funding commitments for the
humanitarian appeal. We should remind everyone that
the desperate circumstances that Mali’s young people
find themselves in leave them with nowhere to go but to
join the ranks of terrorist, extremist or criminal groups.
The situation in Mali is a significant factor for
African security generally. However, neither will it
possible to reach a settlement there without normalizing
the situation in the entire region. The Libya factor is still
playing a negative role in that regard. The connections
between the terrorists operating in Mali and in the
region as a whole are becoming increasingly visible. In
that regard, we support the concrete steps taken by the
States of the Group of Five for the Sahel to form their
Joint Force to fight terrorism and organized crime, and
we hope that their role in ensuring regional security
will increase.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
his useful briefing on recent developments in Mali,
particularly in the wake of the presidential elections
held in July.
Since Ambassador Issa Konfourou, Permanent
Representative of Mali, is here with us today, I take
this opportunity to congratulate President Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita on his re-election as Mali’s Head of
State. I also express my country’s satisfaction regarding
the fact that the electoral process was transparent and
credible, and commend the efforts of the Government
and all political stakeholders, as well as international
partners, to that end.
I would like to address three aspects of the subject
under discussion today.

S/PV. 8376

First, with respect to the political situation, we
have closely followed recent political developments
in Mali and also listened to the address delivered by
the President of the Republic of Mali to the General
Assembly during the general debate last month (see
A/73/PV.8), in which he presented his Government’s
priorities for the upcoming period, including its focus
on the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the serious steps taken by
his Government in that regard. Kuwait welcomes this
positive development.
During the past few months we have witnessed the
restoration of Government authority in northern and
central Mali, and we also note that the Government
has prepared a national strategy for security sector
reform. We further commend the efforts of Prime
Minister Maïga to achieve stability. He recently visited
central Mali, a region that is suffering from instability
and an absence of State authority. He is also working
to expedite the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.
We welcomed the signing last Monday of the pact
for peace between the United Nations, the Government,
the Platform Platform coalition of armed groups and the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad, renewing
the commitment of all parties to the implementation of
the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, in
implemention of paragraph 5 of resolution 2423 (2018).
We want to emphasize the important role played by
the international mediation team, under the leadership
of Algeria, in monitoring developments and making
tangible progress.
With regard to the presidential elections held in
July, we commend the efforts of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and Special Representative
Annadif for their efforts during and after the election
process, including the provision of technical, logistical
and security support with a view to reducing tensions
between the various parties. We urge everyone to
respect the election results and prepare for the upcoming
parliamentary elections, which were postponed until
next year with the approval of all stakeholders. We
hope that the postponement will allow enough time
to implement the necessary reforms in the country,
pursuant to the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement,
and with the participation of all political parties.

18-3302611/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

Secondly, concerning the security and humanitarian
situations, we are still concerned about the unstable
security situation in some regions of Mali. The threats
posed by terrorist groups still exist, and we have seen
their impact on the most recent electoral process. We
value the efforts of the Malian forces and MINUSMA to
contain those threats and prevent the security situation
from deteriorating further. However, the terrorist
groups are not only a threat to all military forces, but
are increasingly threateningcivilians. We deeply regret
the killing of 287 civilians during the reporting period.
Terrorist threats also led to the displacement of large
numbers of Malians. The number of those in need of
humanitarian aid amounts to nearly 5.2 million people.
We are also concerned about the increasing threats
targeting humanitarian workers, who are undertaking
efforts to alleviate the suffering of the Malian people.
We have seen an increase in the use of improvised
explosive devices in 2018, rising to almost 130
incidents. However, the number of related casualties
has decreased. We apreciate the efforts of MINUSMA
in training and awareness-raising, and we encourage
it to pursue those efforts in the future. We also
underscore the importance of ensuring coordination
among the different active forces in Mali. We commend
the continuous support of MINUSMA to the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force, which
plays an essential role in combating the threats in the
Sahel region. We look forward to strengthening it to
the fullest.
Thirdly and lastly, with regard to the next steps,
we are aware that the Malian Government is in need of
time and resources to achieve security and stability and
restore the rule of law in Mali. After the latest presidential
elections and the reappointment of Prime Minister
Maïga, who has facilitated progress since the beginning
of his term, we look forward to a more focused approach
by the Government to ensure the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Kuwait
stands ready to cooperate with all Council members to
take the necessary measures in order to facilitate that
process. We urge all parties to build on the progress
attained so far.
Achieving sustainable development is essential
to the realization of peace and stability in Mali and
the region. It is also important to improve economic
conditions, because that would give Malians greater hope
for job opportunities and a better future. We welcome
the new strategic framework of the Government, which
12/22

19/10/2018

is based on achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and the vision for Mali 2040.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Issa Konfourou,
Permanent Representative of Mali and my personal
friend. We thank Mr. Koen Davidse for his service as
Deputy Special Representative for Mali, and we wish
every success to his replacement, Ms. Joanne Adamson,
who is here with us today.
Today, I would like to focus on three points: first,
the political and security situation; secondly, the peace
process; and thirdly, action for peacekeeping.
First, I will address the political and security
situation. Allow me to offer President Keita the sincere
congratulations of the Kingdom of the Netherlands on
his re-election. I would also like to commend the joint
and coordinated action of the international community,
including the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
in supporting the electoral process. In the wake of
the elections, tensions between the Government and
the opposition have persisted. It is essential that the
long-awaited reforms move forward. Decentralization
is an imperative. The electoral system needs to be
radically overhauled.
Malian citizens deserve to have a Government that
they can trust, and one that trusts them. The SecretaryGeneral considers the human rights situation alarming.
The fact that the Malian armed forces are directly linked
to 18 cases of violations of those rights raises serious
concerns. Four cases involve summary executions. We
urge the Malian Government to prevent and publicly
denounce human rights violations, including those
committed by Malian forces, such as in Boulikessi,
where 12 civilians were killed. The Government must
investigate allegations of violations and prosecute
the perpetrators. It is important therefore that those
responsible, as established by the investigations, not go
unpunished. That is particularly true in central Mali, a
region where human rights and the security situation
are deteriorating rapidly, as Mr. Lacroix mentioned.
The repercussions of Mali’s instability are felt
beyond the country’s borders, throughout the Sahel and
in Europe. The stability of the entire region is crucial
to the fight against such threats as trafficking in human
beings, illegal immigration, terrorism and organized
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

crime. We also call for the operationalization of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel). That includes the implementation of a strict
framework for human rights compliance. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands will maintain its strong commitment
as a partner for stability in the Sahel.
Secondly, I now turn to the peace process. Following
the elections, the President of Mali was re-elected. We
therefore expect a new impetus to be given to the peace
process and the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Admittedly, progress
has been made with regard to the peace process. But
the full implementation of the agreement is far from
assured. Malians have seen too few tangible results.
That is why we call on all parties concerned, and
especially the Government, to take up the challenge
and move forward, in the interest of the Malian State,
its population and the stability of the entire region.
The role of MINUSMA has been essential in
supporting the peace process and stabilization efforts
in northern Mali. In that regard, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s efforts to give new momentum to
the political process. We welcome the signing of the
pact for peace on Monday. We particularly welcome the
Government’s commitment to an inclusive approach.
The implementation of the pact should be as inclusive
as possible. It must embody the voice and effective
participation of women, youth and civil society.
The pact must also be used to make progress on
the peace agreement and make it more measurable. We
expect progress on the key proposals of the agreement:
first, the effective establishment of legitimate bodies
and services of the State; secondly, decentralization;
thirdly, reconciliation; and fourthly, reform of the
security sector and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process.

S/PV. 8376

Mission suffered no casualties, even though attacks
against it and its troops continued. That is due to the
effective implementation of the recommendations of
the report authored by former United Nations Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers. It is also the result of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, for which Mali is a key
case study. But as Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix said, we
must remain cautious because we do not know what
tomorrow will bring.
As a troop-contributing country, the Netherlands
has sought to improve the performance and impact
of MINUSMA. In particular, we have contributed to
cutting-edge capabilities in the area of intelligence. We
have also encouraged a rotation system, recognizing
that the continued availability of those resources is
crucial to the effectiveness of peacekeeping. We will
continue to support the Secretary-General in his efforts
to advance the priorities of Action for Peacekeeping.
We commend the leadership of Côte d’Ivoire on that
issue, in its capacity as co-Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations.
The
new
MINUSMA
mandate
requires
a
comprehensive
strategic
framework.
It attaches particular attention to migration, climate
and the human rights capabilities of the Mission.
We would appreciate it if the Secretary-General
could elaborate on those issues in his next report.
It is essential that MINUSMA have the surge resources and
capacities necessary to effectively implement its mandate.
That includes taking firm and effective measures to
protect civilians, by military and non-military means,
in particular in central Mali.
In conclusion, now that the elections are behind us,
our work begins.

Resolution 2423 (2018) requires the full integration
into the Malian defence and security forces of at least
1,000 members of the signatory armed groups. We
expect all parties to honour that obligation. The Council
has already been firm in its exhortations to make the
necessary progress. We must not hesitate to continue
in that direction by using the sanctions regime against
those who obstruct the peace process.

Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing on the most recent political and security
situation in Mali. We also want to extend our
appreciation to the military and civilian personnel
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), who are
operating under difficult circumstances.

Thirdly, I will speak about action for peacekeeping.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands commends the men
and women engaged in the Mission, including our
compatriots. During the last reporting period, the

We welcome the successful holding of the
presidential elections in Mali, which culminated with
the re-election of President Boubacar Keita. We note
that the election was held in a peaceful manner and

18-3302613/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

without major incident, and we congratulate Mali for
achieving an important milestone in its governance
dispensations. The formation of the new Cabinet,
comprising one-third women, is a sign of the positive
response of the Government in meeting its commitment
with regard to the empowerment of women.
The role of MINUSMA continues to be very
important and its support of the electoral process,
in coordination with the African Union and other
international partners, is commendable. We also thank
the Mission for its support to the Malian defence and
security forces, including through increased patrols in
remote areas. We agree with Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix that the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali remains very central, and we are encouraged by
the progress made with regard to its implementation,
including the nomination of interim authorities at the
district level, the creation of municipalities and the
adoption of the national security sector reform strategy.
We hope that the post-election period will witness more
invigorated efforts by the parties to ensure greater
peace and stability in the country.
The pact for peace, signed by the Government of
Mali and the United Nations in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 2423 (2018), is a step in the
right direction that we hope will help in accelerating
the implementation of the peace agreement.
Regarding the extension of State authority in the
north, the appointment of officials by the Government
as members of the interim administrations in the
majority of districts is a welcome development.
MINUSMA’s support in the restoration and extension
of State authority in the northern and central parts of
the country remains vital, as is the capacity-building
support bof the Mission, together with the United Nations
Development Programme, in the implementation of the
national policy of preventing and countering violent
extremism and terrorism in Mali.
We join others in strongly condemning the terrorist
attacks against Malian defence and security forces, as
well as international forces. We are concerned by the
frequency of those attacks in central Mali, as expressed
by other delegations. That underscores the need for
the international community to continue supporting
the fight against terrorism and the stabilization efforts
in Mali.
The contribution of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel in returning peace and stability to
14/22

19/10/2018

Mali and the region remains absolutely important. We
commend the Force for deploying all seven battalions
and its success in conducting several operations since
its establishment. To ensure that the operations of that
important regional force are effective and sustainable,
predictable financing remains critical, as identified by
the tripartite mechanism, comprising the Joint Force,
the United Nations and the European Union.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation, as a result
of insecurity in the northern and central regions, as well
as the impacts of poor rainfall in 2017, is also a matter
of concern. We hope that the international community
will enhance its support in filling the funding gap.
We are encouraged by the commitment of the regional
interim administrations, which are materializing several
projects targeting the improvement of the provision of
basic services and enhancing social cohesion in all five
northern regions, with funding from the Government.
The implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel remains absolutely
important, and we believe that there is need for
enhanced efforts in its implementation.
Finally, we support the proposal of France for a
press element at the end of this meeting.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his briefing.
Following the recent successful presidential
elections, President Keita has started a new term
of office. He has promised to continue to actively
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, thereby injecting new momentum into the
peace process. China expresses its appreciation in
that connection.
However, at the same time, the security situation
in north and central Mali remains grim with rampant
terrorist activities inside the country and in the
neighbouring region posing a serious threat to the peace
process. The international community should, on the
basis of respect for the sovereignty and leadership of
Mali, continue to support the peace process and provide
support to peace and the development of the country.
First, we must continue to help the parties in the
implementation of the peace agreement and moving
the political process forward. The political solution is
the only way out. In that connection, China hopes that
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

the signatories of the peace agreement will continue to
demonstrate political will, facilitate the implementation
of the agreement and work together to achieve national
development and reconstruction.
Secondly, we must continue to support the
Government’s capacity-building in governance and
security. The Malian Government bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining peace and stability
in the country. At the request of the Government,
the international community should continue to
support and assist the Government in its security
and counter-terrorism capacity-building and enhance
the Government’s ability to respond to security
threats independently.
Thirdly, we must support regional and subregional
organizations in playing a mediation and coordinating
role, as the peace and security of the country are closely
linked with the overall security situation in the region.
Therefore, it is necessary to take a comprehensive
approach and to respond to terrorist activities inside
the country and in the neighbouring regions through
regional cooperation.
China welcomes the formation of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel to independently
fight security threats, including terrorism, in the
region. That is an important initiative on the part of
the African countries to achieve strength through unity
and to maintain peace and stability in Africa and in
the world at large. China commends the preparatory
work done by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in order to support the Joint Force and hopes that, once
the conditions are ripe, MINUSMA will be able to take
effective actions to backstop the Joint Forces as soon
as possible.

S/PV. 8376

areas relating to the Mission’s equipment and training,
campsite planning, security and protection material and
equipment, medical ability, and information-gathering
and -sharing in order to strengthen the safety and
security of the Mission’s personnel. China supports
the peace process in Mali. Chinese peacekeepers
are actively engaged in the Mission’s peacekeeping
operations and have made their contribution to stability
in the country. China is ready to continue to play a
constructive roll towards the achievement of peace,
stability and development in the country and in Africa
at large.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting, and we thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for the important information
he has provided. We also welcome Ambassador Issa
Konfourou, Permanent Representative of Mali.
We would like, through him, to congratulate the
people and Government of Mali on the holding of their
presidential elections in a peaceful manner, despite the
complicated security situation. We think it is important
for it to be able to lead to greater stability and dialogue
between the political parties in order to more effectively
address the serious challenges facing the country.
We also wish to highlight the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
as well as the role played by the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and other
international actors, such as France. In this new phase,
we wish to renew our support for the full implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

MINUSMA and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali have played an important
role in maintaining peace and stability in the country
and in the implementation of the peace agreement.
China expresses its appreciation in that connection, and
hopes that MINUSMA will continue to communicate
and coordinate with the Government in order to help
the latter in the implementation of the peace agreement
and in enhancing its security capacity-building.

In particular, we underline the importance of the
progress made in the appointment of interim authorities
in the north of the country, the adoption of the national
security sector reform strategy, and the gradual
operationalization of mixed units of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu. We
also highlight the recent signing of the pact for peace,
in accordance with resolution 2423 (2018). We hope that
it will help revitalize and accelerate the implementation
of the peace agreement and contribute to the stability of
the country.

At the same time, the Council and the Secretariat
must pay attention to the issue of the safety and
security of the Mission’s personnel. We hope that the
secretariat of MINUSMA will take effective actions in

We note with concern the continuing deterioration
of the humanitarian and security situation in Mali,
particularly in the centre of the country, as well as
the alarming number of cases of murder, kidnapping,

18-3302615/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

intimidation and sexual and gender-based violence.
Greater State presence must be projected throughout
the territory in order to promote the rule of law, combat
terrorist groups and put an end to clashes between
armed groups. In that connection, we highlight three
items to prioritize in order to achieve sustainable peace
in Mali.
First, the signatory parties to the peace agreement
must work to reconstitute and redeploy Mali’s defence
and security forces and territorial police. That is urgent
in order to lay the foundation for stability and civilian
protection in the country.
Secondly, there is a need to combat impunity
and ensure accountability for serious human rights
violations committed by armed groups and by Malian
law enforcement and security forces. It is essential that
the judicial system be able to investigate and process
complaints in a comprehensive and timely manner.
Thirdly, the root causes of conflict must be addressed
in order to build a peaceful and inclusive society, in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The economic growth of recent years is important, but
it is also crucial to increase the budget for education
and employment opportunities, particularly for young
people, and to ensure the full participation of women.
In that regard, we highlight the efforts of the Malian
Government in preparing a new strategic framework
for economic recovery and sustainable development.
In conclusion, we wish to acknowledge the work
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
to strengthen the regional response to scourges such
as terrorism and transnational organized crime, as
well as the key role of MINUSMA in a particularly
complex environment.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation once again
thanks the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing
and his hard work on this issue. The convening of this
meeting is undoubtedly further proof of the willingness
of the Security Council to support Mali in the face of
the complex and multidimensional challenges it faces,
and allows us to renew our firm commitment to the
stabilization of this country.
We welcome the peaceful conduct of the recent
presidential elections that led to the re-election of
President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and the formation
16/22

19/10/2018

of a more representative Government with significant
female representation. In wishing him success in
his functions, we recall that progress in the full and
inclusive implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali must remain one of the main
priorities of the new Government. Indeed, the peace
agreement remains the ideal inclusive and consensual
framework for restoring peace and stability in Mali. It
is therefore essential that the signatory parties redouble
their efforts to ensure the diligent implementation of all
the provisions of the Agreement.
However, my Government welcomes progress
made in the priority action timeline and especially its
road map, such as the creation of interim authorities
in the five regions of northern Mali; the redeployment
of the army in several cities of the country and the
gradual resumption of mixed patrols composed of
elements of the Malian defence and security forces; the
pro-Government movements of the Platform coalition
of armed groups and the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad in Kidal and Timbuktu, as agreed in 2016
in the framework of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism; and the start of the preregistration phase
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, which is crucial. These are all
undoubtedly positive steps to build trust between the
security forces and the various local armed groups.
While it is true that the lack of implementation of
the commitments undertaken can be partly explained
by the lack of political will of the parties concerned, we
must accept that there can be no lasting stability in Mali
if the agreement is not fully implemented. Therefore,
after the holding of the presidential elections and the
coming legislative elections, substantial progress must
be made in mobilizing all actors in order to make
further important gains towards the implementation of
the key institutional and security reforms outlined in
the agreement and in resolution 2423 (2018).
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea will continue
to support any initiative aimed at promoting ownership
of peace processes in unstable countries and regions of
the world. That is why we gladly welcome the signing
of the pact for peace on 15 October. As Mr. Lacroix
has pointed out, this new partnership among the United
Nations, the Malian Government and the signatory
armed movements does not replace the 2015 agreement,
the priority action timeline or even the March road
map. Instead, it symbolizes the renewal of the parties’
commitment to giving significant impetus to the
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

implementation of the peace agreement and serves
as a catalyst to strengthen the inclusive nature of the
political process. Similarly, its objective should not be
to reinvent what has been agreed, but rather to allow
for the effective implementation of the commitments
undertaken in the framework of the peace agreement,
with a clear and well-defined time horizon.
In that context, we must also reaffirm our
satisfaction with the operational support provided by
Operation Barkhane to MINUSMA, which must focus
primarily on mechanisms to improve its operational
capacity, including the security of its personnel. In
addition, the stabilization of the situation in central
Mali, the focus of continuous terrorist attacks,
requires a comprehensive solution. We reiterate that
any response to violent extremism must go beyond a
military approach. We should focus on a humanitarian
and sustainable response that can meet the political and
economic needs of the population and peoples of Mali.
I conclude by endorsing the words of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, who recently stated at a high-level meeting
on Mali and the Sahel:
“We cannot stress enough that for lasting peace
to be built in Mali, the inclusion of all sectors of
society is needed. Although it is true that violence
cannot be halted without the involvement of the
armed parties, it is also clear that without the full
participation of other components of society, the
achievements already obtained will remain fragile,
reversible and at the mercy of any disagreement
between the parties. The stabilization of Mali means
the stabilization of the neighbouring countries and
that the entire Sahel region and beyond. That means
that the signatory parties to the Peace Agreement
bear a great responsibility.”
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, and all
of his staff for their important work, as well as UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/866), and
through Under-Secretary-General Lacroix we pay
tribute to the bravery of those working in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), in the very challenging
environment in which the military and civilian

S/PV. 8376

personnel operate. And, of course, we unequivocally
condemn all attacks against MINUSMA personnel.
I would like to congratulate President Keita on his
re-election and the Malian people and their institutions
on the relatively peaceful elections, despite terrorist
attempts to disrupt the process. We also commend
the support provided by MINUSMA and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif in
bringing all parties together for a peaceful conclusion.
The United Kingdom encourages President Keita
to redouble efforts to secure a lasting peace and to
improve the lives of all Malian people, including those
facing increasing insecurity in the central region.
I join my colleagues in welcoming the signing
of the pact for peace by the Agreement Monitoring
Committee. The parties that have reconfirmed their
commitment to accelerating the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali must
now take action and fulfil their commitment to make
tangible progress against the 22 March road map. Their
credibility is on the line. Progress must also include
the meaningful participation of women in the peace
process, and we welcome the steps taken by President
Keita to ensure that the 30 per cent quota for women in
elected positions is met, as per Malian law.
The price of lack of progress is clear: the
humanitarian and security situation continues to
deteriorate across Mali, particularly in the central
region; and 287 civilians have been killed in the past
three months, the highest number since MINUSMA
deployed. Today 5.2 million people require life-saving
and protection assistance, up from 3.8 million in 2017.
It is therefore more vital than ever that the Malian
Government and the international community fulfil
their humanitarian and security commitments. In that
context, we welcome the role of the Group of Five for
the Sahel.
An integrated security plan is needed to address
the causes of the humanitarian crisis and civilian
casualties. We are concerned about the number of
human rights violations and cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse; all such violations must be thoroughly
investigated in order to bring perpetrators of crimes
to account, including those that involve the Malian
defence and security forces. This is a global priority
for the United Kingdom. Yesterday in London we
hosted an international safeguarding summit as part of

18-3302617/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

19/10/2018

our commitment to driving up standards and tackling
sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment.

of democratic coexistence that will help to alleviate the
difficult situation that prevails today in Mali.

Returning to MINUSMA, we welcome its ongoing
efforts to focus its mandate on core political and
security tasks, and we encourage further progress in
this regard as we look towards MINUSMA’s six-month
review, in February.

Furthermore, we commend the efforts of the
Government of the Republic of Mali regarding, first
and foremost, the definitive cessation of hostilities
on the basis of national plans and the taking of
fundamental political measures aimed at achieving
peace and stability in the country. Regarding the
elections that took place in July, we commend the
fact that in spite of certain difficulties, the elections
took place in satisfactory conditions and in a peaceful
environment, in the presence of international observers
and in the context of the deployment and active role of
the Malian security forces and the crucial support of
MINUSMA, which included mainly logistical support
and technical assistance.

The bottom line is that rapid progress is needed by
the politicians on the implementation of the Agreement.
This is the best and only sustainable way to improve
the lives of the people of Mali and to enhance collective
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia thanks the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his
briefing on the situation in the Republic of Mali and
the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
on the ground. We also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Mali,
Ambassador Konfourou. We echo other delegations that
have expressed their support for the Chadian members
of the Mission who were wounded in the course of an
attack using an improvised explosive device and wish
them a speedy and full recovery. We would like also to
express our condolences in connection with the death
of a member of the Barkhane force during the discharge
of the force’s mission.
We would like to begin by underscoring the
important progress made in the political sphere in Mali.
In the framework of the provisions of resolution 2423
(2018), we commend and welcome the signing of the pact
for peace a few days ago in Bamako, on the margins of
the meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee.
We fully agree with the delegations that have stressed
the importance of that event, as it offers an opportunity
to revitalize the peace process in that brotherly nation.
We also agree with the Secretary-General’s statement
in paragraph 87 of his report (S/2018/866) that the pact
for peace should not “duplicate structures or replace
the Agreement”. The pact is, in any case, simply an
instrument that represents a positive complement
to the interests and efforts of the Malian people, the
United Nations and the international community, as it
contributes to defusing tensions and to building a system
18/22

We wish also to stress the progress that the
Government of Mali has been spearheading in areas
such as the appointment and deployment of interim
authorities in 21 districts of the five northern regions, as
well as the progressive operationalization of the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism.
It has been five years since the creation of
MINUSMA and three years since the signing of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Mali’s
efforts to achieve the necessary stability still require
the full support of the Council and of our Organization
as a whole. The complex and fragile humanitarian
and security situation in Mali has spread throughout
the Sahel region as a result of the interventionism
and regime-change policies in Libya. The situation
has had repercussions on the volatile security sector,
compounded by the presence of terrorist groups and
transnational criminal organizations in the country.
Asymmetric and terrorist threats, continuing
clashes between armed groups, and intercommunal and
sexual violence continue to threaten the safety and lives
of civilians and to hinder the economic growth and
development of the country. We note with deep concern
that in northern and central Mali, the criminal activities
of mercenaries, drug and arms traffickers, and those
who traffic in human beings have become a way of life
that is hampering the full implementation of the Peace
Agreement and contributing on a daily basis to the
deteriorating security situation and political process.
For all of these reasons, it is vital to highlight and
express appreciation for the work of the personnel
of MINUSMA, which has stepped up its efforts to
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

ensure not only the definitive implementation of the
Peace Agreement through monitoring the latter and
facilitating a political dialogue through its mediation
and good offices in coordination with the Malian
Government, but also the restoration and extension
of State authority in the northern and central parts
of the country. Similarly, the work of the Mission in
the development of the reform of the security sector
action plan, the implementation of the national vision
for the reconstitution and redeployment of the Malian
defence and security forces, and the development of
the conceptual framework for the territorial police
in the regions of Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu is of
critical importance.
In conclusion, we cannot ignore the outstanding
contributions made by the regional and subregional
organizations, led by the African Union, in cooperation
and coordination with the European Union and
the International Organization of la Francophonie.
We strongly urge and encourage the international
community to continue to contribute, with technical
support, economic and humanitarian cooperation, to
all initiatives to benefit the population by establishing
stability and permanent peace in Mali and the
Sahel region.
I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to convey the regrets of Ms. Kamissa
Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, who is unable to be with us this
morning because of schedule demands.
I am very pleased to convey to you, Madam
President, the warm congratulations of my delegation
on the accession of your beautiful country, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, to the presidency of the
Council for the month of October. We assure you of our
full cooperation.
Let me also express to the delegation of the United
States of America our sincere appreciation for its
outstanding conduct of the Council’s work last month.
The briefings on this item are always a good
opportunity to reiterate to Secretary-General António
Guterres and to all United Nations personnel involved
in Mali the profound gratitude of President Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, the Government and the people of Mali,

S/PV. 8376

for their ongoing commitment to peace and stability in
Mali, the Sahel and the rest of the world.
The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/866) before us, and
I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, for introducing
it. I take note of the comments and strong expectations
that Council members expressed earlier. Let me now
share with the Council the remarks of the Government
of Mali on the report of the Secretary-General.
First, I welcome the fact that the report
recognizes the substantial progress made recently in
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, emanating from the Algiers
process. Among the developments that have been
noted, I wish to highlight the successful organization
on 29 July and 12 August of the election of the
President of the Republic within the time prescribed
by the Constitution of Mali. The balloting, which took
place in conditions deemed satisfactory by national
and international observers, established the election of
President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita as Head of State for
a second five-year term.
The good preparation and the satisfactory conduct
of the electoral process, in a framework of unwavering
cooperation, were made possible thanks to the combined
efforts of all the actors of the Malian public sphere,
including members of civil society, as well as the
significant involvement of partners and friends of Mali.
I commend the role and immense contribution of United
Nations personnel and other national and international
forces in the successful organization of the electoral
process. I would make special mention here of the
remarkable work done by Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
I would also like to pay tribute to Belgian Major
General Jean-Paul Deconinck, whose deployment
ended on 2 October, for his exemplary leadership and
outstanding service as Force Commander of MINUSMA.
By the same token, I extend the warm congratulations
of the Government of Mali to his successor, Swedish
Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre, for the
confidence placed in him by the Secretary-General. We
assure him of the full cooperation of the Government
of Mali.

18-3302619/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

This is also an opportunity to commend the
excellent work done over the past three years by
Mr. Koen Davidse of the Netherlands as Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali. I
welcome the appointment of Ms. Joanne Adamson of
the United Kingdom to that post and assure her of all
Malians. I know that Joanne is in the Chamber. She is
a great friend of Mali and Malians, and she can count
on our support.
I understand the Council’s impatience with what
it considers to be delays in the implementation of the
agreement. However, I can assure the Council that
there is no ambivalence in the shared desire of the
signatory parties to honour the commitments made
in the irreplaceable instrument that is the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The perfect
illustration of that has just been provided yet again
by the Malian parties with the signing on Monday,
15 October, of the pact for peace in Mali between
the Government and the United Nations, and the
solemn accession of the signatory movements, the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and the
Platform coalition of armed groups, through a written
declaration of acceptance of that instrument. Under the
terms of the pact, a copy of which I have provided to
Council members, the Malian parties reaffirm their
firm commitment to accelerating the diligent and full
implementation of the agreement, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of resolution 2423 (2018). However, the
pact for peace is by no means a new agreement in Mali.
It is true that the fulfilment of those commitments
has long suffered from the belated establishment
of relations of real trust among the various Malian
protagonists. Today, that prerequisite is now satisfied,
and the resulting positive effects are very telling. As
the Council is well aware, the establishment of interim
authorities and the ongoing operationalization of mixed
patrols, combined with the gradual redeployment of the
Malian armed forces, allow for the long-awaited return
of the administration and basic social services in many
localities previously held in the grip of terrorists and
armed gangs.
Secondly, the absence of belligerence and clashes
between the Malian armed forces and the signatory
movements is another illustration of the progress
achieved. The return of trust has also resulted in
the participation of the signatory movements in
safeguarding the electoral process. The Secretary20/22

19/10/2018

General saw this positive and constructive momentum
during his visit to Mali in May.
In the same vein, 63 territorial collectivities
have been created in the new regions of Ménaka and
Taoudenni, with a view to making them fully operational
so that they can fulfil their primary mission of delivering
basic social services to our populations. In that context,
I welcome the continuation of the preregistration
campaign for combatants, which is a major step forward
in the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, the cornerstone of our national
strategy for stabilizing the country. On that point, I
note that the Malian parties agreed at the meeting of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee, on 15 October
in Bamako, to launch an accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process for the period
5-30 November.
Still on the subject of our efforts to provide security
throughout our national territory, the process of security
sector reform is proceeding normally, according to the
criteria set, in particular with regard to ensuring that all
actors concerned are included.
As the Council can see, the Government remains
fully committed to playing its full part in the early
implementation of the agreement. However, it must
be acknowledged that the implementation of certain
provisions of the agreement requires considerable
financial commitments that, regrettably, Mali alone
cannot make. That is why I reiterate the Government’s
call for the effective marshalling of the resources
pledged by our partners at the donor conference on
Mali held in Paris on 22 October 2015, which would
enable us to uphold the commitments outlined in the
road map of 22 March and the pact for peace that we
have just signed.
Today more than ever, the continued implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process, is one of the main
priorities of the President of the Republic and of the
Government of Mali. We have no other option, let
alone a plan B. That is the sovereign choice we have
made to build genuine and lasting reconciliation for our
people in a truly diverse Mali. That is why, in the new
governmental structure implemented on 9 September,
the Head of State created the important Ministry
for Ministry of National Reconciliation and Social
Cohesion so as to ensure the improved coordination
18-33026

19/10/2018

The situation in Mali

of State actions and financial resources to implement
the agreement.
The presence of several young people and women
in the Government is also part of that dynamic.
Women, for example, account for more than 30 per
cent of the total number of Government employees,
in accordance with legislation on the promotion of
gender in decision-making bodies in Mali. We are also
working on the charter for peace, unity and national
reconciliation, emanating from the work of the
Conference of National Understanding, which calls for
innovative and courageous measures to help the people
of Mali unite around a common future. At the same
time, the Government is resuming its immense work
on political and institutional reform with a view to
adapting our institutions to Mali’s current realities and
enabling our governance system to respond effectively
to the legitimate demands of our people.
The centre of our country continues to be affected
by indiscriminate terrorist attacks that have resulted in
many casualties, including among members of Mali’s
defence and security forces and innocent civilians.
Thanks to the operationalization of the integrated
security plan for the central regions, whose relevance
is noted by the Secretary-General in his report, several
State representatives and decentralized structures
have returned to the most remote areas, much to
people’s relief. The school year has begun. The Head
of Government, Mr. Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga,
whose efforts have been lauded, visited those areas this
month to mark the State’s return, attend the start of the
school year and distribute food aid in areas affected
by insecurity or natural disasters. However, given the
scale of the situation, it is necessary to maintain and
even strengthen aid programmes administered by the
specialized agencies of the United Nations and other
competent bodies.
We are concerned about the funding gap in the
2018 humanitarian response plan, whose requirements
total $330 million. Only 32 per cent of that sum has
been raised, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report. That is why the Government of Mali joins the
Secretary-General and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in launching a strong appeal
to marshal additional financial resources to support
Government efforts to implement assistance plans in
response to multifaceted humanitarian crises, including
plans for the return of displaced persons, returnees and
basic social services.

S/PV. 8376

I would like to turn now to the issue of human
rights. The Government of Mali remains very concerned
about respect for human rights in general, and human
rights in particular — a focus that is consistent with
our history and Mali’s international commitments. The
State of Mali is aware of its primary responsibility to
protect people and their property, and the Government
remains determined to continue and even strengthen
the appropriate measures to ensure that human rights
are respected, in particular those of our people. That is
why all reported cases or allegations of violations are
systematically investigated by the competent national
structures. Disciplinary measures have already been
taken against those suspected of violating the rights
of individuals, even before investigations have been
completed. In that regard, we remain open to all forms
of cooperation in the areas of training, the sharing of
experience or technical or financial support. That said,
it should be recalled that, in accordance with paragraph
51 of the Secretary-General’s report, most abuses are
perpetrated by violent extremist groups, which, in their
destructive fury, do not spare civilians or members of
Malian or foreign forces.
Moreover, the Government agrees with the
Secretary-General that any exit strategy must take into
account the regional dimension, which is, regrettably,
marked by an exponential increase in transnational
organized crime. That was the reason for establishing
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which
seeks to unite the efforts and actions of the five countries
concerned in a comprehensive approach to effectively
combat terrorists and drug-trafficking groups that
have plagued our entire subregion, especially since
the collapse of the Libyan State in 2011. We take this
opportunity to request once again that the Council
provide the Joint Force with an adequate mandate and
sustainable resources, including through the United
Nations, to enable it to discharge its mission as it sees
fit, for the benefit of the people of the Sahel and the rest
of the world.
I would like to conclude as I began, by reiterating
the gratitude of the people of Mali to the United Nations
and all of our bilateral and multilateral partners for their
continued multifaceted support for the crisis-recovery
process in Mali. Above all, I would like to assure the
Council of the resolve of the President of the Republic
of Mali, the Government and signatory movements to be
relentless in the diligent and inclusive implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,

18-3302621/22

S/PV.8376

The situation in Mali

emanating from the Algiers process. In that regard, we
attach particular importance to the relevant provisions
of resolution 2423 (2018), in particular paragraphs 4, 5
and 6.
Lastly, I again pay tribute to all victims — civilian
and military, Malian and non-Malian — who have lost

22/22

19/10/2018

their lives in the line of duty in Mali. I would like to
spare a thought for the twenty-third French soldier to die
in Mali, only a few days ago. I wish a speedy recovery
to the Chadian five soldiers who were wounded in Mali.
Of course, I cannot forget our own forces and civilians.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

18-33026
