UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNffiS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFIC!AL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR

428th l\1EETIN G: 21 JUNE 1949
-428e-me-SEA-NC-:r..-21-JUIN-1949----

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OFflCIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS. NEW YOlUt

< 50 p.)

No. 31

'fABLE OF COIVfENTS

TABLES DES MATIERES

Four hundred and twenty-c,ighth meeting

Quatre cent vingt-huitieme seance
Pages

Page

1. Provisional agenda ...•..•.••••......
2. Adoption of the agenda .•......•.....
3. Admission of new Members (continued)

1
2
2

1. Ordre du jour provisoire •••••......•
2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour .•••••.•...
3. Admission de nouveaux Membres (suite)

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official
Records.

All United Nations docttments are designated by symbols, i.e., 'capital
letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference
to a Un#r.cl Nations document.
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans le
texte des seances du CQnseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements
mensuels aux Proces-verbaux officiels.

Les pocuments des Nations Unies portent taus une cote, qui se compose
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans
tm texte sigr.ifie qu'il s'agit d'zen document des Nations Unics.

---

1
2
2

NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES·YERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTHYEAR

No. 31

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 31

ERRATUM 1
On page 12, line 29, delete "Jordl'iu" and I A la page 12, 2geme Hgne, supprimer "Jorinsert "Transjordan [Jordan]".
1danie" et inserer "Transjm-danie [Jordanie]".

.....

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEI.L
DE SECURITE

OFli'ICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 31

FOUR HUNDRED AND TWENTY·

QUATRIEME ANNEE

. NOS1

QUATRE CENT VINGT.IRjlTI&'IE

EIGHTH MEETING

SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 21 June 1949, at 3 p.m.

, Tenue a. Lake Success, New-York,
le mardi 21 juin 1949, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. A. LUNDE (Norway).

President: M. A. LUNDE (Nofvege).

Present: The representatives of thl~ ff 1lowing
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Social. ist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of ,America.

Pr;'~,' )s: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional. agenda (S/Agenda 428)

1. Ordl"e du jour provisoire

(S/~enda~8)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Admission of new Members (continued).

2. Admission, de nouveaux Membr~s (suite).'

(a) Letter dated 11 December 1948 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the text of
the resolutions regarding the admission of
new Members adopted by the General
Assembly at its 177th meeting held on
8 December 1948 (5/1170).,
(b) Communications dated 22 September and
9 October 1948 from the Government of .
the People's Republic' of Bulgaria to the
Secretary-General concerning BUlgaria's
application for admission to membership
in the U~ited Nations (S/1012 and
S/1012/Add.1).
, Cc) Communications dated 27 September and
8 October, 1948 from the Government of
Hungary td the S~cretary:-General con~
cerning Hungary's application for admission to membership in the United Nations"
(S/1017 andS/1017/Add.l).
.
(d) Communications dated 13 October and

2 December 1948 from the Government
of th~ People's Republic of Albania to
the Secretary-General concerning AI.;.
bania'.g application for admission to membership in the United Nations (S/1033
and S/1105).

a) Lettre, en date du 11 decembre 1948,

adress/ie par le Secretaire generalfl.u, President du Conseil de securite,transl11ettant
le texte des resolutions relatives a. l'admission de nouveaux Membres, adoptees'
par l'Assemblee generale a. sa 177eme
seance, le 8 decembre 1948 (S/1170).
b) Communications, en date des 22 septembre '
et 9 octobre 1948, adressees par le GOt1~
vernement de ,la R~p'Ublique populairede
IJulgarie au Secretairegeneral, concernant
la dema..l1de d'admi~sion de' la Bulgarie
comme Membre'de l'Organisation des Nations Uuies (S/1012 et S/1012/Add.1).
c) Communications, en da:tedes 27 septembre
et 8 octobre 1948, adressees par le Gouver. nement de ',la Hongrie au, Secretaire ge.n.
ral, concernant la demande d'admission'de
la Hongrie comme Membre de l'Organisationdes Nations Unies (S/1017- ,et
S/1017/Add.l).
d) Communications; en date des 13 octobre
et 2 decembre 1948, adressees par le GbU~
vernement de la Republique populaire
d'Albanie ,au Secretaire" general, concernant la demande d'admission de l'Albanie
. c01l1)lle Membre de .1'Organisation des
Nations Unies (S/1033 et S/1105).

e:,

(e) Communicr>tions dated 12 and 25 October 1948 from the Government of the
People's Republic of Mongolia to the
Secretary-General concerning the application of the Mongolian People's Republic
for admission to membership in the
United Nations (S/1035 and S/1035/
Add.l).
(f) Communications dated 12 October and
9 November 1948 from the Government
of the Pe'Jple's Republic of Romania to
the Secretary-General concerning Romania's application for admission to membership in the United Nations (S/1051
and S/1051/Add.l).

2. Adoption of the agenda

e) Communications, en date des 12 et 25 octobre 1948, adressees par le Gouvernement
de la Republique populaire de Mongoii,e
au Secretaire general, concernant la demande d'admission de la Republique populaire de Mongolie' comme Membre de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies (5/1035
et S/1035/Add.l).
f) Communications, en date des 12 octobre
et 9 novembre 1948, adressees par le Gouvernement de la Repnblique populaire de
Roumanie au S'ecretaire general, concernanr la demande d'admission de la Roumanie comme Merr.bre de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies (S/1051 et 5/1051/
Add.l).

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
L'ordre dte jOlltr est adopte.

The agenda was adopted.

3. Admission of new Members
(continued)
.

3. Admisldnn de nouveaux Membres
(suite)

M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit d~ l'anglais):
Mr. TSIANG (China): My delegation appreciates deeply the general statem~nt which the Ma delegation fait grand cas de la declaration
President made at the beginning of our last meet- generale que le President a faite au debut de
inlY on Thursday, 16 June [427th meeting]. The llotl'e derniere seance, le jeudi 16 juin [427eme
pr~cedure which the President outlined for deal- seance] .' Je trouve parfaitement acceptable, pour
ing with the item on the agenda.is compl~tely trr:~ter cepoint de l'ordre du jour, la procedure
acceptable to me. In accordance WIth the WIshes dont le President a indique les grandes lignes.
of the President, I shall simply state the attitude Conformement a son desir, je me bornerai a.
exposer l'attitude de ma delegation.
of my delegation.
Que -le recours au "veto" soit ou non j1'.stifie
, In practice my delegation has never vetoed an
an application for membership in the United en vertu de la Charte et du reglement interieur,
Nations, no matter whether such use of the veto dans la pratique ma delegation n'a jamais oppose
is justified by the Charter and the rules of pro- de "veto" a une demande d'admission dans l'Orgacedure or not. We believe that as a matter of nisation des Nations Unies. Nous pensons <I;.t'en
policy the veto should be exerdsed very sparingly, principe ee droit ne doit etre exerce qu'avec beauif at 3.11, in connexion with the admission of new coup de moderation a regard de l'admh,sion de
Members. My delegation pledges itself to do its nouveaux Membres, si tant est qu'il doive l'etre
utmost towards promoting an agreement among jamais. Ma delegation s'engage a faire tOut son
the five permanent members of the Security possible pour que les cinq membres permanents
Council whereby, in matters connected with the du Conseil de securite conviennent de ne pas
admission of new Members, the veto would not user de leur droit. de "veto" dans les questions
be used. Before such an agreement is reached- relatives a l'admission de nouveaux Membres.
and I should like to make this point clear-it En attendant qu'intervienne un accord de cette
goes. without saying that my delegation has the nature - je tiens a preciser ceci - i1 va sans
same· rights and privileges in voting as other dire que ma delegation ales memes droits et privipermanent members of the Security Council.
leges de vote que les autres membres permanents
duConseil de securite.
1
Dans son discours d'ouverture\ le President a
In the President's opening statement he. said
that, as the representative of his country, he dit que, en tant que repre~entant de son pays, il
favoured the principle of universality. As an etait favorable au principe de l'universalite.
ideal to be put before the United Nations, we, Comme ideal a proposer a l'Organisation des
too, favour that principle, but if, by this principle, Nations Dnies, nous aussi nous approuvons ce
the President means that mathematical univer- principe; cependant, si aux yeux du Presid.ent
sality is to be achieved automatically through some ce principe signifie que l'universalite nume~ique
mechanical process, my delegation regrets that it doitetre realisee automatiquement par quelque
cannot accept such an interpretation of the procede mecanique, ma delegation' regrette de ne
Charter. Article. 4 of the Charter stipulates the pouvoir admettre pareille interpretation de la
conditions for admission to membership. In the Charte. L'Article 4de la Chartestipule les condiinterpretation of that Article, my delegation tions d'admission comme ,Membre. Pour !'interaccepts the advisory opinion recently rendered by pretation de cet Article, ma delegation accepte le
the International Court of Justice2 • We are recent avis consultatifde la Cour internationa1e
ready to consider all . applica1ions in a fair and de Justice2 • Nous sommes prets a examiner toute
S See Official Records of the Security Council, fourth
yeaT, No..30.
.
. 2 See Admission 0/ a State to the United Nations

(Charter, Art. 4), Advisory opinion: l.CJ. Reports 1948,

page ,57.

...

.

.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de
securite, quatrieme annee,lN'o 30.
• Voir Admission d'un .§tataux Nations Unies (Charte
Art.. 4), avis consultatif: C. 1. J. Recueil1948, page 57.

generous spirit, so that membership in the United
Nations shall be as universal as possible.

deI11ande dans un esprit equitable et liberal, de
telle sorte que le nombl'e des Membres de l'Orga- .
nisation des Nations Unies approche d;lns la
mesure du possible de l'universalite.

At the present stage of the debate my delegation
finds it unnecessary to enter into a long discussion
on the ideas so eloquently put forward by the
representative of Argentina at the last meeting.
My delegation wiil support the practical proposals which the representative of Argentina introduced in the form of draf resolutions [S/1331,
S/1332, S/1333, S/1334, S/1335, S1336 and
S/1337]. '
.

A la phase actuelle du debat, ma delegation juge
inutile d'entrer dans une longue discussion sur
les idees que le representant de l'Argentine a si
eloquemment exposees a la derniere seance. Ma
delegation appttiera les propositions d'ordre pratique que le representant de l'Argentine a presentees sous forme de projets de resolutions [S/1331,
S/1332, S/1333, S/1334, S/1335, S/1336 et
S/1337].

While IholJe that the present deliberations of
the Council on the admission of new Members
may break the deadlock which has existed fer
sop:1t: time, I should n9t like to see any further
heat or bitterp.ess engendered during our debates
here. I believe that is the spirit of. the President's
opening statement, and, so far as my delegation is
concerned, we shall do our utmost to contribute
towards the realization of that spirit.

Tout en esperant que les presentes deliberations
dy Conseil de securite sur l'admission de nouveaux Membres lui permettront de sortir de l'impasse dans laquelle il se trouve depuis quelque
temps, je ne voudrais pas que la VehemeilCe ou
l'acrimonie donnent a nouveau le ton a nos debats
sur cette question. Je presume que c'est la l'esprit
du discours d'ouverture du President et, dans la
mesure ou cela concemei ma delegation, nous
ferons tout notre ,possible pour nous conformer
. i. cet esprit.

Q

!\'L RIBAS (Cuba) (traduit de l'espagnol):
Mr. RIBAS (Cuba) (translated from Spanish) :
The Republic of Cuba is one of· the new mem'hers . La .:,.epublique de Cuba est un nouveau m.embre
of the Security Council that has not previously du Conseil de securite et n'a donc pas encore eu
had the opportunity to give the Council itE views l'occasion d'exposer au Conseil ses vues sur les
on the applications for admission of new Mem- demandes d'admission dansl'Organisation des
,bel'S to the United Nations.
Nations Unies.
Accepting· the invitation which the President
Deferant a l'invitation que le President du
of the Council tendered to us in his well-founded Conseil de securite nous a adressee dan.s sa declastatement of 16 June 1949, my delegation wishes ration solidement documentee du 16 jllin 1949,
to say that it cO;J.siders it eminently desirable that ma delegation declare qu'elle juge eminemment
all nations which fulfil the requirements set forth souhaitable que .tous les Etats satisfaisant au."C
i.1 Article 4 of the Charter should belong to the conditions posees par l'Article 4 deja Charte
United Nations.
soient admis a faire partie de ·l'Organisation. des
Nations Unies;
L'Article en question stipule que peuvent deve..;
This Article states that the United Nations is
'open to all States which fulfil the following nir Membres del'Organisation des Nations Unies
requirements, that is, which are "pea1:;:~loving "tous autresEtats pacifiques qui acceptent les
States which. accept the obligations contained in obligations de la Charte et, au. jugement de l'Orgathe present Charter and; in the judgment of the nisation, sont capables de les remplir et disposes
Organization, are able and willing to cfl,rry out a lefaire". '
these obligations".
Conformement aceprincipe de l'universalite,
My delegation will therefore, in accordance
with this principle of universality, vote in favour ma delegationvotera doncenfaveur de l'admisof the admission of any applicant State which sion de tout Etat candidat satisfaisantauX susdltes
conditions.
fulfils those requirements. .
.
Elle se conformera, en 'outre, a I'avisconsulMoreover, my delegation will act in accordance
with the .advisory opinion given by the .Inter- tatif emisle 28 mai 1948 par la Cour internationale
national Court of Justice on 28 May 1948, accord- de Justice, et selon lequel la Charte n'autorise
ing to which the Charter does not authorize a utl Membre de I'Organisation, ni a subordonner
Member to make his consent to the admission of son consentement a l'admission d'un nouveau
a new Member subject to conditions which are Membre a des conditions qui ne figurentpas
not set forth in the above-mentioned Article 4, dans l'Article 4 sus-indique,ni. a le faire aependre
or tC' make his affirmative. vote conditional on the de l'admission d'autres Etats.
admission of other States.

.

.

Ma delegation n'ignore pas que le Conseil de
My delegation is aware that the practice of this
Council has been to interpret Article 27 of the securite a pour habitude, quand it doit prendre
Charter, when it has been necessary to decide une decision sur une recommandation relative
on a recommendation of· admission, as meaning a l'admission d'un nouvel Etat, d'interpreter
that seven members of this Council, including all ,l'Article 27 de la Cnarte dans ce sens que la
the permanent members, must give their affirma- recommandation en question ne peut etre adoptee
. tive votefot the recommendation to be adopted.
que si sept membres du Conseil, au nombre des-'
quels doivent figurer tous ses membres permanents, votent en.sa faveur.
In deciding a question of such great importance
Four une question d'un si haut interet, qui met
as that of the principle of 'universality, which en jeule principe de l'universalite a laquelle doit

4

.\

must be the goal of this Organization, when it tendre I'Organisation, lorsque, de plus, it s'agit
is 'a question of cases in which the application of de cas ou l'application de ce principe est compathis principle is consistent with the provisions of tible avec les buts enbnces dans la Charte et )l.vec
the Charter and with its rules concerning respect les normes relatives au respect de5 droits de
for human rights and fundamental freedoms I'homme et des libertes fondamentales etablies
established by the Charter, my delegation would par la meme Charte, ma delegatio!i serait fachee
regret to see the Council not conforming in this si le Conse] ne tenait pas compte du rapport de
matter to the renort of the Interim Committee of la Commission interimaire de l'Assemble.e3 , adopte
the General Assembly which was adopted on le 15 juillet 1948, qui recommande que la decision,
15 July 19488 • That report recommends that the concernant l'admission d'un Etat dans l'Organisadecision on the admission of a State as a Member tion des Na.tions Un!es soit consideree comme
of the United Nations should be adopted by the adoptee quand sept quelconques des membres du
affirmative votes of any seven members of the Conseil de securite ont vote en ila faveu!". Dans
Security Council. My delegation would therefore le meme esprit, ma delegation aimerait voir le
be pleased, to see the recommendation contained Conseil faire entrer en ligne de compte et mettre
in paragraph 3 of the resolution which was en application la recommandationcontenue dans
approved by the General Assembly on 14 April , le paragraphe 3 de la resolution approuvee par
19494 taken into account and applie<:l to that end. r Assemblee generale le 14 avril 19494 , •
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): During the
past two years, when my country was not a member of the Security Council, much has been said
and done in the Council relating to the very
important question of membership' in the United
Nati()ns, r am therefore prompted to make a
statement briefly outlining the general position of
Egypt in this respect.

Mahmoud F A\V:ZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de.
l'anglais) : Au cours de ces deux dernieres annees, ou mon pays ne faisait pas partie du Conseil
de securite, bien des choses ont ete dites et faites
au sein du Conseil a propos de la tres importante
question de l'admission de nouvcaux Membres.
Cela m~incite a faire une breve declaration pour
exposer, dqns ses grandes lignes, la position de
l'Egypte a cet egard.

La plupart des membres id presents ne trCl1To ,ro6st members present here, _t.hi::; - statement
of' the position of my country will not be new, veront rien de nouveau clans cet expose des vues
sin,ce they will probably· recall _that Egypt has ! de mon pays, car its se rappellent sans doute que
consistently and firmly supported the principle that l'Egypte a constamment et f~rmement soutenu
our Organization should have as great a measure que le principe d'une universalite aussi large que
of "universality as possible. In the -light of this p6ssible devait prevaloir dans notre Organisation.
principle, my country has always insisted ,that' A la lurrnere de ce principe, l'Egypte a toujours
membership'in the United Nations should be a'ffinne que l'on do~t admettre a l'Organisation
open to all applicants which-fulfil the requirements des Nations Un~es tous les Eta-ts candidats qui
\ ofthe Charter, as stipulated in Article 4, and that remplissent les conditions prevues a l'Article 4
no ~pplicant should be precluded, for reasons de la Charte, et que nul ne devrait etre tenu a
extraneous to the stipulations ofthe Charter, from l'ecart de l'Organisation pour des motifs etrangers
membership in the Organization.
"
aux dispositions de la Charte.
En 1946" duraht la premiere session de l'AsIn 1946, during the first 'session of.the General
Assembly,Egyptsubmitted a draft resolution to semblee generale, l'Egypte a presente un projet
.this effect/;. The delegations of Panama and the de resolution dans ce sens!). Des projets de resoPhilippines also.submItted clraftresoluti()ns6 • 'lUtiOfl ont egalement ete depo&es par les deleThese draft resolutions, which. were supported by gations ,du, Panama et <ks Philippines6 •
many other Members, ,culminated in General Ces projets, quifurent appuyes parbea.ucoup
Assembly resolution 35, (I) ()f 19 November 1946. d'autres Etats Membres, ont abouti _a la resoluwhich recommended that, the Sectirity Council tion 35 (1) du 19 novembre 1946. aux termes de
should re-examine, on their merits and according laquelle 1'Assembleegeneralearecommande que
to 'Article 4 -of the Charter", the applications' of leO;mseil de sect2rite exftJUine anouveau,en
,the -People's Reptiblic of Albania" the Mongolian tenant compte de leurs titres,etconf6rmement a
People's Republic and the Hashemite Kingdom of l'A,rtiCIe 4 de'la Charte, les demandes de la RepuTransjordan which the Council .had failed to blique populai:t'ed'Albanie, de'-la Republique de
recommend for acceptance. Thisreeolution of Mongolie -et du Royaume hachemite de 'Trans19 November 1946 set _the example for ~subse­ jordanie,dont le Conseil n'avait pas recommande I
quent resolutions of the General Assembly, one . l'acceptation. Cette resolution du 19 novembre
ofwhich-iliat of 17 November 1947 [113 (IJ)] 1946 a servi, de precedent pour, d~s resolutions
~resulted in the advisoryovinion of the Inter~ ulterieures de .1'Assernbleegenerale, dont 1'une,
'national CC\urt of Justice, confirming the General celle du 17 novembre·1947 [113 (11)], a donne
Assembly'stepeatedly expressed views on this lieu a-l'avis consultatif de la' Cour internationale
matter.
de Justice qui confirme les vuesexprim~es .a
maintes reprises par l'Assemblee generale _sur
cette question.
'
·Voir les Do~uments offidels de la- trois'ieme session
iJe l'Assemblee generale, SuPPlement No 10, page 1.
4Voirles Documents officiels de latroisieme session
fie l'AssembUe generale, deu.xieme ,partie, Resolutions,'
267 (IH).
.'
I; See Official Records of the second part of the first
BVoir lesDocuments offkiels de la seconde partie '
session of the General Assembly, First Committee, An- 'de la premiere session de l'Assemblee generale, Premie,.e
,'
,
. ne?, 6 C, ,page 320. , '
Commission, Annexe 6 cr, page~20.
:·Ibid., Annex 6 b, page319~mdannex 6 d, page 321. ••• IS ~~~d".~~exe 6 c, page 319 et annexe,6d, page 321. d
a See Official Records, of the third session of the
'General Assembly, Supplement No. 10 page 1.
4 See Official I?ecordso,f the third' session of the
General }Issembly, Part 1I, IResolutions,267 (HI).

5
Most of the other relevant points and facts
'">een reviewed in the mast~r1y statement
whi the President made at ou.r last meeting.
The ma'~ter is now completely clear. The unequivocallet;er and spirit of the Charter, as well as the
opinions of'both the General Assembly and the
International Court of Justice, are all in favour
of our taking. as our single yardstick the requiremep.ts of Article 4. They are all against our
dosing membership in the United Nations to
applicants which fulfil these requirements; they
are against DU! instilling into this matter elements
o£ .political pressure or political bargaining.

Dans l'expose nlagistra1, qu'il a fait a. notre
a.erniere seance, le President a passe en revue
la plupart des autres elements et faits relatifs a.
cette question. CelIe-ci estmaintenant parfaitement elucidee. Tant l'esprit et la lettre de la
Charte qui ne pretent a aucune equivoque, que
l'opinion de l'Assemblee generale et de la Cour
internationale de J utsice, preconisent que noun
prenions pour seul critl~re les conditiot's preVt1es
a l'Article 4; i!s s'opposent a ce que nous refusions d'admettre dans 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies les Etats qui remplissent ces conditions et.
a. ce que nous introduisions duns cette question
des facteurs relevant de la pj:essioDj ou diu'
marchandage politiques.

Now that efforts are being redoubled with a
view to achieving better international relations,
particularly among the permanent members of the
Security Council, it seems legitimate to hope
that some previous attitudes should be superseded
by other attitudes, in line with these efforts for
an improved international atmosphere. In fact,
such a change of attitude and the consequent
admission-the non-discriminatory admission-of
all worthy applicants to membership in the United
Natinns, would serve as a substantial ,contribution
toward the accomplishment of a less strained, a
more hopeful and a more constructive international atmosphere.

A l'heure actuel1e ou 1'01'\ redouble d'efforts
pour ameliorer les relations internationales, no..,"
tamrnent entre les membres permanents du Conseil de secu:rite, it semble legitime d'esperer que"
certaines attitudes anterieures felOnt place a'
d'autres attitudes, en harmonie avec ces tentatives
Vlsant a allegel' l'atmosphere internationale. Eft
fait, pareil changement d'attitude qui engendrerait l'admission dans l'Organisation des Nations
Unie", "- sans d'.stinction aucune - de tous les
Etats qui en ont fait la d~mande et· qui en sont
dignes, contribuerait grandement a creer une amhiailce internationale moins tendue. plus promet'
teuse et plus constructive.

hav~

M. AUSTIN (Etat~-Unis d'Amerique) (tr.aditif
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of Ame:dca): At
our last meeting, the representative of Argentina de l'ang1ais): Lors de la derniere seance' du;
ltgain state4, his views before the Security Council Conseil de securite, le representant de ,i'Argen~
on the admission of new Members to membersmo tin~ a expose a nouveau ses vues sur l'admission
in the U n~ted Nations. The United States sees de nouveaux Membres dans l'Organisation des
the uriderlying purpose of the representative of Nations Unies. Les :1tats:Unis discernent au
Argentina as expressing his dissatisfaction with fond dudisc01.trs du rerresentant de l'kgentlne
the USSR's obstruction of the admission of le desir de manifester le mecontentement que lui
qualified applicants to membership in the United cause 1'obstruction de l'URSS a. l'admisSl0n
Nations. My Government, of course, shares that d'Etats qui posseaeilt les titres voulus a cet effet.
dissatisfaction. It has attempted. to reach agree- Mon Gouvernement, bien entendu, partage .ce
ment with all the permanent members of the meccintentement. I1 a. essaye de s'entendre ~wec
Security Council on procedures which would bring tous les memhres permanents du Conseilde secu..,
an end to the deadlock reached on this question, rite sur une procedure qui mettraitfina la situaand it is continuing its efforts to achieve such a . tion sans issue a laquelleon a abouti dans cette:
result.
question, et it poursuit· ses efforts POUi' atteindre
ce resultat.
.
La delegation des Etats-pnis a declare, lors
The 4elegation of the United States has stated
at the second arid the third sessions of the des deuxieme et troisieme sessions de l'AssemGeneral Assembly'l' that it would not exercise. its blee generale", qu'elle n'utiliserait pas son droit
right of veto in the Security Council to exclude· de "veto" au Conseil de securite pour ecarter
from the United Nations any applicant then under de I'Organisation des N~,tjons Unies un candidat,
consideration which the Assembly deemed to be qui, <le l'avis de l'Assemblee, remplirait les coodi':
qualified for membership. I can amplify that tions requises pour devenir Membre de l'Org!l:-;
,statement of policy now and say that we have nisation. Je peux maintenant developper, cett~"
no intention in the future of permitting our vote definition de notre politique et dire que, a l'avenir,;
to prevent the admission to membership of, any nous ne voulons pas que notre vote fasse obstacle,
applicant receiving seven, affirmative votes in this a l'admission d'un Etat qui aurait obtenu le v"J~e
Council. Furthermore,' I would recall that our favorable de sept membres du Conseil. En outre,
privileged vote has not in any instance excluded je rappellerai que notre vote priviligie n'a, en
an applicant from United Nations membership. aucun cas" empeche un Etat candidat de devenir;
I 'shall return later to this point.
Membre de l'Organisation. Je reviendrai plus
tard.sur ce point.
.
Par
consequent,
j'ai
en
vue
un
objectif
ideo, Therefore, we seek a purp()sejdentical with that
of the representative of Argentina. The last two . tique a celui du representant de l'Argentine. Au'
sessions of the, General Assembly have heard cours des deux dernieressessions de l'Assemblee.,
learned .stat~ments in the First Committee by the generale, nous avons entendu, a la ,Premiere'

b

7 See Official Records of the second session of tht:
General Assembly, Plenary., meetings, volume I. 82nd
meeting, page 25, and OfficiallRecor-ds of the third
session of the General Assembly, Part I, Plenary meetings, 175th meeting, page 773.

1 Voir les Documents offidels· de la deu~ieme .Yession
de ,I'Assembleegenerale, seance plenieres; Volume I;
82e~~,~eance, ~age 25, et les J)oc,ume1~ts, offiqiels d~ )If)
tr01,neme seSS10n de l'Assembleegenerale, preil't1ef'e
partie, seances plenieres, 175eme seance, page 773.
,

representative of Argentina on the constitutional
history of the process of the admission of new
Members to the United Nations.s Upon such
occasions, we have carefully considered the
position which he has presented. However, we
have not been able to :l,ccept the method of procedure for which he bs so long been an advocate.

Commission, des declarations tres savantes du
representant de l'Argentine concernant l'histoire
constitutionnelle de la procedure en vigueur pour
l'admission de nouveaux Membres dans l'Organisation des Nations Uniess• A ces occasions,
nous avons examine avec be~~coup d'attention
le point de vue du representant de l'Argentine.
Neanmoins, nous n'avons pu nous rallier a la
procedure dont ce representant s'est fait le champion depuis fort longtemps.

The willingness of my Government to refrain
from using its veto to block the decision of any
seven members of the Security Council that an
applicant is qualified for membership, does not
mean that the United States deems that the
Council or its members should ignore the ~'equire­
ments of Article 4. To be admitted into the organized community of nations, States should by their
conduct prior to admission give proof of their
readiness and willingness not to use force as an
instrument of national policy, to respect the laws of
nations, and to assist in their development and
enforcement. Any political entity which possesses
the essential attributes of statehood can easily conform its policies to the requirements of Article 4,
but while these requirements are simple, they are
nevertheless serious and basic. They may not be
fulfilted by paper assurances that as of the date
of admission an applicant will accept the obligations of the Charter. The Organization is entitled
to reasonable proof of a desire for membership
based on a full understanding and respect for
Article 4.

Certes, mon Gouvernement est tout pret a
s'abstenir de faire usage de son droit de "veto",
dans les cas OU sept quelconques des membres
du Conseil de securite decident Qu'un Etat candidat remplit les conditions necessaires pour etre
admis au sein de l'Organisation, mais cela ne
signifie pas que les Etats-Unis estiment que le
Conseil ou ses membres peuvent se dispenser de
tenir compte de~ conditions fixees a l'Article 4.
Pour etre admis au sein de cette comcunaute
organisee des nations, les Etats doivent avoir
prouve, par leur conduite anterieure, qu'ils sont
prets et decides a. ne pas se servir de la force
comme d'un instrument de politique nationale, a.
respecter le droit des gens, et a. favoriser le developpement de ce droit et sa mise en application.
Toute entite politique qui possede les attributs
essentiels de I'Etat peut facilement mettre sa
politique en harmonie avec les exigences de. l'Article 4; mais, si les conditions fixees par cet
Article sont simples, eUes n'en sont pas moins
importantes et fondamentales. It ne suffit pas,
pour remplir ces conditions, que 1'Etat candidat
affirme sur le papier qu'a. dater du jour de son
admission it acceptera toutes les obligations de
la Charte. L'Organisation est en droit d'exiger
une preuve suffisante que le desir de 1'Etat qui
presente sa candidature repose sur une pleine
comprehension de l'Article 4 et sur le plus grand
respect pour ces dispositions.

•
I take it that this discussion will be limited to
the twelve nations whose applications have been
considp.red in the Security Council and those that
did not obtain the Council's recommendation during the 'first part of the third session of the
General Assembly in Paris. Otherwise, I should
not fail to manifest again the warm support which
~y Government gives to the application of Korea.
The applications of Austria, Ceylon, Finland,
Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Jordan have consistently received the support of my Government.
We continue to support fully the admission of
these States. Every one of them received in the
Council at least eight, and some of them nine,
favourable votes, and in each case it was the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics that cast the
negative vote which excluded the aspiring State
from membership. It will not be forgotten that,
Ut ,respect of Italy, the representative of the
USSR said that his GOVl'~rnment considered that
country qualified to become a Member of the
United Nations, but voted against its admission
in consideration of the fact that Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary had not been recommended
for admission. Nor need I recall. that at the first
part of its third session, the General Assembly
'a See Official Records of the second session of the
General Assembly. First Committee, 98th meeting, page

33~t

Je crois comprendre que cette discussion doit
se limiter aux douze nations dont les demandes
ont ete etudiees par le Conseil de securite et
n~ont pas obtenu une recommandation favorable
de la part du Conseil, au cours de la premiere
partie de la troisieme session de l'Assemblee
generale. S'il en etait aui:rement, je ne manquerais
pas d'affirmer, une fois de plus, que mon Gouvernement accorde son appui chaleureux a. la
demande d'admission presentee par la Coree.
Les demandes d'admission de l'Autriche, de
Ceylan, de la Finlande, de 1'Irlande, de l'Italie,
du Portu.t"al et de la Jordanie ont re,;u I'appui
constant de mon Gouvernement; nous continuerons a. appuyer sans reserve les demandes d'admission presentees par ces Etats. Chacun d'entre
eux a obtenu, au Conseil de securite, huit, et meme
parfois neuf voix en sa faveur. Dans chaque cas,
c'est l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques qui, par son vote negatif, a ecarte la
candidature· de ces Etats. En ce qui concerne
l'Italie, on se souvient que le representant de
l'URSS' a dit que, de I'avis de son Gouvernment,
ce pays remplissait les conditions requises pour
devenir Membre de l'Organi~tion, mab que
l'URSS voterait contre l'admission de l'Italie,
etant donne .que les demandes d'admission presentees par la Bulgarie, la Roumanie et la Hons Voir les Documents officiels de la deu.zieme session
de rAssemblM ginerale, Premiere Commission. 98eme
seance, page 338.

'1
reaffirmed by a large majority, in resolution
197 (HI), the view that the opposition of the
Soviet Union to the applications of the countries
concerned was based on grounds not included in
Article 4 of the Charter, and determined again
that in its judgment they were peace-loving
States within the meaning of Article 4 of the
Charter, and should therefore be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

grie n'a.vaient pas re15u une recomnt<1.ndat~on
favorable de la part du Conseil. It est inutile de
rappeler que l'AssembIee generale, au cours de
la premiere partie de sa troisieme session, a adopte
<\ une forte majorite la resolution 197 (HI) dans
laquelle eUe affirme a nouveau que 1'0pposition
de J'Union sovietique a l'admission des pays en
question se fonde sur des considerlltions qui sont
etrangeres a l'Article 4 de la Charte, et que ces
pays sont, a son avis, des Etats pacifiques, au
sens de I'Artic1e 4 de la Charte, et devraient, par
consequent, etre admis comme Membres de I'Organisation des Nations Unies.

The Security Council has been requested to
reconsider these applications in the light of the
General Assembly's determination and the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 28 May 1948. That advisory opinion
held that the conditions for membership described
in Article 4 of the Charter are "exhaustive", that
a Member of the United Nations is not juridically entitled to make its consent to the admission
of a State to membership dependent on conditions
not expressly provided by paragraph 1 of that
Article, and that, in particular, a. Member while
recognizing that the applicant has fufilled the conditions set forth in Article 4, cannot subject its
affirmative vote to the additional condition that
other States should be admitted to membership
in the United Nations together with that State.
The General Assembly has also recommended that
every member of the Security Council should
act in accordance with the Cocrt's opinion in
exercising its vote on the admission of new
Members.

Le Conseil de securite a ete invite a reconsiderer
ces demandes cl'admission a la lumiere de 10.
declaration de l'Assemblee generale et de 1'avis
consultatif 6mis par la CO~1r internationale de
Tustice le 28 mai 1948. Cet avis consultatif declare
que I'Article 4 de la Charte contient toutes les
conditions d'admission dans I'Orgal1isation, qu'un
Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
n'est pas juridiquement fonde a fmt"e dependre
son consentement a l'admission d'un Etat comme
Membre de FOrganisation de conditions non
expressement prevues au paragraphe premier de
I'Article 4 et que, en particulier, un Membre ne
peut pas, alors qu'll reconnait que les conditions
prevues a l'Article 4 sont remplies par l'Etat en
question, subordonner son vote affirmatif a la
condition que, en meme temps que l'Etat dont
il s'agit, d'autres· Etats soient egalement admis
comme Membres de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies. L'Assemblee generale a egalement recommande a chacun des membres du Conseil
de securite de se conformer a l'avis precite de la
Cour, lors du vote sur l'admission de nouveaux
Membres.

We are me~ting here today in compliance with
tne various requests of the General Assembly on
this subject. We hope that all the members of
the Security Council will give full weight to
the recommendations and affirmations of the
General Assembly, as well as to the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice.

Nous nous reunissons id, aujourd'hui, pour
donner suite aux diverses demandes que nous
avons re~ues de I'Assemblee eenerale a ce sujet.
Nous esperons que tous les membres du Conseil
de securite attacheront toute l'importance voulue
aux recommandations et declarations de l'Assemblee generale, ainsi qu'a l'avis consultatif de
la Cour intemationale de Justice.

The position of my Government with respect
to the applications of Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary,
the Mongolian People's Republic and Romania
remains the same as before. We are unable' to
support these applications. We could not vote
for the admission of Bulgaria, Hungary and
Romania in 1947 and in 1948, nor can we do so
now, when the three Governments stand charged
with systematic suppression of human rights and
the violation of their peace treaties with the
Allied nations. Furthermore, both Bulgaria and
Albania continue to give matexial assistance and
comfort to the rebels seeking to overthrow the
constituted Government of a Member of the
United Nations, Greece.

La position de mon Gouvemement en ce qui
concerne les demandes d'admission de I'Albanie,
de la Bulgarie, de la Hongrie, de la Republique
populaire de Mongolie et de la Roumanie demeure
la meme que precedemment. Nous ne sommes
pas en mesure d'appuyer ces demandes. Nous
n'avons pas pu voter en faveuT de l'admission
de la Bulgarie, de la Hongrie .et de la Roumanie
en 1947 et en 1948, et nous ne pouvons pas le
faire aujourd'hui, alors que ces trois Gouyernements. sont accuses de supprimer syntematiquement les droits de l'homme sur leur territoire et
de violer les traites de paix qu'ils ont conclus
avec les Allies. En outre, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie .
continuent de soutenir etd'aider materiellement
les rebelles quit cherchent a renverser le Gouvernement legalement constitue d'un Membre de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, a savoir la
Grece.
Je reconnais, avec le President, que s'it se
revele que les differentes positions des membres
du Conseil de securite sur ce sujet sont telles
qu'un nouveau vote sur les douze demp.ndes
d'admission donnera les Inemes resultats que precedemment, II ne serviraa rien de m'ettre la question aux voix. Mais, si 1'on devait Inettre aU~

I agree with the President that, if the present
views of the memb.?rs of the Security Council
indicate that there will be no change in the results
of voting on these twelve applications, no useful
purpose would be served py bringing the present
matter to a vote. However, if votes should be
~en on the resol.utions presented by Mr. Arce,
t . ! £ Lt L1! iAIIR'

'.rIf_CilUill··

•

.T

..

..

--_._--_._~"---"_.

__ ..._--_ ..

8
I should like to characterize the vote whi:h the
United States will cast as being free from commitment to the understanding stated by Mr. Arce
of the procedure which should be followed in
arriving at a recommendation by the Security
Council, or at a decision. by the General Assembly.

vOlX les projet de resolutions presentes par
M. Arce, je desire preciser que ma deIe~tion,
~n se pronon~ant sur ces projets, entendralt bien
ne prendre aucun engagement concernant les
vues e:l>.-primees par M. Arce au suj et de la proced~re qui devrait etre suivie afin d'obtenir une
recommandation du Conseil de securite ou une
decision de l'AssembJee generale.

Mr. TSARAPK:tN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tratlslated from R'U,)wn): The
statement just made by the representative of the
United States has shown that, in the question
ef the admission of new Members, the United
States is carrying out a policy of discrimination
against some ~ountries and favouritism towards
others. Its position has not changed. It is perfectly clear that the United States wants to aJmit
to the United Nations only the countries which it
favours, to ~ncrease the Ijumber of its supporters
in the United Nations, and to prevent the admission to the United Nations I)f all States whose
policies it does not entirely approve.

M. TSARAPKINE (UIl..on des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques)' (trad1tit du ntsse): La
declaration que vient de faire le representant
des Etats-Unis montre que, en matiere d'admission de nouveaux Membres, les Etats-Unis continuent a. pratiquer la discrimination a l'egard de
certains pays tout en poursuivant leur politique
de favoritisme a. l'egard d'autres pays. L'attitude
des Etats-Unis n'a pas change. De toute evidence,
les Etats-Unis ne tiennent a admettre dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies que les pays auxquels ils sont favorables, et veulent donner ainsi
plus de poids au clan de leurs partisans, tout en
empechant l'admission des Etats dont la politique
n'est pas tout a. fait a leur gout.

But the Security Council will not progress very
far with the United States adopting such an
attitude and pursuing such Cl. policy. If the United
States continues to pursue its blatant and barefaced policy of discrimination with regard to
the admission to membership of such States as
Albania, the Mongolian People's Republic, Romania, Hungary and Bulgaria, that will constitute the crudest possible violation of the principles, purposes and aims of the United Nations.

Toutefois, ce ne sont pas cette attitud~ et cette
politique des Etats-Unis qui permettront au Conseil d'aller de l'avant. En continuant de pratiquer
une discrimination grossiere et ehontee en ce qui
concerne l'admission dans l'Organisation des
Nations Unies de pays tels que l'Albanie, la
Republique populaire de Mongolie, la Roumanie,
la Hongrie et la Bulgarie, les Etats-Unis se mettront en contradiction flagrante avec les principes, les buts et les objectifs de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies.
Je repete: les Etats-Unis tiennent, ainsi que
leur representant l'a reitere ouvertement aujourd'hui, a ce que seuls les pays dont its approuvent
le regime et la politique ~oient admis dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Mais, si lear desir
etait satisfait, rOrganisation des Nations Unies
cesserait d'etre un orghnisme reunissant tinquante-neuf pays, sans distinction de regime ou
de politique, et deviendrait un simple bloc d'Etats
soumis aux Etats-Unis. Est-ce done la le but et
la tache qili ont ete assignes a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies? Si tel est bien l'objectif que cherchellt a atteindre les Etats-Unis, it n'est nullement
conforme a la tache confiee iJ. l'Organisation; il
lUl est meme contraire. L'Organisation des Nations Unies et ses organes principaux, parmi lesquels figure le Conseil de securite, ne sont nullement tenus de se laisser guider par les motifs
egoistes dont s'inspire te1 pays ou tel groupe de
pays.
Le Conseil de securite ne saurait accepter une
politique quiequivaudraita un "diktat" des
Etats-Unis et de certains pays qui les soutiennent,
ni en ce qui concerne l'admission de nouveaux
Membres, ni en ce qui concerne aucune autre
question.
.
Lors de la derniere seance du Conseil de seeurite qui s'est tenue le 16 jllin, le representant de
l'Argentine a fait un long discours dans lequel
il n'a pourtant rien dit de nouveau, et n'a ava,nce
aucune idee ni aucune proposition nouvelles.
M. Arce s'est borne a repeter ce qu'il avait di~
a :Raris, a la troisieme session de I'AssembIee
generate, au sujet de la methode de vote a adopter
au Conseil de securite ence qui concerne l'admission de nouveaux Membres. I1 a affirme,
comme par le passe, que, dans des cas pareil;,...

Let me emphasize once again: the United States
wants-and this was openly repeated once again
today-that only States whose regim('~s and
,policies are acceptable to the United States should
be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
But in that case, the United, Nations would no
longer be an organization comprising fifty,-nine
countries of the world, regardless of their regimes
or the policies of their Governments, but a bloc
of States subjected to the United States. Is that
what the United Nations must 'Nork and strive
for? That is the aim of the United States, but
it does not represent the aims of the United
Nations and is in direct conflict Wcth them. Must
the Organization' and its main organs, including
the Security Council, be guided by such selfish
motives on the part of· one or several countries?

En

We cannot accept su~h a policy, which is
nothing but a dictatorial policy exercised by the
United States and certain other countries which
support it either in this question of the admission
of new Members to the United Nations or on
any other question, in whatever field.
At the last meeting of the Security Council,
on 16 June, the representative of Argentina made
a long speech which, however, contained nothing
new, not a single new thought or proposal. Mr.
Arce repeated everything he had said in Paris
at the third session of the General Assembly on
the voting procedure in the Security' Council in
connexion with the admission of new Members.
As hefore, the representative ofArgentina insisted
that the "veto" should not be used in such cases.
that the Security Council's recommendations ori
Iln.1111I1

1I110.BaS_lllla

111111111111111&

_

•••

d

_

--

the admission of new Members were not binding
and that final decisions in the matter lay with the
General Assembly.

it n'y avait pas lieu de faire usage du "veto", que
les recommandations du Conseil relatives a l'admission de nouveaux Membres n'avaient rien
d'obligatoire, et que les decisions finales sur la
question etaient la prerogative de l'Assemblee
generale.

The representative of Argentina referred more
than once to the advisory opinion of the International Court of 28 May 1948. The President
also referred to that opinion in his statement at
the last meeting of the Security Council. The
worthlessness of that so-called advisory opinion
was exhaustively and convincingly demonstrated
by the head of the USSR delegation, Mr. Vyshinsky, at the third session of the General Assembly,
on 8 December 1948. The delegation of the Soviet
Union therefore does not propose to dwell once
again on that matter.

Le representant de l'...'\.rgentine a cite a plusieurs
reprises l'avis consultatif em:s par la Cour internationale de Justice le 28 mai 1948. Le President
du Conseil a, lui aussi, invoque ce document
dans la declaration qu'il a faite lors de la derniere
seance du Conseil. Toutefois, le 8 decembre 1948,
a la troisieme session de I'Assemblee generale,
M. Vychinsky, chef de la delegation de l'URSS,
avait montre d'une fr..;on parfaitement concluante
que ce pretendu avis ~ol'jsultatif etait depourvu
de tout fondement La delegation de l'Union sovietique se dispensera done de s'etendre davantage
sur cette question.

D'autre part, on sait que l'ordre du JOUl du
Furthermore, the item on the Security Council's
agenda is the revision of applications for admis- Conseil de securite prevoit la reconsideration des
sion to membership in the United Nations, not demandes d'admission dans l'Organisation des
the revision of the Charter, which was in fact Nations Unies, et non pas une revision de la
the main subject of the Argentine representative's Charte. Or, c'est essentiellement a cette derniere
speech and which was also ttlentioned by the . question que M. Arce a consacre, en fait, son
representative of the United States. The USSR discours, et c'est surcette'meme question que le
delegation will therefore pass over everything that representant des Etats-Unisa fait porter son
has been said on that point by these two repre- intervention. Pour cette raison, la delegation de
sentatives. The fact that in his speech the repre- l'URSS se dispensera de repondre a tout ce que
sentative of Argentina clutched at the ineffectual ces deux representants ont dit a ce sujet. Le fait
advisory opinion of the International Court shows que le representant de I'Argentine se soit cramonly that he has not substantially changed his ponne, dans sa declaration, a un avis consultatif
position 'in the matter of the admission of new de la Cour internationale qui n'a aucune valeur
Members, and intends to pursue his old policy juridique indique. simplement que M. Arce mainof discrimination on the one hand and favouri- tient au fond l'attitude qu'il a adoptee a l'egard
tism on the other, following the lead of the United de l'admission de nouveaux Membres, et que,
States and some other countries.
suivant l'~emple de la delegation des Etats-Unis
et de certains autres pays, it veut rester fidele a
la politique de discrimination, d'une part, et de
favoritisme, d'autre part.
En· examinant avec soin la declaration que le
After closely studying the Argentine representative's speech at the Security Council meeting of representant de l'Argentine a faitea la seance du
16 June one is led to ask ~ Why did he see fit Conseil tenue le 16 juin demier, on est force de
to reiterate his fanciful views on the problem of se demander pourquoi it a juge necessaire de
voting in the Security Council in connexion with reprendre tous ces arguments extravagants sur
the admission of new Members and on the ques- la methode de v;)te a suivre au Conseil de securite
tion of the Secu.rity Council's recommendations, lors de l'admission de nouveaux Membres et sur
views which he advanced without success in Paris les recommandations a formuler par le Consei1,
alors qu'il avait deja tente d'invoquer ces arguat the third session of the Genera~ Assembly?
mentsa Paris, lors de. la troisiiillle session de
l'Assemblee generale?
On sait qu'a l'epoque le chef de la delegation'·
The h~ad of the delegation of the Soviet Union
at that time cO'lli?letely demolished the whole de l'Union sovietique a refute l'.argumentati~Q.
argumentation of the Argentine representative, de M. Arce d'une fa~on si brillante, que ce der':
and we all know that the latter was obliged to nier a ete oblige de retirer ses propositions comme
withdraw his proposals as unfounded. Why, then, depourvues de fondement. Pourquoi a-t-il done
has. he brought up these issues all over again? souleve toutes ces questions a nouveau? N'est-ce
Could it be in order to provoke the application pas pour provoquer un nouveau "veto" au Conseil
of the so-called "veto" in the Security Council, de secutite, pour consolider sa position et pQ11r
thus replenishing his arsenal for renewed attacks poursuivre ainsi la campagne qu'il mene. contre
against one of the fundamental principles of the l'un des pilliers de l'Organisation des Nations
United Nations as. expressed in the rule of Unies, a savoir la regie de l'unanimite des memunanimity of the permanent members of the b' 3 permanents du Conseil lors' de l'adoption de
Security Council in decisions on all important toute decision importante?
.
questions?
Cette conclusion s'impose d9e11e..meme lorsqu'on
- That is the inevitable conclusion to be drawn
envisage
les sept projets, de resolutionsoumis'par
Argen-'
from the .fact that the. representative of.
tina has placed before the Security Council seven le representant de l'Argentine. Ces proJetsse
<traft resolutions recommending the admission to bornent er,l effet a recommander l'admissiou.a
membership in the United Nations of only such l'Organisation des Nations Unies des pays tels
'Countries as Po~ugal, Jo~da.n, Italy, Finland~ Ire,;, que le Portugal, la ] ordanie, l'Italie, la Finlande,

b

__.__,,_ .". ~__

"_c".,·,,

10

-

land, Austria and Ceylon, which filed their appli~' l'Irlande. I'Autriche et Ceylan qui ant soumis
cations in 1947 or 1948, at the same time saying leurs demandes, soit en 1947, soit en 1948, et ne
nothing about the admission of five other States soufflent mat de l'admission des cinq autres pays,
such as Albania and the Mongolian People's a savoir l'Albanie et la Republique populaire de
Republic, which submitted their applications in Mongolie qui ant presente leurs demandes d'ad~
January and June 1946 respectively, and Bulgaria mission respectivement en janvier et en juin 1946,
and Hungary, and Romania which applied for et la Bulgarie, la Hongrie et la Roumanie qui
membership in April and July 1947 respectively. ont demande a. faire partie de 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies en avril et en juillet 1947.
La maniere de proceder du representant de
All those actions on the part of the representative of Argentina and those who support him can l'Argentine et de ceux qui le soutiennent indique
only mean that they are continuing to share the simplement qu'ils s'en tiellnent a. l'attitude adop~
attitude of the Anglo-American bloc on this mat- tee a. regard de cette question par le bloc anglo~
ter; the only result of that attitude has been that americain. attitude qui a eu pour seul resultat
such countries as AlbaI" J., the Mongolian People's d'interdire, pendant une periode de deux ans a.
Republic, Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania still trois ans et demi, l'acces de 1'0rganisation des
remain outside the United Nations after a period Nations Unies aux pays tels que l'Albanie. la
ranging from three and a half to two years, Republique populaire de Mongolie, la Hongrie,
although they are funy entitled to admission to la Bulgarie et la Roumanie, qui ont pourtant
membership, in as much as they satisfy all the toutes les raisons d'etre admis dans cette OrgarequireItlents of the Charter in respect of the nisation puisqu'ils remplissent toutes les conditions imposees par la Charte a. l'admission de
admission of new Members.
nouveaux r\'fembres.
Le representant de l'Argentine a declare, certes,
True, the representative of Argentina, speaking at the last meeting of the Council, said that a. la derniere seance du Conseil, qu'il ne s'oppohe had' nothing against considering the applica- serait pas a. l'examen des demandes d'admission
tions of those countries for admission to member~ pre:::entees par ces pays a. l'Organisation des
ship in the United Nations, and that the Argen- Nations Unies et que sa delegation n'eprouverait
tine delegation would have no difficulty in voting pas de difficultes a. voter en faveur de ces demandes.
.
in favour of those applications.
Les representants de Cuba et de l'Egypte se sont
The representative of Cuba spoke on more or
less the same lines, as also did the representative prononces a. peu pres dans le meme sens. On
of Egypt and, I might add, the President of the peut en dire autant du President qui, en sa quaSecurity Council, who stated on behalf of the lite de representant de la Norvege, a declare a.
Norwegian delegation at the last meeting that that la derniere seance du Conseil que sa delegation
delegation firmly upheld the idea of the uni- s'en tenait fermement au principe de l'universalite
versality of the United Nations. If that is 1'0, de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies. S'il en est
the inference may be drawn that some members ainsi, on pourrait en deduire que certains membres
of the Security CoucH seem to be inclining, du Conseil commencent a accepter, quoiqu'avec
though with inconsistencies and all kinds of hesitation et avec toutes sortes de reserves, qu'une
reservations, towards a positive solution of the solution favorable soit donnee au probleme de
l'admission de nouveaux Membres.
question of the admission of new Members.
Toutefois, la solution que 1'on va donner a ce
However, a solution of this matter depends on
whether or not the other permanent members of probleme dependra de la question de savoir si,
the Security Council will, to use the President's comme l'a dit le President, les autres membres
words, wish to use their privileged vote to block permanents du Conseil tiendront a faire usage de
leur vote priviligie pour empecher 1'admission d'un
the admission of any State.
ou de plusieurs Etats 'dans 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
Dans la declaration qu'il vient de faire, le repreThe United States representative has just told
us that he will block the admission of the United sentant des Etats-Unis a annonce qu'il s'opposerait
Nations of Albania, the Mongolian People's Re- a ce que l'Albanie, la Republique populaire de
Mongolie, la Bulgarie, la Hongrie et la Roumanie
public, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania.
soient admises dans 1'0rganisation des Nations
Unies.
Nous connaissons tous les moyens auxquels
We all know how the applications of those
States were blocked in the past. Those who on a eu recours pour empecher 1'admission deces
blocked them even went as far as to invoke the pays dans 1'0rganisationdes Nations Unies. Ceux
aid of the International Court of Justice. There- qui etaient opposes a cette admission ont meme
fore the references made here to the so-called fait appel a la Cour internationale de Justice.
advisory opinion of the Court were needed only Aussi les references qu'on a faites ici du pretendu
to sidetrack the Security Council from. the funda- avis consultatif de la Cour internationale ne
lllental issue which, as we know, is the considera- devaient-eIles servir qu'a. ecarter le. Conseil de
tion of the general recommendation of the Gen- securite de la question essentielle dont il est saisi;
eral Assembly, contained in resolution 197 (HI) B or on sait que cette question -essentielle, c'est
and requesting the Security Council to reconsider l'examen de la recommandation d'ensemble qui
~ll applications received up to now for memberfait 1'objet de .la resolution. 197 (Ill) B de
ship in the United Nations.
l'AssembIee generale et aux ter1nes de laquelle le
Conseil de securite doit reconsiderer toutes les
demandes d'admission re<;ues' j't1squ'a. present par
l'Organisation des Nations UnJes.

11

a

The meaning of that resolution is that the
Security Council should review all the applications before it and should recommend the admission to membership of all the applicant States.

Cette resolution tend simplement
ce que le
Conseil de securite examine a nouveau toutes les
demandes dont it est saisi et a. ce qu'it recommande
d'admettre tous les Etats interesses comme Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

The General Assembly has already on three
occasions adopted resolutions recommending that
the Security Council should reconsider applications for membership in the United Nations; but
resolution 197 (HI) B is the first one to contain
a recommendation by the General Assembly to
the effect that the Security Council should review
the applications on the basis of the principl~ of
universality.

Comme on le sait, c\~st la troisieme fois que
l'AssembIee generale auopte une resolution recommandant au Conseil de £ecurite de reconsiderer
les demandes d'admission adressees a l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Mais c'est la premiere
fois qu'elb recommande, dans sa resolution 197·
(HI) B, que le Conseil envisage ces demandes a
la lumic~re du principe de l'universalite.

Obviously the Security Council should draw
the proper conclusions from this fact and adopt a
satisfactory decision. But a positive solution of
the question of admission of the applicant States
can be reached only if the majority of members
of the Security Council, including the familiar
"foursome" of the permanent members, abandon
their policy of discrimination against some States
and favouritism towards others and, without
complicating the matter by external issues entirely
irrelevant to the question of admission to the
United Nations, vote for the admission to membership of the countries wl.ose applications are
listed in the agenda of this meeting, and who are
peace-loving and able and willing to carry out
the provisions of the Charter.

Il va sans dire que le Conseil de securite est
tenu d'en tirer les conclusions qui s'imposent et
de prendre une decision satisfaisante en la matiere. Toutefois, pour regler par l'affirmative la
question de l'admission des Etats qui avaient
demande a faire partie de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, il faut que la majorite des membres
du Conseil, et notamment le fameux t< quator"
des membres permanents, renoncent a leur politique de discrimination et cessent de favoriser
certains Etats au detriment des autres; il faut
aussi qu'iIs cessent de compliquer le probleme en
y intruduisant des considerations entierement
etrangeres a l'admission de nouveaux Membres;
il faut enfin qu'ils votent en faveur de l'admission
dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies des pays
dont les demandes figurent a l'ordre du jour de
la presente seance, des pays pacifiques, desireux
et capables de respecter les dispositions de la
Charte.
Il est exact que la question de l'admission de
The question of admission of new Members to
nouveaux Membres dans l'Organisation des Nathe United Nations has a long history.
tions Unies a deja. une longue histoire.
Certains Etats, tels que l'Albanie, qui a presente
Some States, such as Albania, which applied
for membership in the United Nations in January sa demande d'admission en janvier 1946, atten1946, have been waiting for admission for the dent depuis trois ans et demi d'etre adrnis a
past three and a half years. The Mongolian l'Organisation des Nations Unies. La Republique
People's Republic has b~n awaiting a decision populaire de Mongolie attend une decision depuis
since 1946, namely for three years; Hungary has juin 1946, c'est-a-dire depuis trois ans; la Honbeen waiting since April 1947, and Romania and grie attend depuis avril 1947, la Roumanie et la
Bulgarie depuis juillet 1947. .
.
Bulgaria since July 1947.
Les deux premiers Etats, 11. savoir l'Albanle et
The first two States I have mentioned, Albania
and the Mongolian People's Republic, made a la Republique populaire de Mongolie, ont apporte
noteworthy contribution to the struggle of the au cours de la derniere guerre une contribution
democratic countries against the common enemy magnifique a la lutte menee par les pays demoin the last war and suffered many losses in that cratiques contre l'ennemi commun, et its ont
subi dans cette lutte des pertes considerables.
struggle.
Quant a la Hongrie, a la Bulgarie et a la RouAs regards Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania,
it is a well-known fact that the States which manie, on sait que les Etats qui ont signe des
signed peace treaties with those countries, includ- traites de paix avec ces pays, et notamment les
ing the United States, the United Kingdom and EtatE' Unis, le Royaume-Uni et certains autres
se sont engages par la meme a en favooth~rs, thereby undertook to support their adrnis- ; enco.
sion to membership in the United Nations. Today riser l'admission a l'Organisation des Nations
we have heard the United States representative Unies.. Aujourd'hui, le representant des Etatssay how his Government interprets the obligation Unis nous a fait part de la maniere dont son
it assumed to support those countries' applica- Gouverne11'lent interpretait l'obligation qu'il avait
tions for admission to membership in the United assumee de favoriser l'admission de ces pays a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Nations.
Outre les pays que je viens de menrtionner, un
Apart from those States, a number of other
countries are awaiting admission to the United. certain nombre d'autresEtats attendent d'etre
Nations.
admis dans rOrganisation des Nations Unies.
The USSR delegation deems it essential that
La delegation de I'URSS estime necessaire de
the question of the admission of new Members regler sans delai la question de l'admission de
should be solved forthwith. To facilitate the nouveaux Membres. Pour faciliter la solution de
solution of this question, the Government of the ce probleme, le Gouvernement de rUnion sovieSoviet Union is submitting~Pfoposal for the , itique propose d'admettre simultanement clans

1It

_

-----_._ _ _
.. _

..

simultaneous admission to membership in the
United Nations of all the twelve States whose
applications have been repeatedly examined by
the Security Council, namely: Albania, the Mongolian People's Rtlpublic, Bulgaria, Romania,
Hungary, Finland, Italy, Portugal, Ireland,
Jordan, Austria and Ceylon.

rOrganisation des Nations Unies tous les Etats
dont les demandes d'admission ont deja. ete examinees a. pltJsieurs occasions par le Conseil de
securite; il s'agit des douze Etats suivants: Albanie, Republique populaire de Mongolie, Bulgarie,
Roumanie, Hongrie, Finlande, Italie, Portugal,
Irlande, Jordanie, Autriche et Ceylan.

Though there are serious grounds for objecting to the admission to membership in the United
Nations of some of the above-named countries,
the Soviet Union is prepared to withdraw its
objections to their admission in order to facilitate
the solution of the question of the admission of
new Members, provided that no discrimination
will take place in respect of Albania, the Mongolian People's Republic, Bulgaria, Romania and
Hungary, which, I stress. again, are fully entitled
to admission to the United Nations as they comply
with all the requirements for admission set forth
in the Charter.

Bien qu'il existe des raisons graves pour s'opposer a. l'admission de certains de ces pays,
rUninn sovietique, desireuse de faciliter la solution de cette question, est prete a. retirer les
objections qu'elle eleve contre leur admission, a.
la condition toutefois que 1'on cesse de pratiquer
la discrimination a. regard de l'Albanie, de la
Republique populaire de Mongolie, de la Bulgarie,
de la Roumanie et de la Hongrie qui ont - je
le repete - toutes les. raisons d'etre admises a.
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, puisqu'elles
remplisscnt toutes les conditions dont la Charte
fait dependre l'admission de nouveaux Membres.

In counexion with the above, the delegation of
the USSR is submitting for the Security Council's
consideration the following draft resolution

En consequence, la delegation de l'URSS soumet a. l'examen du Conseille projet de resolution
suivant [S11340j :

"The Secur-ity Coundl,
"Havi,ng cons-idered the applications of Albania,
the Mongolian People's Republic, Bulgaria,
Romania, Hungary, Finland, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, Jordan, Austria and Ceylor. for admission
to membership in the United Nations,

"Le Conseil de securite,
trAyant examine les demandes de l'Albanie, de
la. Republique populaire de Mongolie, de la Bulgarie, de la RotL.i1anie, ~e la Hongrie, de la Finlande, de l'Italie, du'Portugal, de l'Irlande, de la
Jordanie, de l'Autriche et de Ceylan, tendant a. les
admettre dans I'Org .nisation des Nations Unies,
"Recommande a. l'Assemblee generate d'admefu.; les Etats designes ci-dessus a. I'Organisation des Nations Unies."
La delegation de I'URSS espere que les membres du Conseil de securite appuieront cette proposit:on du Gouvernement de I'Union sovietique, ce
qui pemlettra de donner enfin une solution sadsfaisante la question de l'admission des douze
Etats interesses.

[S/1340]:

"Recommends to the General Assembly that
the above-mentioned States be admitted to membership in the United Nations."
The USSR delegation believes that this pro-'
posal by the Soviet Government will meet with
support in the Security Council, and that the
question of admitting to the United Nations the
twelve States listed above will, at last, reach a
positive solution.
.

a

.Mr. CHAUVEL (France) (translated from
French) : I wish to make a few brief remarks on
various points.

M. CHAUVEL (France): Je desire me borner
a. formuler de breves remarques a. propos de divers
points.
.
.Tout d'abord, je tiens a. dire que la delegation
In the first place; I should like to say that the
French delegation agrees with the conclusions de la France donne son accord aux conclusions
submitted by the President himself on the 16th de procedure que le President a presentees luiof this month with regard to the procedure for meme le 16 de ce mois en ce qui touche la fac;on
dealing with the problem at present before the de traiter le probleme actuellement pose devant le
Conseil.
Council.
. Quant a.l'avisconsultatif de la COUl', la position
With regard to the advisory opinion of the
Cdurt, the position of the French delegation is de la delegation franc;aise est assez particuliere.
a rather special one. It was with some relu~tance C'est avec 'hesitation que ma delegation avait
that my delegation gave its agreement to an donne son accord a. la demande d'avis. II lui etait
opinion being requested. It had felt-and I apparu en effet - et je prie mes collegues de se
would refer my colleagues to document AIAC.24/ rHerer pour plus amples details au document
SR 11 for fuller details-that the question was AIAC.24/SR,1l - que la question etait d'ordre
more political than legal in character, and, con- politiqtie plus que juridique et, par consequent,
sequently, was not the kind of question where the h'etait pas de celles ou l'avis de la Cour put etre
completement. determinant.
opinipn of the Court could be decisive.
The opinion having been requested and given,
L'avis ayantete demande et donne, le Gouverthe French Government felt that there was no nement hanc;ais a estime qu'il n'y avait pas lieu,
o~casion for the Assembly to alter the advisory pour l'Assemblee, de' transformer l'avis consulopinion, which has a definite value as a guiding tatif, qui a une valeur propre en tant qu'element
factor and as such should be filed as arecom- d'appreciatioll, et devait, comme tel, etr:e verse au
mendation.
dossier sous forme de recommandation.
. ' Lastly,. on the substance of the question, my
Sur le fond des choses !=nfin, mon GouverneGoyernment wholeheartedly supports paragraph meritapprouve entierement leparagraphe b)
{b) of the Court's opinion. It feeJsthat every· de l'avis de la Cour. It estime que toute candida~

.

I
...Ill

13
application should be considered on its own merits
and that even if there were a dozen applications
outstanding, they should not be linked together
in any way. One the other hand, it has reserva"
tions concerning paragraph (a), which limits the
objections which may be raiaed against an application to the conditions expressly set forth in
paragraph 1 of Article 4 of the Charter.

ture doit Stre consideree suivant ses propres merites et qu'aucune liaison ne doit etre etablie entre
deux ou plusieurs candidatures simultanement
pendantes, celles-ci fussent-p.lles au nombre de
douze. Par contre, n fait des reserves sur le
paragraphe a) qui Iimite aux conditions expressement prevues au paragraphe premier de l'Article 4
de la Charte les objections sus~eptibles d'etre presentees contre une candidature.

Although those conditions are expressly laid
down in that Article, they are neither explicit nor
specific: the State under consideration nas to be
peace-loving and able to assume the obligations of
the Charter. Those terms are so wide in scope
that they cover any politi(:al objections which
might be raised. My Govemment reserves complete freedom with -regard to the political judgment that t~t entails.

Ces <:onditions de l'Artic1e 4, en dIet, si eUes
sont expressement prevues par cet Article, ne sont
ni explicites ni precises: rEtat considere doit Stre
pacifique et capable d'assnmer les obligations de
la Charte. Ces termes sont si generaux qu'ils couvrent toutes les objections poIitiques que 1'0n
pourrclit formuler. Mon Gouvemement entend se
reserver la plus grande liberte quant a. l'appreciation politique que cette redaction comporte.

The French Government is, and always has
been, a staunch supporter vI the principle of
universality. . That me'ans that my Government
hopes that all the States in the world will eventually fulfil the conditions imposed by the Charter
and will. thus be able to be admitted as Members
of the United Nations. It does not mean, however-and on that point I am in full agreement
with the representative of China-that any country which submits an application must be admitted
solely by virtue of the principle of universality.

Le Gouvernement franc;ais, sans doute, est
partisan de l'tmiversalite, et il fa toujours ete.
Cela veut dire que mon Gouvernement souhaite
que tous les ~.tats du tponde en viennent a repondre aux ~0n.dltions p.osees par la Charte et puissent,
d~ ce. faIt, e~e admis comme M~bres de l:Orgamsation; mats cela ne veut pas dire - et Je suis
completement d'accord sur ce point avec le representant de la Chine - que tout pays faisant acte
de candidature doive, de ce seul fait, par application du principe de l'universalite, etre admi8.
La delegation franc;aise, enfin,' n'a pas d'insFinally, the French delegation has not received
instructions which would enable it to make.as full tructions qui lui permettent de faire au Conseil,
a statement on the use of the right of veto as that en ce qui concerne l'usage du droit de "veto",
which has just been made by the United States . une declaration aussi complete que celle que vient
representative. It would recall, however, respond- de formuler le representant des Etats-Unis. Elle
ing as far as it pertains to the concern eloquently rappelle par contre, repondant dans toute la
expressed by the representative of Argentina, that mesure qui lui est possible aux preoccupations
it has not made use of the veto in respect of any eloquemment eAf)rimees par le representant de
l'Argentine, qu'elle n'a fait usage du "veto" a.
of the appl~cations now before the Council.
1'IIDcontre d'aucUfI?- des candidatures dont le
Conseil est actuellement saisi.
Moreover, it sees no reason to modify its posiEIle precise, en outre, qu'elle ne voh aucune
tion in thatconnexion. It will maintain that raison de modifier sa position a. cet egard. EIle
position in the event of the applications in ques- s'en tiendra a. cette position, au cas ou lesdites
tion being put to the vote again.
candidatures feraient l'objet d'un nouveau vote.
Mr. ARCE (Argentina) (translated fram
Spanish) : I wish to make only a few brief comments on the speech made by the representative of
the Soviet Uniori.

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de .l'espagnol).:

Je ne demande. la parole que pour formuler

quelques breves observations apropos du discours
que vient de faire le representant de l'Union
sovietique.
.
He expressed surprise that in a long speech I
Ce representant s'est etonne de m'eritendre
had repeated again and again some arguments repeter a plusieurs. reprises, dans une longue
which .1 had advanced previously.. That should intervention, certains arguments que J'a,vais dej a.
not surprise him, for repetitions and the making exposesprecerlemment. I1 a tort de s'etonner,
of lengthy speeches are practices to which S01tt~ car les .repetitions et les longs discours sontdes
delegations have accustomed us. Argentina, for. pratiques auxquelles certaines delegations nous
its 'part, does not abuse that custom, but it is at ont accoutumes. L'Argentine, pour sapart,n'et1
times forced to make use of it. It seems to me abuse pas, mais se voit parfois dans l'obligation
that if any delegation could be accused of repeat- d'y avoir recours. It me semble que s'il y a une -,'
ing itself, it is not exactly the Argentine delega- delegation a laqueIle on ne peut reprocher de se"
tion. Thus it is no doubt for those reasons that repeter, c'est precisement la delegation del'Argenthe representative of the Soviet Union said he tin,e. C'est gour cetteraison,certes, quelereprewould ignore my speech ;it is, however, an excuse sentant de l'Union sovietiquea dec1are·qu'ilne
designed to camouflage ..ne fact that he does not tiendrait pas compte de mon discours, mais c'est
know what to answer. I, for my part, do not la.une excuse. destinee it masquer le faitqu'ilest
have to pretend to ignore his speech, and I there" bien enpeine d'y repondre; quant a moi,quhil'ai
fore wish to correct one of his statements;.accord- pas a feindie d'ignorer son discours, h~ tiens .a.
ingto him, I had· indicated. that I would vote for proceder aune rriise.au point a. son, stijet; selol)l
. the other-countries WhOSe applications the USSR ce representant, j'aurais Il1anifeste l'intention
representative wished, to have examined.. In fact de .vot,er pour. les autre~ .pays dont . . il .voudrait
what 1 said was that I was prepared to consider voir les demandes d'admission.prises .en conside...

.._m.··········

those applications and that I would not find it
difficult to vote for some of them.

ration. Or, ce que j'ai declare, en realite, c'est
que j'etais dispose a examiner ces <iemandes et
que je n'eprouverais pas de difficulte::l a voter
en faveur de certaines d'entre eUes.

To round off his case against mine, the representative of the Soviet U!lion stated that, in his
speech in Paris, Mr. Vyshinsky had destroyed all
the arguments that I had put forward. That is a
very easy statement to make, especially if he
ignores the speeches ;n which I proved that Mr.
Vyshinsky did not refute a single one of my
arguments; but that is a matter which concerns
the representative of the Soviet Union and him
alone. If he does not wish to take any notice of
my speech, it is obvious that he will never go
beyond the first stage of the discussion during
which Mr. Vyshinsky claimed to have pulled my
arguments to pieces, but will continue to ignore
th.e subsequent stages in which I proved that Mr.
Vyshinsky had not destroyed anything at all.

Pour renforcer son argumentation, dirigee
contre la mienne, le representant de l'Union sovietique a pretendu que M. Vychinsky avait reduit
a neant, dans son discours de Paris, tous les
arguments 'que j'avais fait valpir. I1 lui est assez
facile de le dire, surtout s'H prend le parti d'ignorer les interventions dans IesqueIles fai demontre que M. Vychinsky n'avait pas refute un seul
de mes arguments; mais cela, c'est l'affaire du
representant de I'Union sovietique et de 1ui seuI.
S'it lui plait d'ignorer mon discours, it en restera
toujcurs, evidemment, a la premiere phase des
debats all cours desquels M. Vychinsky pretendait mettre en pieces mon argumentation, et it
continuera a ignorer les interventions ulterieures
dans lesquelies j'ai prouve queM. Vychinsky
n'avait rien detruit du tout.

He also reproached me for not having said a
single word about the applications of' Albania,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania and the Mongolian
Peoples' Republic. That is not correct, for I said
that I was prepared to consider any application
submitted by another delegation, and it is obvious
that the USSR delegation has the right to submit
resolutions on that subject. Moreover, I am well
aware of them, because on the ag('.nda which we
have approved, the very applications to which
the USSR representative referred appear under
items (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f). T-hus, under
item (a) are the seven to which I referred, because they have been recommended by the General Assembly, and under items (b), (c), (d),
(e) and (t) are those to which the representative
of the Sov.et Union referred, which were not
recommended individually by the General Assembly, but were recommended en bloc in resolution
197 (HI) B, which was adopted on the proposal
of the Swedish delegation.

Le representant de l'Un,ion sovietique m'la.
egalement reproche d'avoir passe sous silence les
demandes d'admission de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie, de la Hongrie, de la Roumanie et de la
Republique populaire de Mongolie. Cela est
inexact, car j'ai dit que j'etais dispose a examiner
toute demande d'admission presentee' par une
autre delegation, et it est evident que la delegation de l'URSS a le- droit de presenter des resolutions en la matiere; un autre detail qui prouve
que je suis loin de vouloir ignorer Ies demandes
de .ces pays est que les alineas b), c), d), e)
et f) de l'ordre du jour adopte par leConseit
ont precisement trait aux demandes ,:"'1 question.
L'alinea a~ se rapporte aux sept demandes auxquelles fai fait allusion, parce qu'elles ont fait
l'objetde recommandations de l'Assemblee gene~
rale, alors que les alineas b), c), d), e) et f)
ont trait aux demandes mentionnees par le repre~
sentant de l'Union sovietique, qui n'ont pas fait
1'0bjet de recommandations individuelIes de l'Assemblee, mais sont visees, en bloc, par la resolution 197 (In) B, qui a ete adoptee sur l'initiative de. la delegation de la Suede.

With reference to the draft resolution which
the USSR delegation has submitted, according to
which, in view of the speeches made by the representatives of Cuba, Egypt and perhaps also the
United States, it Qlight seem possible to reach a
favourable solution by the adoption of a draft
resolution reco1l1111ending that the eleven countries
which have requested admission to membership
should be admitted jointly. This is one of the
practices that have been .most criticized in the
United Nations, namely, the bargaining on the
various political questions for the purpose of
reaching an agreement.

Ten arrive au projet de. resolution presente
par la delegation de I'URSS selon cette derniere,
tant donn~ les interventions desrepresentants de
Cuba, de I'Egypte et, peut-etre aussi des EtatsUnis, ont pourrait abotitir a une solution favorable en adoptant un projet de resolution
recommandant I'admission simultanee .des onze
pays candidats.. Il s'agit la d'une des pratiques
.qui- ont suscite, au sein de l'Organisationdes
Nations Unies, les plus vives critiques et qui
consiste cl effeduer un marchandage sur diverses
questions politiques en vue d'aboutir a un accord~

What the world wishes, and what· the United
Nations wishes, is that the great Powers should
reach agreement on principles, and not on specific
questions of 1)()litical interest. Moreover, according to the ( . 'ter, applications must be dealt with
separ-,~elyanuOn .fheir own merits, as. the representative of France, for example, has just recalled and as is stated in the Swedish draft resolution,whichdoes not $ay that the eleven appIi.cations. shall Qe dealt with en bloc,· but that they
shall be dealt with according to the. merits 'of
each ·one,that is,. separa.t~ly.· Although I am
familiar with· the resolution submitted. by the

Ce qu~ desire le monde, ce que· ·d.esirent les
Nations Unies, c'est q~e les grandes Puissances
se mettent· d'accord sur des principes, et non sur
des questic;>Ds d'interets politiques. particuliers.
D'un autre cote, aux termes de la Charte, les
demandes d'admission doivent etre etudiees une
par. une et compte tenu de leurmerite, comme
vientde le rappe1er, par. exemple, le representant
de la France ~ le projet de resolution de ,la Suede
part, lui aussi, de ce point de 'vue, car it. propose;
non pas de considerer les onze demandes en bloc,
mais de lesexaminer du point de vue de leurs
merites individuels, c'est-a.,dire separement. Voila

15

representative of the Soviet Union-1 am not
going to ignore it-1 cannot consider it and I am
going to request the Council to adhere to the
agenda and it should consider the various proposals in the order they are listed on the agenda.
I do not wish to be discourteous enough to disregard the Governments of Bulgaria, Hungary,
Albania, the Mongolian People's Republic and
Romania, which have asked u!) to reconsider their
applications; I believe that we should come to a
decision on these communications which have
been sent us.

Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Intervening at this
stage of the discussion, I think I need do no more
than summarize the position of the Canadian
.delegation. ,Most of the arguments seem to ha.ve
been pretty thoroughly traversed.

la raison pour laquelle je ne puis prendre en
consideration, bien que je le connaisse - jene
ferai pas mine de l'ignorer- le projet de resolution soumis par le representant de l'Uniofl
sovietique. Je vais, au contraire, demander au
Conseil de s'en tenir it l'ordre du jour et d'etudier
les diffe:rentes propositions dans l'ordre OU e1les
y sont inscrites. Loin de moi l'idee peu courtoise
de negliger les Gouvernements de la Bulgarie, de
la Hqngrie, de I'Albanie, de la Republique populaire de Mongolie et de la Roumanie, qui vienneni:
de solliciter it nouveau leur admission. J e crois
en effet que nous devons prendre une decision
sur les communications qu'ils nous ont adressees.

I

M. IGNATIEFF (Canada) (tratiuit de l'anglais) :
Intervenant it ce stade de la discussion, ie crois
que je peux me borner a resumer la position
de ma delegation. En effet, la plupart des arguments semblent avoir ete invoques en detail.

En cette occasion, comme en d'autres occasions,
In considering this item on our agenda, the
Canadian delegation, on this occasion as on pre- la delegation du Canada, lorsqu'elle examine ce
vious occasions, bases its pClsition upon two point de notre ordre du jour, se fonde, d'une part,
foundations. One is Article 4 of the Charter, sur l'Article 4 de la Charte et, d'autre part, sur
and the other the subsequent re,commendations of les recommandations que l'Assemblee generale
the General Assembly. Reference has already a formulees pa:r la suite. On a deja dit - et
been made-I should like to recall this again be- j'aimerais le rappe1er une fois de plus car il
cause I think it cannot be recalled too frequently s'agit d'une chose que 1'0n ne saurait repeter
-that the General Assembly on 19 November trop frequemment - que l'Assemblee generale
1946 specifically recommended [resolution 35 a expressement recommande, [resolution 35 (1)]
(I)] that applications for membership be con- le 19 novembre 1946, que 1es demandes d'admissidered ". . . on their respeCtive merits as sion soient examin~es, et. • • en tenant compte
measured by the yardstick of the Charter in des titres de chacun consideres d'apres 1es cri.teres de, la Charte. tels qu'ils resultent de
accordance with Article 4".
I'Article 4 de la Charte".
It should then be recalled that, at its last sesI1 convient aussi derappeler que l'Assemblee
sion, the General Assembly adopted a resolution generale, lors de sa demiere session, a adopte
which the Secretary-General brought to the atten- une resolution que le Secretariat a porte a l'attention of the S,ecurity Council in document S/1170j tion du Conseil de securite, (S/1170/Add.l en
Add.l of 13 June, in which the General Assembly date,' du 13 juin) ,resolution dans 1aquelle l'As'"
recommends to each member of the Security semblee. generale recommande a chacundes
Council, as well as to the General Assembly, that membres du Coriseil de securite et de l'Assemblee
in exercising its vote on the admission of new generale de se conformer, lors du vote sur I'ad-'
:M:embers, it should act in accordance. with the mission de nouveaux Membres, it l'avis precite
foregoing opinion of the International Court of de la Cour internationale de Justice.
Justice.
.
Nous S~l.Vonsce quecontient cet avis) et nous
We know what that opinion was and that the
General Assembly, having considered that opinion, savons que l'Assemblee generale, apres l'avoir
recommended it. to the' Security Council and to examine, I'a recommandeau Con~eil. de securite
each member that, in exercising its vote on 'the et a recommande que chacun des membres,lc>rs
admission of new Members, it should act' iii . du vote sur I'admission de nouveaux Membres,
accordance with that opinion and "in particular, seconforme it cet avis, lequel declare que "un
a Member of the Organization cannot, while it Membre de l'Organisation ne peut, alors qU'il
recognizes. the' conditions set' forth in that pro- . !"econnait. que 1es conditionsprevues par l'Arvision to be fulfilled by the State concerned, sub- ticle 4 sont remplies par l'Etat en question, Bbject its affirmative vote to the additional condi· bordonner son vote affirmatif a la condition que,
tion that other States be admitted to membership en meme temps que l'Etat dont il s'agit, d'autres
in the United Nations together with that State"'. Etats soient egalement admis commeMembres de
1'0rganisation des Nations Unies".
I need only say that if the President should
Il me sufiit de dire que; si le President juge
think ,it necessary to bring these various pro- necessaire de mettre ces diverses propositions aux
posals to a vote, the Canadian delegation will voix,. je voterai con~ormement aux principes
vote. in accordance with the principles I have just que je viens d'.exposer~
outlined.
.
Mr. TARASENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Rusdan): Some of
the . representatives of various delegations who
'have spoken have stated that they do not intend
to apply the "veto" in the question of the admis~
sion of new Members to the United Nations, and
that only·· the d~legation of the Soviet Union.

M. TARASSENKO (Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) (tradu,it. du rztsse): Plt1sieurs
des orateurs qui ont pris la parole jusqu'a present
ont declare, au nom de1eurs delegations respectives, qu'ils n'avaient pas l'intentioh <:le faire
usage de leut droit de. "veto" 10rs du vote sur .
l'admission de -nouveaux -Membres, -et que 1a

applies the "veto". This statement is quite in"
sincere, I should even say erroneous, for the
representatives of the United States, 'the United
Kingdom, French and Chinese delegations can
apply a hidden "veto" by abstainii~g from voting.
We all know that to have legal force, a recommendation requires seven affirmative votes including those of the five permanent members of
the Security Council. Abstention by the United
States and other permanent members of the
Security Council, .as well as by those non-permanent members who support them in this
matter, is in fact tantamount to a "veto", as it
.can block any favourable recommendation made
with regard to an applicnt State. Consequently,
all statements to the effect that the United States
and the other permanent members of the Security
COUflCil do not make use of their right of "veto"
are empty, hypocritical and false. By means of
. the hidden "veto", the United States and other
countries can block the admission of any State
they happen to dislike, and shelve the application
of any State which fulfils the requirements of the
United Nations Charter. That is the first remark
I wished to make.

delegation de l'Union sovUitique etait la seule cl.
user de ce droit. De toute evidence, cette declaration manque de sincerite; je dirais meme qu'el1e
est fausse, puisque. en s'abstenant de voter, les
representants des Etats-Unis, du Royaume-Uni,
de la France et de la Chine peuvent exercer un
"veto" dissimuIe. On sait, en efiet, qu'une recommandation n'a de force legale que si elle a reuni
sept voix, y compris 1es voix des cinq membres
permanents du Conseil de securite. L'abstention
des Etats-Unis, des autres membres permanents
du Conseil et de ceux des membres non permanents qui les soutiennent dans cette question,
equivaut, en realite, cl. un "veto", puisqu'elle permet de bloquer toute recommandation favorable
au pays dont on examine la demande. C'est
pourquoi toutes ces declarations, selon 1esqueUes
les Etats-Unis et d'autres membres permanents
du CC''!seil n'useraieut pas de 1eur droit de "veto",
sont parfaitement vaines, hypocrites et fausses.
Les Etats-Unis, ainsi que certains autres pays,
peuvent, en usant d'un "veto" dissimule, empecher l'admission de tout Etat qui ne 1eur plait
pas et renvoyer aux calendes grecques la demande
d'admission de tout Etat qui remplit les conditions
fixees par la Charte des Nations Unies. Telle est
la premiere observation que je tenais a. formuler.

Now for my second point: reference has been
made here· to the decision of the International
Court of Justice. I know of no such decision.
There exists no decision of the International
·Court on this matter but only an opinion of
various individual members. On some questions
there was a majority opinion, while on others
concerning the admission of a number of appli.cants which is urged by the United States, the
Court has submitted the opinion of a minority
of its members. This has been convincingly and
factually demonstrated by the head of the USSR
delegation, Mr. Vyshinsky, before the General
Assembly. For some reason, that aspect of the
question is now being suppressed and glossed
over. There have been a number of very forceful
statements by members of the Court, including
statements by the majority of its members, which
were opposed to the views of the United States
and other countries. Why is that :fact being
passed over in silence here?

En voici une deuxieme: On a invoque ici une
decision de la Cour i:qternationa1e. de Justice. Or,
je ne connais paS' de decision de ce genre. En
effet, la Cour n'a prisaucune decision en la
matiere; elle s'est bornee a. soumettre au Conseil
des avis emis par ses membres a. titre individuel.
Sur certaines questions elle a presente l'avis
de la majorite; sur d'autres questions relatives
a. l'admission d'un certain: nombre d'Etat a. 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies, admission sur
laquelle insistent 1es Etats-Unis, la Caul' a soumis 1es wes de la minorite de ses membres. A
l'AssembIee generale, M. Vychinsky, chef de la
delegation de rURSS, l'a d'ailleurs montre d'une
fac;on tres convaincante en s'appuyant sur des
faits precis. Pourquoi s'efforce-t-on maintenant
de passer ces faits sous silence. et d'obscurcir
cet aspect de la question ? En effet, les membres
de la Cour ant formule un certain nombre de
geclarations tres energiques. dont quelques unes
emariaient de la majorite, et qui allaient a. l'encontre des vues exprimees par 1es Etats-Unis et
certains autres Etats. Pourquoi n'en sou£fle-t-on
mot ici?

The representative of the USSR has already
dwelt on the speech made by the representative of
Argentina, Mr. Ar.:e. I shall therefore refrain
'from speaking at length on that subject and shall
confine myself to a few remarks.

Le representant de l'URSS a deja. parte de la
declaration de M. Arce, representant de l'Argentine. C'est pourquoi.• sans m'y etendre davantage,
je me bornerai a. faire que1ques remarques a. son
sujet.

I clearly remember that Mr. Arce once threatJe me rappelle tres bien que, 10rs d'une seance
ened to walk· out of a meeting of the Atomic de la Commission de l'energie atomique, M. Arce
Energy Commission if certain members of the a menace de quitter la salle de seances au cas on
Commission repeated previous arguments. Yet 1es niembres de la Commission repeteraient 1es
Mr. Arce himself, at this very meeting of the arguments qu'ils avaient deja. produits. Et voici
Secnrity Council, chose to repeat his well-worn . qu'au COriseiI de securite, M. Arce se met cl.
objections to the Charter of the Un.ited :b;ations. repeter lui-meme ses arguments rebattus contre
Mr. Arce's statement on that issue. bears no la Charte des Nations Unies. La declaration qu'a
relation to the admission of new. Members to h1.e faite M.Ar.cea ce sujet n'a aucun rapport avec
United· Nations. It concerns the revision of the l'admission de nouveaux Membres dans 1'0rgaCharter, but this is not the time to fa.ise such a . nisation des Nations Unies; elle touche a. la quesquestion. Mr. Arce already tried to raise it tion de la revision de la Charte, question qu'il
before the General AssemblY, with embarrallsing n~y a pas· lieu de soulever ici. M. Arce a deja.

17
results, for he mat with no support on the part
of the overwhelming majority of the Members.

tente de soulever ce probleme a l'Assemblee
generale; toutefois, il a echoue lamentablement
parce que la majorite ecrasante de l'Assemblee
generale a refuse de le soutenir.

Now that he is quite sure that Mr. Vyshinsky
is not in a position to answer him as he deserves,
Mr. Arce is trying to argue with him in retrospect. To argue with someone who cannot answer
back is a strange way to behave.

Si M. Arce essaie, apres coup, d'entrer en polemique avec M. Vychinsky, c'est parce qu'il sait
que, maintenant, ce dernier n'est pas en mesure
de lui donner la reponse qu'il merite. Cette fat;on
qu'a M. Arce d'engager une discussion avec l.me
personne qui n'est pas en mesure de lui repondre
est pour le moins etrange.

All the questions raised by Mr. Arce at this
meeting have been raised in the General Assembly,
where he received the appropriate explanations
and answers from Mr. Vyshb.sky; but it does not
seem that Mr. Arce has taken heed of the!n.

Toutes les questions que M. Arce vient de soulever maintenant ont deja fait l'objet cl'un debat
a. l'Assemblee generale et M. Vycbinsky y a
repondu; a l'epoqu.e, en foumissant tous ]ks
renseignements necessaires. Il ne semble pas cependant que M. Arce ait rois cette reponse a.
profit.
La dtHegation de la RSS d'ULaine estime que·
le projet de resol!J.tion soumis par l'URS'S englobe les propositions de l'Argentine. En effet,
ce texte fait mention des demandes d'admission
des sept pays proposes par l'Argentine, aussi
bien que des cinq autres Etats dont les demandes'
font elles aussi l'objet de la resolution de l'Assemblee qui recommande au Conseil de reconsi-.
derer les candidatures de tous les douze Etats
interesses.

The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR considers
that the proposals of rbe USSR cover those submitted by Argentina, in as much as they cover
both the applications to membership, of the seven
States just proposed by Argentina and those of
the other five States in respect of which the
General Assembly has also taken a decision by
recommending that the Security Council should
reconsider the applications of all twelve States.
I therefore consider that the USSR proposal
should be the first to be put to the vote.

Pour toutes ces raisons, festime que la proposition de l'URSS doit etre la premiere a etre.
m;,se aux voix.
.

As regards the delegation of the Ukraim.n
SSR, its position in this matter depends on the
attitude of the other members of the Security
Council to the proposals made by the represent~­
tive of the USSR. The delegation of the
Ukrainian SSR is prepared to vote for the admission of all the twelve States, or rather fo~ recommending the admission of all the twelve States
which have submitted applic<1-tions,. although it
has serious grounds for believing that a number
of those applicant States do not fully comply with
the requirements of the United Nations Charter.
However, in the spirit of compromise--judicious
compromise--the delegation of the Ukrainian
SSR feels that itcan vote for all the twelve States,
always provided that the other members of the
Security Council will also cast positive votes in
favour of all the twelve applications listed in the
USSR draft resolution.

Pour ce qui est de la delegation de la RSS
d'Ukraine, l'attitude qU'elle adoptera en la ma-'
tiere dependra de l'accueil que feront les atitres~
membres du Conseil aux propositions de l'URSS.
La delegation de la RSS d'Ukraine est prete
a voter en faveur de l'admission de tous les douze
Etats interesses, ou plutot en faveur d'une re:commandation favorable a. ces Etats, bien. qu'elle
ait des raisons graves' pour croire que certain~­
des pays qui ont presente des demandes ne
satisfont pas entierement aux conditions fixees
par la Charte des Nations Unies. Malgre ces:
objections, la delegation de la RSS d'Ukrainef
animee d':un esprit decompromis ...:- comprontis,
raisonnable, bien entendu - se declare disposee'
a voter en faveur de tous les douze Etats, a la
condition, bien entendu, que les autres membres
du Conseil emettent, eux aussi, un vote favorable
a. tous les Etats mentionnes dans le projet de
resolution de l'URSS'.

Mr. CHAUVEL (France) (translated from
French): I have only a brief comment'to offer.
In the course of our previous meeting, the' representative Qf the Soviet Union urged that all applications submitted to the Security Council should
be examined in chronological order. As a result
of his request a list was drawn up in that order.

M. CHAUVEL (France): Je ne veux presenter;
qu'une breve remarque. Au cours de notre precedenteseance, le representant de l'Uniw sovietique a beaucoupinsiste pour que toutes les
candidatures soumises. au Conseil de securite fussent examinees clans leur ordre chronologique;
A ~a suite· de cette remarque, une. liste a. ete:
etablie dans cet ordre.
rai devant moi le texte du projet de resolution·
presente aujoutd'hui par la delegation de l'URSS,
mais je constate que les dOUl~e pays qui y sont
mentlonnes ne le sont pas dans l'ordre chronologique des demandes itesentt~es. Les cinq pays
auxquels le Gouvemement de l'Union sovietique
parte un' interet particuIier soat' en tetede cette)
liste. J'ajout~ qu'ils n'ysont pas mentionnes dans:
l'ordre dans lequel leurs candidatures ont ~te
presentees.
'
.

I have before me the text of the draft resolution submitted today by the USSR delegation and
I notice that the twelve countries mentioned
therein are not· mentioned in the chronological
order in which the requests were submitted. The
five countries in which the Gover1l111ent of the
Soviet Union has a special interest are at the head
of that list. I repeat that they are not mentioned
in the order in which their l:!-pplications were
submitted.

--

18
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America):
This is in the nature of a procedural matter, and
the reason I ask to speak is that it may affect the
judgment of some of the members of the Security
Council concerning what we ought to do procedurally. It has become a serious matter with
some of us to be in the position of having to
reconsider membership applications the destiny of
which we know as well at this time, before we
begin, as we shall know after we have finished.
It is the intention of the United States to make a
procedural motion he.re which will have precedence over any vote of substance. Before making
the motion in concrete form, I wish to make
certain explanations. The motion relates to the
draft resolution submitted by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (S/134O).

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglair) : Il s'agit d'une question de proce-

dure et, si je d~mande la parole, c'est que ma
declaration peut eclairer le jugement de certains
des membres du Conseil de securite quant it la
maniere dont le Conseil doit proceder. I1 est
devenu tres difficile pour certains d'entre nous
d'avoir a examiner de nouveau les demandes
d'admission, dont nous connaissons le sort <lussi
bien aVc.nt qu'apres le t lr examen. La delegation
des Ei.ats-Uni~ a l'intention de presenter une
motion de procedure qui aura priorite sur toutes
decisions touchant des questions de fond. Avant
de donner une forme concrete a cette motion, je
desire fournir certaines explications. La motion
se rapporte au projet de resolution presente par
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
(S/134O).

Obviously-I say "obviously" because we have
already described our position-some of us have
an attitude toward certain countries which is
different from that which we have toward other
countri~, and yet all those cc.'ntries are included
in one: draft resolution. Then again, there is not
one word in this draft resolution about the preliminary decision which the Security Council must
make before it adopts the draft resolution which
is before us here. Rule 60 of our rules of procedure states: "The Security Council shall decide"-that is a strong word-"whether in its
judgment the applicant is a peace-loving State
and is able and willing to carry out the obligations contained in the Charter"-then we come
upon this conjunction, "at'<l"-to do something
else--"accordiilgly wheJ.:~.. to recommend the
applicant State for membership".

Il est evident - je dis "it est evident" parce
ql'l nous avons deja defini notre position - que
l'att .:ude adoptee par certains d'entre nous cl.
l'egard de certains pays est differente de celle
qU'ils ont envers d'autres pays, et pourtant tous
ces pays figurent dans un seu! et mem.e projet
de resolution. D'autre part, le projet de resolution
ne mentionne nullement la decision preliminaire
que le C.onseil de securite doit prel1dre avant
d'adopter le projet de resolution dont nous sommes actuellement saisis. L'article 60 du reglement
interieurstipule que: "Le Conseil de securite
decide" - ceci est un mot tres fort - "si, a 5011
jugement, l'Etat qui r.l1icite son admission est un
Etat pacifique, capable de remplir les obligations
de la Charte et dispose a le faire" - puis. apres
la conjonction "et" - afin de faire quelque chose
d'autre - "s'il convient, en consequence, de recommander l'admission de cet Etat a l'Assemblee
generale".

If this draft resolution called for such a decision, it is apparent from the speeches already
made here that Albania, the Mongolian People's
Republic, Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary would
most certai"ly be regarded with an attitude by
some members of the Security Council which
would be different from that with which they
would regard Finland, Portugal, Ireland. Jordan,
Austria and Ceylon, and that we might have still
another attitude with respect to Italy.

Si le projet de resolution appelle une telle decision, it ressort manifestement des discours qui
ont deja ete faits id que certains membres du
Conseil de securite auront, en ce qui concerne
l'Albanie, la Republique populaire de Mongolie,
la Bulgarie, la Roumanie et la Hongrie, une attitude differente de celle qu'ils auront a regard de
la Finlande, du Portugal, de l'Irlande, de la
Jordanie, de l'Autriche et de Ceylan; Us auront
probablement encore une autre attitude en ce
qui conceme l'Italie.

Now let us be reasonable. We have been confronted with asimiliar resolution before, and
how did we resolve this substantial difficulty? In
the ordinary rational way, which is by taking a
separate vote on each application.

Maintenant, soyons raisonnables. On nous a
deja presente une resolution semblable; or,
qu'avons-nous fait pour resoudre cette grave
difficulte? NOU5 avons suivi la voie rationnelle
ordinaire: celle de voter separement sur chaque
demande.

I wish to call attention to the precedents set
for us in this matter. I refer to the Official
Records of the Security Council, No. 90 of the
second year. It concerns the meetings of 24 and
25 September 1947, when the President was the
representative of the USSR. A resolution was
presented to the Security Council by the representative of Poland in the following languageI am reading from page 2,412:

Je desire attirer l'attention du Consei! sur
les precedents dont nous dcvons nous inspirer
clans cette attaire. Je me reporte aux Procesverbattx o1ficiels du Conseil de secltrit8, deuxieme
annee, No 90. Il s'agit des seances des 24 et
25 septembre 1947, presidees par ie representant
de l'URSS. Au cours de ces seances, la resolution
suivante, qui figure a la page 2412, a ete soumise
par le representant de la Pologne.

"The Secur#'J{ Council,
."Having receive£! and examined the applications for. membership in the United Nations submitted by Hungary, Italy,Romania, Bulgaria and
Finland,

"Le Conseil de sectwite,
"Ayant re~u et examine les demandes d'admission ~ l'Organisation des Natiolls Unies, presentees par la Hongrie,· !'Italie, la Roumanie, la
Bulgar1.~ et la Finlande,
.......

---

19

a

"R/lcommmd~' to the General Assembly that
these countries be admitted as Members of the
United N ationso"

URr,cQ1lf,mande
l'Assembtee generale d'admettre ces pays comme Membres des Nations
Unies.

After some discu~sion a practice was adopted
based upon what had taken place a year before.
The United States was at that time represented
by Mr. Johnson, who said:

Apres une breve discussion, on a adopte une
procedure tenant compte de ce qui s'est produit
l'annee precedente. Les E"'lts-Unis etaient, a. cette
epoque, representes par 1'1. Johnson, qui a declare:

"The circumstances surrounding each one of
the applicants are so entirely different that I can
hardly believe that the Council would wish to
vote on all of them together. I should certainly
reserve the right of my delegation to make comments on them individually and to vote separately
on each." That was recorded on page 2,414.

"Chacune des demancles d'admission s'accompagne de particularites si completement differentes que je puis difficilement croire que le
Conseil sait dispose a. voter en bloc sur toutes
ces demandes. J e tiens a. reserver le droit, pour
ma delegation, de presenter des observations sur
chacune d'elles separement, et de voter de la
meme maniere." Cette declaration figure a. la
page 241.1l.

On pages 2,422 and 2,423 of the same document, the President, Mr. Gromyko, said:
"The majority of the Security Council is
definitely in favour of discussing and taking a
decision on each of the applications sepaTate1y.
Therefore, I shaH not ask the Council today to
vote on this procedural point. As the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, I
wish to repeat that it is impossible for the Security
Council to make any positive decision on the
applications if we take separate decisions on them
without taking a decisio.. to admit all fivl:: cou..·
tries to the United Nations. No matter what
procedure we use, since the majority is in favour
of discussing and taking separate decisions on
each of the applications, the result will probably
be the same.
"Speaking as the Preside.r.,t, I wish to state,
therefore, that we shall discuss each application,
and after the discussion we shall take a vote. I
should like to suggest that we discuss and take
decision on the applications in the order in which
they were submitted to the Security Council:
namely, first Hungary, then Italy, Romania, Bulgaria and Finland:'
I shall now refer to the Official Records of the
S1curity Council, No. 91 of the second year, page
2,435. The President was Mr. Gromyko, who
stated at that time:
"The representative of Poland did not ask that
a vote be taken now on his resolution. He suggested that the Security Council first discuss each
application, and then take a separate vote on each.
If there is no objection to this proced.ure, we
shall follow it.
"I wish to remind the Council that we followed
exactly the same procedure last year."
In the footnote on the same page it is stated:
"See Official Records of the Security Council,
first year, second series, No. 4."
It is evident that the United States was represented at that time by Mr. Austin, who said:
"1 wish to speak on the question of order. I
shall. read from the verbatim record of the last
meeting, and quote the President: 'The majority
--=i~e Security Council is definitely in favour of

I

Al1x pages 2422 et 2423 du meme document,
on trouve la declaration suivante du President,
M. Gromyko:
"La majorite du Conseil de securite est nettement favorable une discussion et a. une decision
separee pour chaque cas. Je ne mettrai done pas
aux voix ce point de procedure; mais, en ma
qualite de representant de l'URSS, je persiste
a. declarer que le Conseil de securite ne pourra
prendre aucune decision positive a. propos des
demandes d'admission, si, au lieu de decider
d'admettre en bloc ks cinq pays au sein de l'Organisation, nons nous pronon~ons separement sur
chaque cas. Quelle que soit la procedure qu~ nous
adoptions, puisque la majorite des membres du
Conseil est d'avis de discuter separement de
chaque cas, le resultat sera probablement le meme.

a

"Je declare done, en ma qualite de President,
que nous allons proceder, pour chaque dcmande,
a. une discussion et a. un vote separes. Je proposemi que nous abordions les demandes dans
l' ordre ou elles ont ete presentees au Conseil, a
savoir ceile de la Hongrie d'abord, puis celle de
l'Italie, de la Roumanie, de la Bulgarie et de la
Finlande."
Je me reporte maintenant aux Proces-verbaux
officiels du Conseil de securite, deuxieme annee,
No 91, page 2435. M. Gromyko, qui etaitalors
President, a declare:
"Le representant de la Pologne n'a pas demande que l'on vote maintenant sur sa resolution.
Il a propose que le Conseil de securite examine
d'abord les demandes tIne a. une et que celles-ci
soient ensuite mises aux voix separement. Si
cette procedure est acceptable, nous l'adopterons.
"Je tiens a rappeler au Conseil que c'est exactement la procedure que nous avons suivie l'annee
demiere."
Une note de renvoi au bas de la meme page
indique: . "Voir les Proces-verbaux offici6l:S du
Conseil de securite, Premiere Annee, Deuxieme
Serie, No 4."
I1 est clair que les Etats~Unis etaient representes a cette epoque par M. Austin, qui a
declare:
"Je voudrais presenter une observation sur ce
point d'ordre. Je cite les paroles du President
figurant au compte rendu stenographique de la
derniere seance: "La majorite du Conseil de secu-

-

discussing and taking a decision on each of the
applications separately.' U

rite est nette~t favorable a. une discussion et
a. une decision separee pour chaque
cas."

After further discussion, the President again
made the following statement, as recordt:d on the
next page:

Apres t,me nouvelle discussion, le President a
fait une autre declaration qui figure a la page
suivante du me-me document:

"1 still have not made any ruling on the q1.ies"Je n'ai encore pris aucune decision a. ce sujet.
tion. 1 propose the following procedure, which Je propose la procedure
suivante qui me semble
I think is the most appropriate in the circum- convenir le mieux aux circons
stances: to discuss each of the applications and, terions chacune des demand tances: nous r"u_
after the discussion on each of them, to take ensuitt. aux voix separem es et les mettnons
separate votes on each application. I repeat, this je le repete, est ceIle que ent. Cette procedure
nous avions suivie l'an~
is the procedure we used last year."
nee derniere."
And that was the procedure that we carried
Et c'est cette procedure que nous avons apout.
pliquee.
I move, as a procedural matter, that the action
Je propose, comme
de procedure, que
of the Security Council on this draft resolution, en e.xaminant le projetmotiotl
de ft' .Jution S/134O, l~
S/134O, be taken up by separate consideration and Conseil de securite proced
a separate vote taken on the different applications mette aux voix separem e par division et qu'il
made by the countries named in the draft resolu- mission presc:ntees par ent les demandes d'adl<:s p~ys dont le nom figure
tion, so that each member of the Security Council dans le proJet de resolutI
may reflect the attitude of· his country on each membre du Conseil de On, an..'1 que chaque
securite puisse montrer
applicant.
l'attitude de son pays a l'egard des diverses candidatures.
The PRESIDENT: In view of the late hour, and
Le PRESIDENT
since one member of the Council has requested Eta.,t donne qu'il est (tradui t de l'anglais). :
deja tard et qu'un membre
that the draft resolution before us should not be du Conseil a
demande a ce que le projet de resoput to the vote today or tomorrow, I propose to lution que nous
examinons ne soit mis aux voix
adjour n the meeting until Friday at 10.30 a.m. ni aujourd'hui ni
dettlain, je propose, si cela vous
if that is convenient to members.
convient, de lever la seance et de nous reunir
vendredi matin a. 10 h. 30.
Mr. ARCE (Argen tina). (translated from
M. ARCE (Argentine) (tradui t de I'espagnol) :
Spanis h): I only wish to remind the President Je tiens seulement a rappele
that before this draft resolution, No. S;134O, qu'avant ce projet de resolut r au President
ion, qui porte la,
there are no less than seven drafts which bear cote S/134O, it n'y a rien moins
earlier .numbers; if mathematics is still an exact projets qui porten: des numero que sept autres
science, I understand 'that No. 1330 comes before mathematiques sont toujou s anterieurs. Si les
No. 1340 and that the drafts represented by the le nombre 1330 doit preced rs une science exacte,
er 1340, et c'est a mon
Argentine delegation should therefore pe con- avis, par l'examen des
projets
de resolution presidered first.
sentes par la delegation de l'Argentine qu'il con-;
vient de commencer.
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of Ameri ca):
M. AUSTIN (Etats- Unis d'Amerique) (trtult'it
I regret very much to have to say that the time de l'anglais) : Je regrette de devoir
for our next meeting which has been suggested date suggeree pal;" le President pour dire que la
notre pro-by the President is inconvenient for me. I should chaine seance ne me convient pas.
J
e
ne
never want to interpose my convenience in the jamais, pour des raisons personnelles, voudrais
path of facilitating the work of the Security travau x du Conseil de secl.rrite, mais gener les'
j'ai, depuis
Council. .The fact is, however, that I have a long- longtemps, accepte une invitation pour
le lun&
standing engagement for Monday, 27 June, for 27 juin et j'ai deja pris toutes roes
disposi
tions.
which I have made all preparations. Therefore, Par consequent, le changement
de
date
des;
this changing of the dates of our meetings is seanCtS me derange beaucoup.
extremely inconvenient for me.
If I had a deputy to attend meetings of the
Si j'avcl.is un stlppleant pour merem placer aux
Council, it would be somewhat different, but I seances du Conseil, la question serait differente,.
have no deputy. Of course, if the Security mais je.n'en ai pas. Naturellement, si le Conseil
Council holds another meeting this week, I shall tient une nouvelle seance cette semaine, je devrai,
have to come, and I shall have to take care 9f my yassis ter, et, bien que je ne sache au juste comprevious engagement in some manne r-just how, ment, refuser l'invitation de lundi.
I do not know.
I wonder if the President would consider putJe demande si le President ne pourrait pas
ting off this next meeting until 5 July.
envisager de reporter la date de notre prochaine
seance au 5 juillet.
The PRESIDENT: I wonder if there is not a misunderstanding. I suggested to adjour n this meeting and to meet again on Friday, 24 June.

Le PRESIDENT (tradui t de l)~nglais): Je
crois qu'il y a un malentendu. J'ai propose de
clore la seance et de nous reunir le vendredi
24 j u i n , '
.

Mr. AUSTI:r-, (Unite d States ')f Ameri ca):
I thought that· suggestion had been modified so

M. AUSTIN (Etats- Unis d'Amerique) (tra.~uit
de l'ang1ais): Je pensa.is que cette propoSlt1~

.

,

21
that the meeting would take place on Sa+urday,
25 June.

I

avait ete modifiee et que la seance aurait lieu le
samedi 25 juin.

Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I should
also like to say something about our next meeting.
On Friday there is to be a meeting of the Special
Committee on the Establishment of a United
Nations Guard. Our chief representative, Mr.
Malik, is at present indisposed, and I am acting
as his deputy in the Secur~ty Council. I am also
the USSR representative on the Special Committee on the Establishment of a United Nations
Guard, which is due to meet on Friday. In view
of this and certain other considerations, it would
seem preferable to me not to hold a second meeting of the Se~urity Council this week.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du fusse): Je
voudra j ,. 1110i aussi dire quelques mots a. propos
de la 1Jl uchaine reunion du Conseil. Vendredi se
tient une seance de la Commission speciale pour
la creation d'une "garde des Nations Unies.
M. Malik, chef de la delegation de l'URSS~ est
souffrant en ce moment, et je suis charge de le
remplacer au Conseil de securite. En meme temps,
je represente l'URSS au sein de la Commission
speciale pour la creation d'une garde des Nations
Unies qui doit se reunir vendredi. Pour cette
raison, ainsi que pour certaines autres encore, il
me s~ble preferable de ne pas convoquer une
seconde seance du Conseil de securite cette
semaine.

The PRE:';IDENT: Would Friday afternoon be a
better time for the representative of the USSR?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de· l'anglais) :
Est-ce que le vendredi apres-midi conviendrait
mieux au representant de l'URSS?

Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I think
it would be better not to hold a second meeting
of the Security Council this week.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des. Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (tradttit du russe): A
man avis it serait preferable de ne pas convoquer
de seconde seance dans le courant de la semaine.

The PRESIDENT: Can we not try to close the
discussion of this· question before the end of the
week and could we not meet on Thursday afternoon at 3 p.m. ?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) :
Ne pourrions-nous pas essayer d'achever l'examen de cette question avant la fin de la semaine
en nous. reunissant peut-etre jeudi a. 15 heures?

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America):

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): Je serais dispose a. rester ce soir
si ceia est necessaire. le suis d'avis de continuer
et d'achever notretravail, soit ce soir,soir demain
mann. Je ne crois pas qu'il soit utile de sieger
jeudi au lieu de vendredi puisque nous sommes
aujourd'hui mardi.

If necessary, I will stay right here. I am willing

to carry on tonight and finish it, or to start again
tomorrow morning and .finish it then. I do not
think it would help to advance the time to Thursday, since today is Tuesday.

Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques
Republics) (translated from Russian): The socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : C'est
USSR representative's draft resolution was sub- seulement i1 V a tme heure environ que le repremitted only about an hour ago. I do not think it sentant de l'URSS a soumis son projet qe resowould be altogether advisable to examine all ques- lution. Un examen aussi rapide de toutes les
ti,ons connected with the admission of new Mem- questions relatives a. l'admission de nouveaux
bers so quickly; it seems to me that the proposal Membres ne me semble pas tres indique puisque
submitted by the delegation of the Soviet Un~on la proposition de l'URSS n'est pas aussi connue
is not as familiar to all members as, say, those que les propositions de l'Argentine, par exemple,
submitted by the representative of Argentina, . dont on a deja. parle aplusieurs occasions. L'Union
which have been discussed more than once in the sovietique pose la question d'une maniere plus
past. The USSR proposal is a more radical treat- radicaIe; son projet de resolution souleveun
ment .of the problem and therefore has. great probleme politique tres important qui por!e sur
political significance of principle as regards the le principe meme de 1'a,dmission, at! sein de
admission to membership of the States which l'Organisation des Nations Unies, des Etats don.t
have submitted the applications now appearing les demandes figUl·ent actuel1ement a. l'ordre du
on the Security Council's agenda.
jour du Conseil de securite.
,

.

It would seem,. therefore, .that delegations
should be given some time to think over the
USSR proposals. It may be that some delegations
will also have to consult their Governments; all
members may not be authorized to take a decision.
personally on the matter without further instructions from their Governments. This has to be
taken into consideration. .
.

Il semblerait done qu'il fame laisseraux delegations le temps d'etudier les propositions de
l'URSS. Certaines deIegations pourraient· vouIoir, en outre, consulter leur Gouvernement; it
se peut, en effet, que tel ou tel representant ne
soit pas qualifie pour trancher lui-meme la question et qu'il doive demander des instructions a.
son Gouvemement. Il faut tenir compte de tous
ces elements.

I think, therefore, that to hold the next meeting
as. early as the President suggests would be. inadvisable. In any case, I believe that would
l15&ede:e full and. detailed ~on~~~~~.a.~~n of the

C'est pourqttoi it me .semble mutile de fixer- la
prochaine seance a une date aussi rapprochee que
celle que vient de suggerer le President. Cela
risquerait, a' mon avis, d'empecher un examen

22
USSR proposals and would be detrimental to
them.

complet et detaille du projet de resolution soumis
par l'URSS et porterait donc prejudice it cette
proposition.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de IJanglais): Il n'y
The PRESIDENT: Only one member of the
Council has asked for a postponement, as he is a qu'un membre du Conseil qui ait demande
still waiting for instructions. He has requested que nous ajournions les debats, car it attend
that we do not put the resolution to the vote today des instructions. Il a demande que nous ne voor tomorrow. I think that there would be ample tions sur la resolution ni aujourd'hui ni demain.
time for anyone to receive new instructions, if he Je crois qu'it a amplement le temps jusqu'a. venthinks they are needed, by Friday. I must remind dredi de recevoir de nouvelles instructions, s'il
the members of the Security Council that the le juge necessaire. Je dois rappeler aux membres
representative of the United States told us that du Conseil de securite que le representant des
his delegation could not be here next week, until ·Etats-Unis nous a declare que sa delegati.on ne
5 July. I do not think it is reasonable for us to pouvait pas sieger h semaine prochaine, c'est-aadjourn for as long as that. Therefore, I think dire avant le 5 juillet. J e ne crois pas qu'il soit
we must find some compromise. I think that all raisonnable d'ajourner les debats pour une peof us should be able to meet on Friday afternoon I riode aussi longue. N ous devons done trouver un
compromis. J'estime que nous pourrions tous nous
at.3 p.m.
reunir vendredi a. 15 ht:ures.
As there is no objection, we shall adjourn now
and meet again on Friday at 3 o'clock.

En l'ausence d'objection, je leve la seance et
now' nous reunirons de nouveau vendredi a
15 heures.

The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

La seance est levee ~ 1~ h. 20.

ES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATION
DEPOSrrAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE

Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS Anms
AUSTRAlIA-AUSTRAl.IE

H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE

Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue d'l Persi!
BRUXELLES
BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE

Libreria Cientffica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ
CANADA

lrhe llyerson IJress
29!L Queen Street West
lroRONTO
CHILE-CHill

Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
CH!NA-CHINE

lrhe Commerc~al Press Ltd.
211 Honan lload
SHANGHAI

COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE

LibIeria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA
COSTA RICA-COSTA.RICA

lrrejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE
CUBA

La Casa BeIga
llene de Smedt
O'lleilly 455
LA HABANA.
CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE

F. lropic
Narodni lrrida 9
PRAHA 1.
DENMARK-DANENlARK

Einar Munksgaard
Ni6rregade 6

K~BENHAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE

Librerfa Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartatlo 656
.CIUDAD lrRUJILLO
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR

Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octuhre 703
CasilIa 10·24
• GUAYAQUIL
EGYPJ-EGYPTE

librairie ."La llenaisslmce d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAmo
ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE

Agence ethiopienne de puhlicite
P. O. Box a
ADDIS·ABEBA
Printed in the U.S.A.

FINLAND-FINLANDE

Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
FRANCE

Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Souffiot
PARIS, Ve
~EECE-GRECE

'''EIeftheroudakis''
1ibrairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES
GUAiEMALA

Jose Gouhaud
Gouhzmd & Cia. Ltds.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA
HAITI

Max Bouchereau
tibrairie "A la Carave1le"
BOlte postale 111-B
PORT-AU·PRINCE
ICELAND-ISLANDE

Bo::taverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
llEYKJAVIK
!NDIA-INDE

Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI
IRAN

Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
lrEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie

The Bookshop
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-LlBAN

Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH

PERU-PEROU

tibreria internacional del Peru
S.A.
I
Casilla 1417
LIMA
PHILIPPINES

D. P. Perez Co.
132 lliverside
SAN JUAN, llIZAr.
POLAND-POLOGNE

Spotdzielna Wydawnj.~"a
"Czytelnik"
38 Pozaanska
WARSZAWA
SWEDEN-SUEDE
A~B.C.E.Fri~esKun~.

Hofhokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

swnZERLAND-SUISSE

Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhal'dt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA-SYRIE

Librairie universelle
DAMAS
TURKEY-TURQUIE

Lihrairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU"IsTANBUL
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD·AFRICAINE

Central News Agency
Commissioner & ·llissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETOWll
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI

NETHERLAND5-PAYS·BAS

H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANcHJl5
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BmMINGHAM
and BRISTOL

N. V.· Martinus Nijhoff
Langtl: Voorhout 9
'S-GRAVENHAGE

UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE

LUXEMBOURG

Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE·ZELAN~:S

Gordon & Cotch, Ltd.
Waring lraylor Street
WELLINGTON

Unitt'd Nations Association of
N'~w Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON
NiCARAGUA

Ramiro llamirez V.
Agencia de Puhlicaciones
MANAGUA,D. N.
NORWAY-NORVEGE

Johan Gl'undt lranum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A OSLO
Price -in the United States: 25 cents

International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
~EW YORK 27,N. Y.
URUGUAY

Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO
VENEZUELA

Escritorfa Perez Machado
Conde a Pinango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA.....;.YOUGOSLAVIE

Drzavno Pl'eduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD
August· 1949-'-2,900

[~
