A/74/49 (Vol. I)

Resolutions and Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its seventy-fourth session
Volume I
Resolutions
17 September – 27 December 2019

General Assembly
Official Records·Seventy-fourth Session
Supplement No. 49

United Nations·New York, 2020

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses indicating
the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several resolutions were
adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a capital letter placed
between the two numerals (for example: resolution 3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A
and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another arabic
numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several resolutions or
decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been identified by a
capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution 31/16 A,
resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a roman
numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The decisions
were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letters
“ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by
an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1, decision
ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly from
17 September to 27 December 2019, as well as the information requested by the Assembly
in section C, paragraph 3, of its resolution 54/248 of 23 December 1999. Decisions adopted
by the Assembly during this period appear in volume II. Resolutions and decisions adopted
subsequently during the seventy-fourth session will be published in volume III.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee .......................................................... 1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee ...........................................................207
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) .......................................................................................................................337
IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee ......................................................461
V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee .........................................................687
VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee ........................................................1041
VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee .......................................................1111
Annexes
I. Allocation of agenda items ..........................................................................................................1153
II. Checklist of resolutions ...............................................................................................................1167

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/2.

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage.................................................................. 3

74/3.

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress made in addressing the priorities of small island
developing States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway ........12

74/4.

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under the auspices
of the General Assembly ..........................................................................................................................................17

74/5.

Proclamation of 28 September as the International Day for Universal Access to Information ........................................22

74/6.

Report of the International Criminal Court ................................................................................................................23

74/7.

Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba............................................................................................................................................................26

74/8.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency ....................................................................................................28

74/9.

The situation in Afghanistan .....................................................................................................................................29

74/10.

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People ............................................................41

74/11.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine .........................................................................................................44

74/12.

Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat........................................................................................................48

74/13.

Special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department of Global Communications
of the Secretariat ......................................................................................................................................................49

74/14.

The Syrian Golan.....................................................................................................................................................51

74/15.

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024 ..............................................................................53

74/16.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal ...................................................................59

74/17.

Problem of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well
as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov ...........................................................................................................62

74/18.

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments ......................................................65

74/19.

Oceans and the law of the sea ...................................................................................................................................98

74/20.

Global health and foreign policy: an inclusive approach to strengthening health systems ............................................143

74/21.

Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace ..........................................................152

74/22.

World Chess Day...................................................................................................................................................157

74/23.

Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace.................................158

74/114.

Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster ..............................................................................................................163

74/115.

International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development .........165

74/116.

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel.........................................177

74/117.

Assistance to the Palestinian people ........................................................................................................................186

74/118.

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations..................................190
1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/179.

Credentials of representatives to the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly .................................................202

74/244.

International Year of Fruits and Vegetables, 2021 .....................................................................................................202

74/245.

International Day of Banks .....................................................................................................................................204

74/248.

Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him.................................................................................................205

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/2
Adopted at the 14th plenary meeting, on 10 October 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.4, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

74/2.

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage
The General Assembly

Adopts the following political declaration approved by the high-level meeting on universal health coverage on
23 September 2019:
Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage
Universal health coverage: moving together to build a healthier world
We, Heads of State and Government and representatives of States and Governments, assembled at the United
Nations on 23 September 2019, with a dedicated focus for the first time on universal health coverage, reaffirm that
health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of the social, economic and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,1 and strongly
recommit to achieve universal health coverage by 2030, with a view to scaling up the global effort to build a healthier
world for all, and in this regard we:
1. Reaffirm the right of every human being, without distinction of any kind, to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health;
2. Reaffirm General Assembly resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, stressing the need for a comprehensive and people-centred approach,
with a view to leaving no one behind, reaching the furthest behind first, and the importance of health across all the
goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which are integrated and indivisible;
3. Reaffirm General Assembly resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the
Third International Conference on Financing for Development, which reaffirmed strong political commitment to
address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in
the spirit of global partnership and solidarity;
4. Reaffirm the strong commitments made through the political declarations adopted at the high-level
meetings on ending AIDS,2 on tackling antimicrobial resistance,3 on ending tuberculosis4 and on the prevention and
control of non‑communicable diseases,5 as well as the General Assembly resolutions entitled “Consolidating gains
and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2030”;6
5. Recognize that universal health coverage is fundamental for achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals related not only to health and well-being, but also to eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
ensuring quality education, achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment, providing decent work and
economic growth, reducing inequalities, ensuring just, peaceful and inclusive societies and to building and fostering
partnerships, while reaching the goals and targets included throughout the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is critical for the attainment of healthy lives and well-being for all, with a focus on health outcomes throughout the
life course;
6. Reaffirm the importance of national ownership and the primary role and responsibility of governments at
all levels to determine their own path towards achieving universal health coverage, in accordance with national

_______________
Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 70/266, annex.
3
Resolution 71/3.
4
Resolution 73/3.
5
Resolution 73/2.
6
Resolutions 70/300 and 73/337.
1
2

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

contexts and priorities, and underscore the importance of political leadership for universal health coverage beyond the
health sector in order to pursue whole-of-government and whole-of-society approaches, as well as health-in-allpolicies approaches, equity-based approaches and life-course approaches;
7. Recall World Health Assembly resolution 72.4 of 24 May 2019, entitled “Preparation for the high-level
meeting of the United Nations General Assembly on universal health coverage”;7
8. Recognize that health is an investment in human capital and social and economic development, towards
the full realization of human potential, and significantly contributes to the promotion and protection of human rights
and dignity as well as the empowerment of all people;
9. Recognize that universal health coverage implies that all people have access, without discrimination, to
nationally determined sets of the needed promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative essential health
services, and essential, safe, affordable, effective and quality medicines and vaccines, while ensuring that the use of
these services does not expose the users to financial hardship, with a special emphasis on the poor, vulnerable and
marginalized segments of the population;
10. Recognize the need for health systems that are strong, resilient, functional, well governed, responsive,
accountable, integrated, community-based, people-centred and capable of quality service delivery, supported by a
competent health workforce, adequate health infrastructure, enabling legislative and regulatory frameworks as well
as sufficient and sustainable funding;
11. Recognize the need to tackle health inequities and inequalities within and among countries through
political commitment, policies and international cooperation, including those that address social, economic and
environmental and other determinants of health;
12. Recognize that action to achieve universal health coverage by 2030 is inadequate and that the level of
progress and investment to date is insufficient to meet target 3.8 of the Sustainable Development Goals, and that the
world has yet to fulfil its promise of implementing, at all levels, measures to address the health needs of all, noting
that:
(a) At least half of the world’s population lacks access to essential health services, more than 800 million
people bear the burden of catastrophic spending of at least 10 per cent of their household income on health care, and
out-of-pocket expenses drive almost 100 million people into poverty each year;
(b) At the current pace, up to one third of the world’s population will remain underserved by 2030 and a
measurable acceleration is urgently needed to reach the health-related targets of the Sustainable Development Goals
by 2030;
(c) Despite major health gains over the past decades, including increased life expectancy, the reduction of
maternal and under-5 mortality rates and successful campaigns against major diseases, challenges remain with regard
to emerging and re‑emerging diseases, non-communicable diseases, mental disorders and other mental health
conditions, as well as neurological disorders, communicable diseases, including HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria,
and antimicrobial resistance, noting that non-communicable diseases account for over 70 per cent of all deaths in
the 30–69 age group;
(d) Despite the progress achieved at the global level, many health systems are not sufficiently prepared to
respond to the needs of the rapidly ageing population;
(e) The high prices of some health products, and inequitable access to such products within and among
countries, as well as financial hardships associated with high prices of health products, continue to impede progress
towards achieving universal health coverage;
13. Recognize that primary health care brings people into first contact with the health system and is the most
inclusive, effective and efficient approach to enhance people’s physical and mental health, as well as social well-being,

_______________
7

4

See World Health Organization, document WHA72/2019/REC/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and that primary health care is the cornerstone of a sustainable health system for universal health coverage and healthrelated Sustainable Development Goals, as was declared in the Declaration of Alma-Ata and reaffirmed in the
Declaration of Astana;
14. Recognize the fundamental importance of equity, social justice and social protection mechanisms as well
as the elimination of the root causes of discrimination and stigma in health-care settings to ensure universal and
equitable access to quality health services without financial hardship for all people, particularly for those who are
vulnerable or in vulnerable situations;
15. Recognize the consequence of the adverse impact of climate change, natural disasters, extreme weather
events as well as other environmental determinants of health, such as clean air, safe drinking water, sanitation, safe,
sufficient and nutritious food and secure shelter, for health and in this regard underscore the need to foster health in
climate change adaptation efforts, underlining that resilient and people-centred health systems are necessary to protect
the health of all people, in particular those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations, particularly those living in
small island developing States;
16. Recognize that food security and food safety, adequate nutrition and sustainable, resilient and diverse
nutrition-sensitive food systems are important elements for healthier populations;
17. Note that the increasing number of complex emergencies is hindering the achievement of universal health
coverage and that coherent and inclusive approaches to safeguard universal health coverage in emergencies are
essential, including through international cooperation, ensuring the continuum and provision of essential health
services and public health functions, in line with humanitarian principles;
18. Recognize the need for strong global, regional and national partnerships for Sustainable Development
Goals, which engage all relevant stakeholders to collaboratively support the efforts of Member States to achieve
health-related Sustainable Development Goals, including universal health coverage;
19. Recognize that the world spends 7.5 trillion United States dollars on health, which is close to 10 per cent
of global gross domestic product, but that the allocation of public and external funds on health worldwide is
disproportionate, considering that:
(a) On average, one third of national health expenditure is covered by out-of-pocket expenses, while less than
40 per cent of funding on primary health care is from public sources in low- and middle-income countries;
(b) External funding represents less than 1 per cent of global health expenditure and there are important
funding gaps given existing health needs, whereas low-income countries still rely on aid, which accounts for about
30 per cent of national health spending;
20. Recognize that people’s engagement, particularly of women and girls, families and communities, and the
inclusion of all relevant stakeholders is one of the core components of health system governance, to fully empower
all people in improving and protecting their own health, giving due regard to addressing and managing conflicts of
interest and undue influence, contributing to the achievement of universal health coverage for all, with a focus on
health outcomes;
21. Recognize the vital importance of strengthening legislative and regulatory frameworks and institutions for
the achievement of universal health coverage;
22. Recognize that fighting corruption at all levels and in all its forms is a priority and that corruption is a
serious barrier to effective resource mobilization and allocation and diverts resources away from activities that are
vital for poverty eradication and sustainable development, which may undermine efforts to achieve universal health
coverage;
23. Express concern at the global shortfall of 18 million health workers, primarily in low- and middle-income
countries, and recognize the need to train, build and retain a skilled health workforce, including nurses, midwives and
community health workers, who are an important element of strong and resilient health systems, and further recognize
that increased investment in a more effective and socially accountable health workforce can unleash significant
socioeconomic gains and contribute to the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, empowerment of all
women and girls and reduction of inequality;
5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

We therefore commit to scale up our efforts and further implement the following actions:
24. Accelerate efforts towards the achievement of universal health coverage by 2030 to ensure healthy lives
and promote well-being for all throughout the life course, and in this regard re-emphasize our resolve:
(a) To progressively cover 1 billion additional people by 2023 with quality essential health services and
quality, safe, effective, affordable and essential medicines, vaccines, diagnostics and health technologies, with a view
to covering all people by 2030;
(b) To stop the rise and reverse the trend of catastrophic out-of-pocket health expenditure by providing
measures to ensure financial risk protection and eliminate impoverishment due to health-related expenses by 2030,
with special emphasis on the poor as well as those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations;
25. Implement the most effective, high-impact, quality-assured, people-centred, gender- and disabilityresponsive and evidence-based interventions to meet the health needs of all throughout the life course, and in particular
those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations, ensuring universal access to nationally determined sets of
integrated quality health services at all levels of care for prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care in a timely manner;
26. Implement high-impact policies to protect people’s health and comprehensively address social, economic
and environmental and other determinants of health by working across all sectors through a whole-of-government
and health-in-all-policies approach;
27. Prioritize health promotion and disease prevention, through public health policies, good governance of
health systems, education, health communication and health literacy, as well as safe, healthy and resilient cities,
enabling people, throughout their life course, including, among others, adolescents, to have increased knowledge to
take informed health decisions and improve health-seeking behaviour;
28. Take multisectoral action to promote active and healthy lifestyles, including physical activity for the
benefit of all people throughout their life course, and ensure a world free from malnutrition in all its forms, where all
people are empowered to take responsibility for their own health, supported by public regulatory measures, and have
access to safe drinking water and sanitation and safe, sufficient and nutritious food and enjoy diversified, balanced
and healthy diets throughout their life course, with special emphasis to the nutrition needs of pregnant and lactating
women, women of reproductive age and adolescent girls, and of infants and young children, especially during the first
1,000 days, including, as appropriate, through exclusive breastfeeding during the first six months, with continued
breastfeeding to 2 years of age or beyond, with appropriate complementary feeding;
29. Take measures to reduce maternal, neonatal, infant and child mortality and morbidity and increase access
to quality health-care services for newborns, infants and children, as well as all women before, during and after
pregnancy and childbirth;
30. Scale up efforts to promote healthy and active ageing, maintain and improve quality of life of older persons
and to respond to the needs of the rapidly ageing population, especially the need for promotive, preventive, curative,
rehabilitative and palliative care as well as specialized care and the sustainable provision of long-term care, taking
into account national contexts and priorities;
31. Strengthen public health surveillance and data systems, improve routine immunization and vaccination
capacities, including by providing evidence-based information on countering vaccine hesitancy, and expand vaccine
coverage to prevent outbreaks as well as the spread and re-emergence of communicable and non‑communicable
diseases, including for vaccine-preventable diseases already eliminated as well as for ongoing eradication efforts, such
as for poliomyelitis;
32. Strengthen efforts to address communicable diseases, including HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and
hepatitis, as part of universal health coverage and to ensure that the fragile gains are sustained and expanded by
advancing comprehensive approaches and integrated service delivery and ensuring that no one is left behind;
33. Further strengthen efforts to address non-communicable diseases, including cardiovascular diseases,
cancer, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes, as part of universal health coverage;
34. Strengthen efforts to address eye health conditions and oral health, as well as rare diseases and neglected
tropical diseases, as part of universal health coverage;

6

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

35. Scale up efforts to address the growing burden of injuries and deaths, including those related to road traffic
accidents and drowning, through preventive measures as well as strengthening trauma and emergency care systems,
including essential surgery capacities, as an essential part of integrated health-care delivery;
36. Implement measures to promote and improve mental health and well-being as an essential component of
universal health coverage, including by scaling up comprehensive and integrated services for prevention, including
suicide prevention, as well as treatment for people with mental disorders and other mental health conditions as well
as neurological disorders, providing psychosocial support, promoting well-being, strengthening the prevention and
treatment of substance abuse, addressing social determinants and other health needs, and fully respecting their human
rights, noting that mental disorders and other mental health conditions as well as neurological disorders are an
important cause of morbidity and contribute to the non-communicable diseases burden worldwide;
37. Increase access to health services for all persons with disabilities, remove physical, attitudinal, social,
structural and financial barriers, provide quality standard of care and scale up efforts for their empowerment and
inclusion, noting that persons with disabilities, who represent 15 per cent of the global population, continue to
experience unmet health needs;
38. Scale up efforts to promote healthier and safer workplaces and improve access to occupational health
services, noting that more than 2 million people die every year from preventable occupational diseases and injuries;
39. Pursue efficient health financing policies, including through close collaboration among relevant
authorities, including finance and health authorities, to respond to unmet needs and to eliminate financial barriers to
access to quality, safe, effective, affordable and essential health services, medicines, vaccines, diagnostics and health
technologies, reduce out-of-pocket expenditures leading to financial hardship and ensure financial risk protection for
all throughout the life course, especially for the poor and those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations, through
better allocation and use of resources, with adequate financing for primary health care, in accordance with national
contexts and priorities;
40. Scale up efforts to ensure there are nationally appropriate spending targets for quality investments in public
health services, consistent with national sustainable development strategies, in accordance with the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda, and transition towards sustainable financing through domestic public resource mobilization;
41. Ensure sufficient domestic public spending on health, where appropriate, expand pooling of resources
allocated to health, maximize efficiency and ensure equitable allocation of health spending, to deliver cost-effective,
essential, affordable, timely and quality health services, improve service coverage, reduce impoverishment from
health expenditure and ensure financial risk protection, while noting the role of private sector investment, as
appropriate;
42. Expand quality essential health services, strengthen health systems and mobilize resources in health and
other health-related Sustainable Development Goals in developing countries, noting that, according to World Health
Organization estimates, an additional 3.9 trillion dollars in total by 2030 could prevent 97 million premature deaths
and add between 3.1 and 8.4 years of life expectancy in low- and middle-income countries;
43. Optimize budgetary allocations on health, sufficiently broaden fiscal space, and prioritize health in public
spending, with the focus on universal health coverage, while ensuring fiscal sustainability, and in this regard encourage
countries to review whether public health expenditure is adequate to ensure sufficiency and efficiency of public
spending on health and, based on such review, to adequately increase public spending, as necessary, with a special
emphasis on primary health care, where appropriate, in accordance with national contexts and priorities, while noting
the World Health Organization recommended target of an additional 1 per cent of gross domestic product or more;
44. Promote and implement policy, legislative and regulatory measures, including fiscal measures as
appropriate, aiming at minimizing the impact of the main risk factors for non-communicable diseases, and promote
healthy diets and lifestyles, consistent with national policies, noting that price and tax measures can be an effective
means to reduce consumption and related health-care costs and represent a potential revenue stream for financing for
development in many countries;
45. Provide adequate, predictable, evidence-based and sustainable finances, while improving their
effectiveness, to support national efforts in achieving universal health coverage, in accordance with national contexts
and priorities, through domestic, bilateral, regional and multilateral channels, including international cooperation,
7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

financial and technical assistance, considering the use of traditional and innovative financing mechanisms such as,
inter alia, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance, the Global
Financing Facility for Women, Children and Adolescents and the United Nations trust fund for human security, within
their respective mandates, as well as partnerships with the private sector and other relevant stakeholders, recognizing
that health financing requires global solidarity and collective effort;
46. Expand the delivery of and prioritize primary health care as a cornerstone of a sustainable people-centred,
community-based and integrated health system and the foundation for achieving universal health coverage, while
strengthening effective referral systems between primary and other levels of care, recognizing that community-based
services constitute a strong platform for primary health care;
47. Explore ways to integrate, as appropriate, safe and evidence-based traditional and complementary
medicine services within national and/or subnational health systems, particularly at the level of primary health care,
according to national context and priorities;
48. Scale up efforts to build and strengthen quality and people-centred health systems and enhance their
performance by improving patient safety, built on a foundation of strong primary health care and coherent national
policies and strategies for quality and safe health services, noting that universal health coverage can only be achieved
if the services and medical products are safe and effective and are delivered in a timely, equitable, efficient and
integrated manner;
49. Promote equitable distribution of and increased access to quality, safe, effective, affordable and essential
medicines, including generics, vaccines, diagnostics and health technologies, to ensure affordable quality health
services and their timely delivery;
50. Improve availability, affordability and efficiency of health products by increasing transparency of prices
of medicines, vaccines, medical devices, diagnostics, assistive products, cell- and gene-based therapies and other
health technologies across the value chain, including through improved regulations and building constructive
engagement and a stronger partnership with relevant stakeholders, including industries, the private sector and civil
society, in accordance with national and regional legal frameworks and contexts, to address the global concern about
the high prices of some health products and in this regard encourage the World Health Organization to continue its
efforts to biennially convene the Fair Pricing Forum with Member States and all relevant stakeholders to discuss the
affordability and transparency of prices and costs relating to health products;
51. Promote increased access to affordable, safe, effective and quality medicines, including generics, vaccines,
diagnostics and health technologies, reaffirming the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) as amended, and also reaffirming the 2001 World Trade
Organization Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which recognizes that intellectual
property rights should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of the right of Member States to protect
public health and, in particular, to promote access to medicines for all, and notes the need for appropriate incentives
in the development of new health products;
52. Explore, encourage and promote a range of innovative incentives and financing mechanisms for health
research and development, including a stronger and transparent partnership between the public and the private sectors
as well as academia, recognizing the need for increasing public health-driven research and development that is needsdriven and evidence-based, guided by the core principles of safety, affordability, effectiveness, efficiency, equity and
considered as a shared responsibility, as well as appropriate incentives in the development of new health products and
technologies;
53. Recognize the important role played by the private sector in research and development of innovative
medicines, encourage the use, where appropriate, of alternative financing mechanisms for research and development
as a driver of innovation for new medicines and new uses for medicines and continue to support voluntary initiatives
and incentive mechanisms that separate the cost of investment in research and development from the price and volume
of sales, facilitate equitable and affordable access to new tools and other results to be gained through research and
development;
54. Engage all relevant stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector and academia, as appropriate,
through the establishment of participatory and transparent multi-stakeholder platforms and partnerships, to provide
input to the development, implementation and evaluation of health- and social-related policies and reviewing progress
8

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

for the achievement of national objectives for universal health coverage, while giving due regard to addressing and
managing conflicts of interest and undue influence;
55. Strengthen the capacity of national government authorities to exercise strategic leadership and
coordination role, focusing on intersectoral interventions, as well as strengthen the capacity of local authorities, and
encourage them to engage with their respective communities and stakeholders;
56. Build effective, accountable, transparent and inclusive institutions at all levels to end corruption and ensure
social justice, the rule of law, good governance and health for all;
57. Strengthen legislative and regulatory frameworks and promote policy coherence for the achievement of
universal health coverage, including by enacting legislation and implementing policies that provide greater access to
essential health services, products and vaccines, while also fostering awareness about the risks of substandard and
falsified medical products, and assuring the quality and safety of services, products and practice of health workers as
well as financial risk protection;
58. Improve regulatory capacities and further strengthen a responsible and ethical regulatory and legislative
system that promotes inclusiveness of all stakeholders, including public and private providers, supports innovation,
guards against conflicts of interest and undue influence, and responds to the evolving needs in a period of rapid
technological change;
59. Provide strategic leadership on universal health coverage at the highest political level and promote greater
policy coherence and coordinated actions through whole-of-government and health-in-all-policies approaches, and
forge a coordinated and integrated whole-of-society and multisectoral response, while recognizing the need to align
support from all stakeholders to achieve national health goals;
60. Take immediate steps towards addressing the global shortfall of 18 million health workers in accordance
with the Global Strategy on Human Resources for Health: Workforce 2030, and addressing the growing demand for
health and social sectors, which calls for the creation of 40 million health worker jobs by 2030, taking into account
local and community health needs;
61. Develop, improve and make available evidence-based training that is sensitive to different cultures and
the specific needs of women, children and persons with disabilities, skills enhancement and education of health
workers, including midwives and community health workers, as well as promote a continued education and lifelong
learning agenda and expand community-based health education and training in order to provide quality care for people
throughout the life course;
62. Scale up efforts to promote the recruitment and retention of competent, skilled and motivated health
workers, including community health workers and mental health professionals, and encourage incentives to secure
the equitable distribution of qualified health workers, especially in rural, hard-to-reach and underserved areas and in
fields with high demands for services, including by providing decent and safe working conditions and appropriate
remuneration for health workers working in these areas, consistent with the World Health Organization Global Code
of Practice on International Recruitment of Health Personnel,8 noting with concern that highly trained and skilled
health personnel continue to emigrate, which weakens health systems in the countries of origin;
63. Provide better opportunities and working environments for women to ensure their role and leadership in
the health sector, with a view to increasing the meaningful representation, engagement, participation and
empowerment of all women in the workforce, addressing inequalities and eliminating biases against women,
including unequal remuneration, while noting that women, who currently form 70 per cent of the health and social
workforce, still often face significant barriers in taking leadership and decision-making roles;
64. Take necessary steps at the country level to protect health workers from all forms of violence, attacks,
harassment and discriminatory practices, and to promote their decent and safe working environment and conditions
at all times as well as ensure health workers’ physical and mental health by promoting policies conducive to healthy
lifestyles;

_______________
8

World Health Organization, document WHA63/2010/REC/1, annex 5.

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

65. Strengthen capacity on health intervention and technology assessment, data collection and analysis, while
respecting patient privacy and promoting data protection, to achieve evidence-based decisions at all levels,
acknowledging the role of digital health tools in empowering patients, giving them access to their own health-care
information, promoting health literacy and strengthening patient involvement in clinical decision-making with a focus
on health professional-patient communication;
66. Invest in and encourage ethical and public health-driven use of relevant evidence-based and user-friendly
technologies, including digital technologies, and innovation to increase access to quality health and related social
services and relevant information, improve the cost-effectiveness of health systems and efficiency in the provision
and delivery of quality care in a manner that recognizes the need to build and strengthen interoperable and integrated
health information systems for the management of health systems and public health surveillance, as well as the need
to protect data and privacy and narrow the digital divide;
67. Strengthen health information systems and collect quality, timely and reliable data, including vital
statistics, disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability, geographical location and
other characteristics relevant in national contexts as required to monitor progress and identify gaps in the universal
and inclusive achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 3 and all other health-related Sustainable Development
Goals, while protecting the privacy of data that could be linked to individuals, and to ensure that the statistics used in
the monitoring progress can capture the actual progress made on the ground, for the achievement of universal health
coverage, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
68. Ensure, by 2030, universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family
planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and
programmes, and ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as agreed in
accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development9 and the
Beijing Platform for Action10 and the outcome documents of their review conferences;
69. Mainstream a gender perspective on a systems-wide basis when designing, implementing and monitoring
health policies, taking into account the specific needs of all women and girls, with a view to achieving gender equality
and the empowerment of women in health policies and health systems delivery;
70. Ensure that no one is left behind, with an endeavour to reach the furthest behind first, founded on the
dignity of the human person and reflecting the principles of equality and non-discrimination, as well as to empower
those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations and address their physical and mental health needs which are
reflected in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including all children, youth, persons with disabilities,
people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples, refugees and internally displaced persons and
migrants;
71. Address the particular needs and vulnerabilities of migrants, refugees, internally displaced persons and
indigenous peoples, which may include assistance, health care and psychological and other counselling services, in
accordance with relevant international commitments, as applicable, and in line with national contexts and priorities;
72. Promote strong and resilient health systems, reaching those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations,
and capable of effectively implementing the International Health Regulations (2005),11 ensuring pandemic
preparedness and the prevention and detection of and response to any outbreak;
73. Promote more coherent and inclusive approaches to safeguard universal health coverage in emergencies,
including through international cooperation, ensuring the continuum and provision of essential health services and
public health functions, in line with humanitarian principles;

_______________
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
10
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
11
World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.
9

10

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

74. Enhance emergency health preparedness and response systems, as well as strengthen capacities at
national, regional and international levels, including to mitigate the impacts of climate change and natural disasters
on health;
75. In accordance with international humanitarian law, respect and protect, in situations of armed conflict,
medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and
equipment, and hospitals and other medical facilities, which must not be unlawfully attacked, and ensure that the
wounded and sick receive, to the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the medical care and
attention required;
76. Enhance cooperation at the national, regional and global levels to address antimicrobial resistance, using
an integrated and systems-based one-health approach, including through health system strengthening, capacitybuilding, including for research and regulatory capacity, and technical support and ensure equitable access to
affordable, safe, effective and quality existing and new antimicrobial medicines, vaccines and diagnostics as well as
effective stewardship, as antimicrobial resistance poses a challenge to achieving universal health coverage, noting the
work of the ad hoc inter-agency coordination group on antimicrobial resistance and its recommendations as contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on antimicrobial resistance,12 and look forward to the discussion thereof during
the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, taking into account World Health Assembly resolution 72.5 of
28 May 2019;77
77. Revitalize and promote strong global partnerships with all relevant stakeholders to collaboratively
support the efforts of Member States, as appropriate, to achieve universal health coverage and other health-related
targets of the Sustainable Development Goals, including through technical support, capacity-building and
strengthening advocacy, building on existing global networks such as the International Health Partnership for
UHC2030, and in this regard take note of the upcoming presentation of the global action plan for healthy lives and
well-being for all;
78. Increase global awareness, international solidarity, international cooperation and action towards the
achievement of universal health coverage by promoting national, regional and global collaborative frameworks and
forums, including through the commemoration of International Universal Health Coverage Day on 12 December of
every year;
79. Set measurable national targets and strengthen national monitoring and evaluation platforms, as
appropriate, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to support regular tracking of the progress
made for the achievement of universal health coverage by 2030;
80. Leverage the full potential of the multilateral system, in collaboration with Member States upon their
request, and call upon the relevant entities of the United Nations development system, within their respective
mandates, primarily the World Health Organization as the leading agency on health, as well as the reinvigorated
resident coordinators and the United Nations country teams, within their respective mandates, as well as other relevant
global development and health actors, including civil society, the private sector and academia, to assist and support
countries in their efforts to achieve universal health coverage at the national level, in accordance with their respective
national contexts, priorities and competences;
81. Request the Secretary-General to continue engaging with Member States to sustain and further strengthen
the political momentum on universal health coverage and, in close collaboration with relevant United Nations
agencies and other stakeholders, including regional organizations, to strengthen existing initiatives that are led and
coordinated by the World Health Organization to provide assistance to Member States, upon their request, towards
the achievement of universal health coverage and all health-related targets of the Sustainable Development Goals;
As a follow-up to the present political declaration, we:
82. Request the Secretary-General to provide, in consultation with the World Health Organization and other
relevant agencies, a progress report during the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, and a report including

_______________
12

A/73/869.

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

recommendations on the implementation of the present declaration towards achieving universal health coverage
during the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, which will serve to inform the high-level meeting to be
convened in 2023;
83. Decide to convene a high-level meeting on universal health coverage in 2023 in New York, aimed to
undertake a comprehensive review on the implementation of the present declaration to identify gaps and solutions to
accelerate progress towards the achievement of universal health coverage by 2030, the scope and modalities of which
shall be decided no later than the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, taking into consideration the
outcomes of other existing health-related processes and the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 74/3
Adopted at the 14th plenary meeting, on 10 October 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.3, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

74/3.

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress made in addressing the priorities
of small island developing States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
The General Assembly

Adopts the following political declaration approved by the high-level meeting to review progress made in
addressing the priorities of small island developing States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway on 27 September 2019:
Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress made in addressing the priorities of small
island developing States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway
1. We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and High Representatives, gathered at the United Nations on
27 September 2019 to review the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway,13 reaffirm our commitment to strengthening cooperation with and support to small island developing States
in the context of sustainable development, in line with their national development strategies and priorities.
2. We reaffirm that the Samoa Pathway is a stand-alone, overarching framework setting out the sustainable
development priorities of small island developing States that builds on the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States14 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States.15 The Samoa Pathway is
consistent with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,16 including the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the
Third International Conference on Financing for Development,17 and is in line with the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,18 the New Urban Agenda19 and the Paris Agreement adopted under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.20

_______________
Resolution 69/15, annex.
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
15
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
16
Resolution 70/1.
17
Resolution 69/313, annex.
18
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
19
Resolution 71/256, annex.
20
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
13
14

12

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. We recognize and welcome the ownership, leadership and considerable efforts that have been demonstrated by
small island developing States, with the support of the international community, in advancing the implementation of
the Samoa Pathway, and welcome the successes and the progress made to date.
4. We reaffirm that small island developing States remain a special case for sustainable development and we renew
our solidarity with them, as they continue to face the combined challenges arising, in particular, from their
geographical remoteness, the small scale of their economies, high costs and the adverse effects of climate change and
natural disasters. We are particularly concerned that many small island developing States have not achieved sustained
high levels of economic growth, owing in part to their vulnerabilities to the ongoing negative impacts of
environmental challenges and external economic and financial shocks.
5. We acknowledge that for all countries the principle of national ownership is central to our common pursuit of
sustainable development. We renew our commitment to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda as necessary to achieve sustainable development in all its dimensions.
6.

We recognize that small island developing States continue to grapple with the effects of disasters.

7. We remain especially concerned about the devastating impacts of climate change, such as extreme weather
events, slow-onset events and the increasing frequency, scale and intensity of disasters, due to the particular
vulnerabilities of small island developing States.
8. We highlight the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement and note
with concern the scientific findings contained in the special report entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
9. We recognize the need to strengthen international development cooperation and to address the recent declining
trend of official development assistance.
10. We call upon the international community to mobilize additional development finance from all sources and at
all levels to support small island developing States’ efforts.
11. We acknowledge the value of partnerships as a means of supporting the sustainable development of small island
developing States and note the establishment of the Small Island Developing States Partnership Framework. We
renew our commitment to working in meaningful partnerships with small island developing States.
12. We note the importance of oceans, seas and marine resources to small island developing States and acknowledge
their efforts to develop and implement strategies for the conservation and sustainable use of the ocean and its
resources. We reiterate the call made in the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action”21 and encourage
the fulfilment of voluntary commitments pledged in the context of the United Nations Conference to Support the
Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine
resources for sustainable development and recall the decision to convene the 2020 Conference.
13. We emphasize the importance of the negotiations for an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction in line with resolution 72/249 of 24 December 2017.
14. We underscore the importance of eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty.
Eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, as
well as an overarching objective of the 2030 Agenda for small island developing States and other developing
countries.
Progress, gaps and challenges
15. We recognize that gender equality and women’s empowerment and the full realization of human rights for
women and girls have a transformative and multiplier effect on sustainable development and are drivers of economic
growth in small island developing States. Women can be powerful agents of change. We note and support ongoing

_______________
21

Resolution 71/312, annex.

13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

efforts in small island developing States to achieve gender equality and women’s empowerment, including economic
empowerment, and full and equal participation and leadership and to end gender-based violence.
16. We note the advances in social inclusion by many small island developing States, but are concerned that poverty,
unemployment, inequality and exclusion continue to disproportionately affect people in vulnerable situations.
17. We recognize the efforts of small island developing States in promoting peaceful, prosperous, inclusive societies
and safe communities on their paths toward sustainable development.
18. We recognize the need for the prevention, detection and treatment of communicable and non-communicable
diseases. We are concerned that these diseases and the health-related impact from disasters are endangering the
delivery of quality and accessible health care in small island developing States.
19. We recognize that small island developing States face significant challenges in accessing sufficient affordable
financing for sustainable development, including concessional financing, as their incomes grow. We also recognize
the need to devise methodologies to better account for the complex and diverse realities of middle-income countries
as outlined in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
20. We remain committed to assisting small island developing States to further explore innovative financial
instruments and mechanisms, such as debt for development swaps, debt for climate adaptation swaps, blue or green
bonds among others, while remaining mindful of the need to ease debt burdens with a view to improving small island
developing States’ access to finance.
21. We reaffirm that successful engagement in international trade is a key driver for sustainable economic growth
and sustainable development. We are concerned that small island developing States continue to face challenges in
engaging in the multilateral trading system.
22. We acknowledge that remittances represent a major source of external financing in many small island
developing States. We are concerned that they still face significant obstacles to the flow of and access to remittances,
including costs, policies and access to correspondent banking relationships and services.
23. We recognize and are concerned by the transition challenges encountered by small island developing States that
have graduated or are about to graduate from least developed country status. We remain mindful that graduation must
not disrupt a country’s development progress. We stress the need for the development and implementation of a viable
multiannual transition strategy to facilitate each small island developing State’s graduation, with the support of the
international community where appropriate, to mitigate against, inter alia, the possible loss of concessionary financing,
to reduce the risks of falling heavily into debt and to ensure macrofinancial stability.
24. We stress the importance of access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for small island
developing States. We welcome all initiatives, such as the International Renewable Energy Agency and SIDS DOCK,
to support small island developing States to fully exploit their renewable energy potential, improve energy efficiency
and reduce dependence on imported sources of energy, noting the role of appropriate energy sources and technologies
in the energy mix, and call for further work and enhanced support.
25. We commend the ongoing efforts made by small island developing States to make improvements to their
transportation connectivity. We recognize the important role of sustainable transportation in promoting policy
synergies, trade facilitation, infrastructure connectivity, financial cooperation and people-to-people exchange, which
are key areas in achieving sustainable development.
26. We recognize that disaster risk reduction is key to advancing sustainable development, in all its dimensions, and
resilient societies and note that many small island developing States still experience severe disaster repercussions,
including, inter alia, significant loss of life, biodiversity and infrastructure destruction, disaster-induced human
mobility and threats to food security and nutrition.
27. We also recognize the diverse approaches to address climate change, inter alia ecosystem-based approaches, as
part of overall adaptation, disaster risk reduction and resilience strategies for small island developing States, in the
face of the adverse effects of climate change.

14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

28. We reiterate the need for improved data collection and statistical analysis, including high-quality and
disaggregated data, to enable small island developing States to better plan, monitor and evaluate the implementation
of the Samoa Pathway, the 2030 Agenda and the Sendai Framework monitor.
29. We recognize that science, technology and innovation are essential enablers and drivers for sustainable
development and, in this regard, we reaffirm our commitment to support the efforts of small island developing States
to gain access, on mutually agreed terms, to appropriate, reliable, affordable, modern and environmentally sound
technologies.
Call for action
30. Having noted the progress made and challenges encountered by small island developing States in the
implementation of the Samoa Pathway, we urge the following actions to further advance the sustainable development
priorities of small island developing States:
(a) Targeted measures to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty.
Implementation of nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for the poor and the vulnerable;
(b) The fostering, creation and expansion of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises in small island
developing States, while taking into account national development priorities, circumstances and legislation;
(c) The promotion of investments in science and technology in small island developing States as a means of
incentivizing innovation and entrepreneurship;
(d) The scaling up of investments for economic growth and diversification, including in ocean-based
economies and creative and cultural industries, to serve as a means of reducing vulnerability and building resilience;
(e) Relevant institutions to learn from each other’s efforts to address the diverse circumstances of countries,
to better manage transitions and graduation. While recognizing that official development assistance should continue
to focus on countries most in need, we take note of a willingness to develop a wider analysis of new measures, building
on existing experiences with eligibility exceptions, for concessional finance and multidimensional assessments, to
address limitations of an income-only assessment of development and graduation readiness;
(f) Support for the strengthening of small island developing States’ national institutional capacities to access
sustainable development finance, including grant, concessional, climate and disaster relief finance, to ensure effective
and tailored finance solutions. We remain committed to exploring innovative and sustainable private sources of
financing, including blue, green and diaspora bonds tailored to the specific circumstances to small island developing
States;
(g) The fostering of the appropriate enabling environment to overcome the obstacles to the flow of, and access
to, remittances;
(h) The strengthening of small island developing States’ capacity to effectively participate in the multilateral
trading system;
(i) The scaling up and development of genuine and durable partnerships with all stakeholders at national,
regional and international levels that follow the Small Island Developing States Partnership SMART criteria;
(j) The strengthening of national and regional statistical systems and capacity to effectively monitor and
evaluate the implementation of the Samoa Pathway and the 2030 Agenda;
(k) The continued integration of a gender perspective in priority areas for sustainable development,
strengthening of women’s economic empowerment and women’s full, equal and effective participation in all fields
and leadership at all levels of decision-making, the elimination of all forms of discrimination and violence against
women and girls, and the promotion and protection of the human rights of all women and girls;
(l) The creation of the enabling environment to facilitate and attract foreign direct investment and financing,
and capacity support for small island developing States in this regard;
(m) The strengthening of cooperation, capacity and investment in disaster risk management in the public and
private sectors;
15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(n) The examination of the disaster-related funding and support environment with a view to the possible
development of a targeted voluntary disaster fund, mechanism or financial instrument, coordinated with and
complementary to existing mechanisms, to assist small island developing States to manage disaster risk and build
back better after disasters;
(o) The strengthening of national health systems to prevent, detect and respond to communicable and
non-communicable diseases as well as the enhancement of the resilience of health systems, including by integrating
climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction and management into all health-related activities;
(p) The further promotion of sustainable food systems and the combating of all forms of malnutrition,
including undernourishment and obesity, with a view to ensuring food security, improving nutrition and fostering
healthy diets and lifestyles;
(q) The strengthening of regional and international cooperation, exchanges and investments in informal and
formal education, including technical and vocational training and skills, and the further strengthening of national
education systems to ensure high-quality and inclusive education, in order to enable and support sustainable
development;
(r) Urgent and ambitious global action, in line with the Paris Agreement, to address the threat and impact of
climate change on small island developing States;
(s) Timely, well-managed and successful replenishment of the Green Climate Fund in order to contribute to
the paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate-resilient development pathways;
(t) Enhanced understanding, strengthened dialogue and enhanced action and support with respect to avert,
minimize and address loss and damage, including through the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage
associated with Climate Change Impacts;
(u) Urgent action to address the adverse impacts of climate change, including those related to sea level rise
and extreme weather events, which continue to pose a significant risk to small island developing States and to their
efforts to achieve sustainable development and, for many, represent the gravest of threats to their survival and viability,
including, for some, through loss of territory, as well as through threats to water availability and food security and
nutrition;
(v) Support to small island developing States to mitigate and adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change
through diverse approaches, such as ecosystem-based approaches and nature-based solutions, without risking debt
sustainability by exploring, inter alia, mechanisms such as debt swap initiatives similar to the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean Debt for Climate Adaptation Swap initiative;
(w) Addressing through innovative approaches different types of waste, including, inter alia, mismanaged
plastic waste, chemical waste and marine litter, including plastic litter and microplastics;
(x) The development, adaptation and transfer of technology and policies for sustainable forest management
to prevent and combat desertification, land degradation and drought in small island developing States, and to boost
knowledge exchange, including of traditional knowledge, capacity-building and sharing of technologies, on mutually
agreed terms.
31. We call upon:
(a) All entities of the United Nations system to address and integrate small island developing States-related
priorities into their respective strategic and work plans, in accordance with their mandates;
(b) The World Health Organization to urgently support the implementation of relevant resolutions, in line with
the implementation of the health objectives set out in the Samoa Pathway, and call upon other relevant specialized
agencies, funds and programmes to coordinate and advance initiatives to address the persistent and emerging health
issues of small island developing States;
(c) The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to continue to support small island developing
States to enhance institutional and technical capacity for trade expansion and competitiveness, upon their request,
while taking into account national development priorities, circumstances and legislation;

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(d) The relevant entities of the United Nations development system and international and regional
development banks to continue, upon their request, to support small island developing States to address the water and
sanitation challenges outlined in the Samoa Pathway by strengthening existing technical assistance initiatives in line
with their mandates;
(e) The Committee for Development Policy to give due consideration to the unique and particular
vulnerabilities of small island developing States as it continues to monitor regularly, together with their Governments,
the progress of small island developing States that have graduated from least developed country status, while looking
forward to the outcomes of the ongoing comprehensive review of the least developed country criteria, which will be
concluded at the next plenary of the Committee, in 2020;
(f) The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant entities of the United Nations system,
in accordance with their mandates, to support small island developing States’ efforts, upon their request, in combating
transnational crime and violence, including drug trafficking and illicit trade in small and light weapons, taking into
account the varied national circumstances of small island developing States;
(g) The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other relevant entities of the United
Nations system to support the full and effective implementation of the Global Action Programme on Food Security
and Nutrition in Small Island Developing States and to provide small island developing States with support to enhance
their institutional and technical capacity to promote sustainable and resilient domestic food production;
(h) The relevant institutions, funds and facilities to review, where appropriate, their financing instruments in
order to maximize accessibility, effectiveness, transparency, quality and impact, in the context of a complex funding
environment which presents challenges for small island developing States;
(i) The United Nations Environment Programme to further strengthen support to small island developing
States, including through dedicated programmes;
(j) The United Nations Development Programme to continue to provide support to small island developing
States, upon their request, including through policy and programme development implementation;
(k) The Secretary-General, within existing resources and in consultation with Member States, to identify the
Samoa Pathway priority areas not covered by the Sustainable Development Goals or the Sendai Framework, and, if
any are identified, to develop forthwith targets and indicators for those priority areas while ensuring complementarities
and synergies and avoiding duplication, in order to strengthen monitoring and evaluation, and noting the work being
done by the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries
and Small Island Developing States to develop a toolkit for a harmonized approach of the implementation of the
Samoa Pathway as a whole;
(l) The Secretary-General to mobilize the resources, from all sources, and to continue to address the needs
resulting from the expanding mandates given to the Small Island Developing States Unit of the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat and the Office of the High Representative, including, inter alia, the
Small Island Developing States Partnership Framework, the small island developing States national focal points
network and the Small Island Developing States Global Business Network.
RESOLUTION 74/4
Adopted at the 15th plenary meeting, on 15 October 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.2, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

74/4.

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under
the auspices of the General Assembly
The General Assembly

Endorses the political declaration adopted by the high-level political forum on sustainable development
convened under the auspices of the General Assembly, which is contained in the annex to the present resolution.
17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Annex
Gearing up for a decade of action and delivery for sustainable development: political declaration
of the Sustainable Development Goals Summit
I
Our commitment
1. We, the Heads of State and Government and high representatives, have met at United Nations Headquarters in
New York on 24 and 25 September 2019 at the Sustainable Development Goals Summit,22 to review progress on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.23
2. We stand firm in our determination to implement the 2030 Agenda as a plan of action for people, planet,
prosperity, peace and partnership – a plan to free humanity from the tyranny of poverty and heal and secure our planet
for future generations.
3. We emphasize that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development.
4. Today, we are launching an ambitious and accelerated response to reach our common vision by 2030, and
pledging to make the coming decade one of action and delivery. We will maintain the integrity of the 2030 Agenda,
including by ensuring ambitious and continuous action on the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals with a
2020 timeline.
5. We reaffirm the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind. We will take more
tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach the furthest
behind first.
6. We also reaffirm the principles recognized in the 2030 Agenda and recall that it is universal in nature and that
its Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible, balancing the economic, social and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development.
7. We remain resolved, between now and 2030, to end poverty and hunger everywhere; to combat inequalities
within and among countries; to build peaceful, just and inclusive societies; to respect, protect and fulfil human rights
and achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls; and to ensure the lasting protection of the
planet and its natural resources. We also remain resolved to create conditions for sustainable, inclusive and sustained
economic growth, shared prosperity and decent work for all, taking into account different levels of national
development and capacities.
8. We resolve to realize our vision of a world with access to inclusive and equitable quality education, universal
health coverage and quality health care, food security and improved nutrition, safe drinking water and sanitation,
affordable, reliable and sustainable energy and quality and resilient infrastructure for all.
9. We recognize the special challenges facing the most vulnerable countries and, in particular, African countries,
least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and countries in conflict
and post-conflict situations, as well as the specific challenges facing middle-income countries, in pursuing sustainable
development.
10. We reaffirm that gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls will make a crucial contribution
to progress across all the Goals and targets. The achievement of full human potential and sustainable development is
not possible if one half of humanity continues to be denied full human rights and opportunities.
11. We also reaffirm that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time. We express profound alarm
that emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise globally, and remain deeply concerned that all countries,

_______________
High-level political forum on sustainable development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly (Sustainable Development
Goals Summit).
23
Resolution 70/1.
22

18

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

particularly developing countries, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. We emphasize in this
regard that mitigation of and adaptation to climate change represent an immediate and urgent priority.
12. We commit to achieving a world in which humanity lives in harmony with nature, to conserving and sustainably
using our planet’s marine and terrestrial resources, including through sustainable consumption and production, to
reversing the trends of environmental degradation, to promoting resilience, to reducing disaster risk, and to halting
ecosystem degradation and biodiversity loss.
13. We recognize that greater efforts are needed to direct and align the means of implementation of the 2030 Agenda
with our Goals, and commit to accelerate the implementation of commitments across the seven action areas of the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development.24
14. In this endeavour, we must come together in durable partnerships between governments at all levels, and with
all relevant stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector, academia and youth.
15. The 2030 Agenda is our promise to the children and youth of today so that they may achieve their full human
potential and carry the torch of sustainable development to future generations.
II
Our world today
16. We recognize the many efforts at all levels since 2015 to realize the vision of the 2030 Agenda and the
Sustainable Development Goals. We have seen a significant response from national Governments, cities, local
authorities, civil society, the private sector, academia, youth and other actors. We acknowledge that the Sustainable
Development Goals are increasingly incorporated in national policies, plans, budgets and development cooperation
efforts, and we recognize that private sector engagement in sustainable investing is growing. Global, regional and
subregional multilateral development and finance institutions have embraced the Sustainable Development Goals and
taken significant steps to incorporate them into their operations.
17. We welcome the Secretary-General’s ongoing efforts to reposition the United Nations development system to
better support countries in their implementation of the 2030 Agenda and we commit to continuing to support his
efforts.
18. We commend the work of the high-level political forum on sustainable development, meeting under the auspices
of the Economic and Social Council since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, including its reviews of all 17 Sustainable
Development Goals. The voluntary national reviews presented by 142 countries bear witness to the efforts at the
national level to prioritize integration of the Sustainable Development Goals into national plans and policies and to
bring together all parts of society in the common endeavour of realizing the 2030 Agenda. We further welcome the
efforts at the regional level, including by the United Nations regional commissions and the regional forums on
sustainable development as well as the contributions of major groups and all other stakeholders.
19. We take note with appreciation of the Secretary-General’s progress report on the Sustainable Development
Goals and the Global Sustainable Development Report, including the identified entry points for transformation and
transformative levers for realizing the 2030 Agenda. We acknowledge the potential of a systemic and holistic
approach, taking into account interlinkages between Goals and targets. The reports show that we have achieved
progress in some areas, such as in reducing extreme poverty and child and neonatal mortality; improving access to
electricity and safe drinking water; and expanding the coverage of terrestrial and marine protected areas.
20. At the same time, we are concerned that progress is slow in many areas. Vulnerabilities are high and deprivations
are becoming more entrenched. Assessments show that we are at risk of missing the poverty eradication target. Hunger
is on the rise. Progress towards gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls is too slow. Inequalities
in wealth, incomes and opportunities are increasing in and between countries. Biodiversity loss, environmental
degradation, discharge of plastic litter into the oceans, climate change and increasing disaster risk continue at rates
that bring potentially disastrous consequences for humanity.

_______________
24

Resolution 69/313, annex.

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

21. We recognize that international migration is a multidimensional reality of major relevance for the development
of countries of origin, transit and destination.
22. Violent extremism, terrorism, organized crime, corruption, illicit financial flows, global health threats,
humanitarian crises and forced displacement of people threaten to reverse much of the development progress made
in recent decades.
23. In many parts of the world conflicts and instability have endured or intensified and natural disasters have become
more frequent and intense, causing untold human suffering and undermining the realization of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Our ability to prevent and resolve conflicts and build resilient, peaceful, just and inclusive
societies has often been fragmented and insufficient.
III
Our call to accelerated action
24. We recognize the urgent need to accelerate action on all levels and by all stakeholders, in order to fulfil the vision
and Goals of the 2030 Agenda. We also emphasize the need for concerted action across all relevant major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields, including the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030,25 the New Urban Agenda,26 the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020,27 the Vienna Programme of Action for the Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014–202428 and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway.29 We recognize the synergies
between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement.30
25. We welcome the voluntary actions pledged by leaders at the Sustainable Development Goals Summit and
throughout this high-level week.
26. We request the Secretary-General, as a follow-up to the Sustainable Development Goals Summit and the reports
on progress on the Goals, and in the lead‑up to the summit to mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
to engage Governments, civil society, the private sector and other stakeholders in generating solutions and accelerating
action to address systemic gaps in implementation, as we embark on a decisive decade for the 2030 Agenda. We also
call upon the Secretary-General to organize an annual moment to highlight inspiring action on the Goals, in the context
of the general debate of the General Assembly.
27. To demonstrate our determination to implement the 2030 Agenda and achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals, we need to do more and faster. To this end, we commit to:
(a) Leaving no one behind: we will place a focus on the poorest and most vulnerable in our policies and
actions. People who are vulnerable must be empowered. Those whose needs are reflected in the 2030 Agenda include
all children, youth, persons with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples,
refugees and internally displaced persons and migrants. We intend to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and
peoples and for all segments of society. And we will endeavour to reach the furthest behind first. We commit to
targeted and accelerated action to remove all legal, social and economic barriers to achieve gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls, and the realization and enjoyment of their human rights;
(b) Mobilizing adequate and well-directed financing: in order to close the financing gap for the Sustainable
Development Goals, Governments, the private sector and other stakeholders need to increase the level of ambition in
domestic, public and private resource mobilization, strengthen the enabling environment for sustainable investments

_______________
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
Resolution 71/256, annex.
27
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
28
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
29
Resolution 69/15, annex.
30
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
25
26

20

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and deliver on commitments to international development cooperation. We will ensure that policies and actions reach
those furthest behind, aiming at financial inclusion, and supporting the competitiveness of micro-, small and mediumsized enterprises, including women- and youth-owned enterprises. We will also strive to increase our level of ambition
on the non-financial means of implementation, including promoting a universal, rules-based, open, transparent,
non‑discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system, recognizing that international trade is an engine for
development;
(c) Enhancing national implementation: we pledge to lift the level of ambition of our national responses to
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, while respecting national processes and ensuring ownership. To this end, we
aim to proactively mainstream the 2030 Agenda into our national planning instruments, policies, strategies and
financial frameworks;
(d) Strengthening institutions for more integrated solutions: we will proactively develop effective,
accountable and transparent institutions at all levels and ensure more responsive, inclusive, participatory and
representative decision-making processes. We will strive to equip domestic institutions to better address interlinkages,
synergies and trade-offs between the Goals and targets through a whole-of-government approach that can bring about
transformative change in governance and public policy and ensure policy coherence for sustainable development;
(e) Bolstering local action to accelerate implementation: we commit to empower and support cities, local
authorities and communities in pursuing the 2030 Agenda. We recognize their critical role in implementing and
realizing the Sustainable Development Goals;
(f) Reducing disaster risk and building resilience: we undertake to pursue policy, investment and
innovation to reduce disaster risk and build the resilience of countries, economies, communities and individuals to
economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters;
(g) Solving challenges through international cooperation and enhancing the global partnership: we
recognize that the integrated nature of the Sustainable Development Goals requires a global response. We renew our
commitment to multilateralism, to find new ways of working together and to ensure that multilateral institutions keep
pace with the rapid changes taking place. We further commit to finding peaceful and just solutions to disputes and to
respecting international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including the right
to self-determination of peoples and the need to respect the territorial integrity and political independence of States;
(h) Harnessing science, technology and innovation with a greater focus on digital transformation for
sustainable development: we will promote research, capacity-building initiatives, innovation and technologies
towards advancing the Sustainable Development Goals and promote the use of scientific evidence from all fields to
enable the transformation to sustainable development. We will promote and support quality education and lifelong
learning to ensure that all children, youth and adults are empowered with the relevant knowledge and skills to shape
more resilient, inclusive and sustainable societies that are able to adapt to rapid technological change. We will foster
international cooperation to support developing countries in addressing their constraints in access to technologies and
education;
(i) Investing in data and statistics for the Sustainable Development Goals: we commit to strengthen our
national statistical capacities to address the gaps in data on the Sustainable Development Goals in order to allow
countries to provide high-quality, timely, reliable, disaggregated data and statistics and to fully integrate the
Sustainable Development Goals in our monitoring and reporting systems. We encourage international cooperation
supporting statistical capacity-building in developing countries, in particular the most vulnerable countries, which
face the greatest challenges in collecting, analysing and using reliable data and statistics;
(j) Strengthening the high-level political forum: we pledge to carry out an ambitious and effective review
of the format and organizational aspects of the high-level political forum and follow-up and review of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level during the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly
with a view to better addressing gaps in implementation and linking identified challenges with appropriate responses,
including on financing, to further strengthen the effective and participatory character of this intergovernmental forum
and encourage the peer-learning character of the voluntary national reviews. We also pledge to advance our efforts in
communicating the 2030 Agenda to the global public to raise awareness and inspire accelerated action.
28. We know the world we want. We pledge to accelerate our common efforts, now and in the coming decade to
reach this vision by 2030. Rapid change is possible and the Goals remain within reach if we embrace transformation
and accelerate implementation.
21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/5
Adopted at the 15th plenary meeting, on 15 October 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.1 and
A/74/L.1/Add.1, sponsored by: Argentina, Armenia, Benin, Canada, Central African Republic, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Eswatini, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Ireland, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay,
Philippines, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, Uruguay

74/5.

Proclamation of 28 September as the International Day for Universal Access to Information
The General Assembly,

Recalling that the right to seek, receive and impart information is an integral part of the right to freedom of
expression, as defined in article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights31 and article 19 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,32
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling resolution 57 adopted on 17 November 2015 by the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirty-eighth session,33
Stressing that freedom of information is also central in the context of the World Summit on the Information
Society, which reaffirmed freedom of expression and universal access to information as cornerstones of inclusive
knowledge societies,
Stressing also the importance of full respect for the freedom of opinion and expression, including the right to
seek, receive and impart information, and the fundamental importance of access to information and ideas through any
media, and democratic participation,
Noting that in the declaration by the African Platform on Access to Information, adopted at the Pan-African
Conference on Access to Information, organized by the Windhoek+20 Campaign on Access to Information in Africa
in partnership with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the African Union
Commission and the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information in Africa of the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights in Cape Town, South Africa, from 17 to 19 September 2011, the right to
information was recognized as a human right and also as fundamental to development,
Recalling article 6 of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of
Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 53/144 of 9 December 1998,
Bearing in mind the efforts of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to highlight
the relevance and importance of the right to information in the Brisbane Declaration, adopted at the International
Conference on Freedom of Information: the Right to Know, held in May 2010,
Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
70/1 of 25 September 2015, and the commitments made therein to, inter alia, promote peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development, including by ensuring public access to information and protecting fundamental
freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and international agreements,
Considering that several civil society organizations and government bodies in the world have adopted and
currently celebrate 28 September as the International Day for Universal Access to Information,

_______________
Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
33
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-eighth Session, Paris,
3–18 November 2015, vol. 1, Resolutions, sect. IV.
31
32

22

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking note of the principles established in the declaration by the African Platform on Access to Information,
and recognizing that these principles can play a crucial role in development, democracy, equality and the delivery of
public services,
1.

Proclaims 28 September as the International Day for Universal Access to Information;

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other international and regional
organizations, as well as civil society, including non‑governmental organizations and individuals, to celebrate the
International Day in a manner that each considers most appropriate, with the cost to be met exclusively from voluntary
contributions.
RESOLUTION 74/6
Adopted at the 26th plenary meeting, on 4 November 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.8 and
A/74/L.8/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu

74/6.

Report of the International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/7 of 29 October 2018 and all its previous relevant resolutions,

Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court34 reaffirms the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the International Criminal Court as an independent permanent judicial institution and, in this
regard, that the United Nations and the Court respect each other’s status and mandate,
Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict societies, is a fundamental
building block of sustainable peace,
Convinced that ending impunity is essential for coming to terms with any past crimes committed and preventing
such crimes in the future,
Acknowledging the fact that the International Criminal Court has achieved considerable progress in its
investigations and judicial proceedings in various situations and cases which were referred to it by States parties to
the Rome Statute and by the Security Council, and which the Prosecutor of the Court has initiated proprio motu, in
accordance with the Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective and comprehensive cooperation and assistance in all aspects of its mandate by States,
the United Nations and other international and regional organizations remain essential for the International Criminal
Court to carry out its activities,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective and efficient assistance to the
International Criminal Court in accordance with the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court,35
Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of
13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of the resolution, with respect to the payment in full of expenses accruing

_______________
34
35

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
A/58/874 and A/58/874/Add.1.

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

to the United Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement,36 which provides a framework
for continued cooperation between the International Criminal Court and the United Nations, which enables, inter alia,
facilitation by the United Nations of the Court’s field activities, and encouraging the conclusion of supplementary
arrangements and agreements, as necessary,
Noting the need for funding of expenses related to investigations or prosecutions of the International Criminal
Court, including in connection with situations referred to the Court by the Security Council,
Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International Criminal Court,
Stressing the importance that the Rome Statute accords to the rights and needs of victims, in particular their right
to participate in judicial proceedings and to claim reparations, and emphasizing the importance of informing and
involving victims and affected communities in order to give effect to the mandate of the International Criminal Court
towards victims,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2018/19;37

2. Also welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court,34 and calls upon all States in all regions of the world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider
ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to it without delay;
3. Further welcomes the States parties as well as States not parties to the Rome Statute that are parties to the
Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court,38 and calls upon all States that have
not yet done so to consider becoming parties to that Agreement;
4. Notes the recent ratifications and acceptances of the amendments adopted at the Review Conference of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, held in Kampala from 31 May to 11 June 2010;
5. Underlines, bearing in mind that in accordance with the Rome Statute the International Criminal Court is
complementary to national criminal jurisdictions, that States need to adopt appropriate measures within their national
legal systems for those crimes for which they are required under international law to exercise their responsibility to
investigate and prosecute;
6. Encourages further efforts by the United Nations, other international and regional organizations and
States, as well as civil society, to appropriately assist States, upon their request, in strengthening their domestic
capacity to investigate and prosecute crimes, and in this regard underlines the importance of national ownership;
7. Emphasizes the importance of international cooperation and judicial assistance in conducting effective
investigations and prosecutions;
8. Acknowledges the role of the International Criminal Court in a multilateral system that aims to end
impunity, promote the rule of law, promote and encourage respect for human rights, achieve sustainable peace and
further the development of nations, in accordance with international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations;
9. Calls upon States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so to adopt national legislation to
implement obligations emanating from the Rome Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in
the exercise of its functions, and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this respect;
10. Welcomes the cooperation and assistance provided thus far to the International Criminal Court by States
parties as well as States not parties, the United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and calls
upon those States that are under an obligation to cooperate to provide such cooperation and assistance in the future,
in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims
and witnesses and the enforcement of sentences;

_______________
Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
A/74/324.
38
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.
36
37

24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General in promoting cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court in accordance with the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court,35 and also notes in this regard that the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat has a
specific role within the United Nations;
12. Recalls article 3 of the Relationship Agreement, according to which, with a view to facilitating the
effective discharge of their respective responsibilities, the United Nations and the International Criminal Court shall
cooperate closely, whenever appropriate, with each other and consult each other on matters of mutual interest pursuant
to the provisions of the Relationship Agreement and in conformity with the respective provisions of the Charter and
the Rome Statute, and shall respect each other’s status and mandate,39 and requests the Secretary-General to continue
to include information relevant to the implementation of article 3 of the Relationship Agreement in a report to be
submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
13. Recalls the guidance issued by the Secretary-General on contacts with persons who are the subject of arrest
warrants or summonses issued by the International Criminal Court,40 and in this regard takes note of the information
included in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of article 3 of the Relationship Agreement;41
14. Recalls the Relationship Agreement, and notes that expenses related to investigations or prosecutions
incurred by the International Criminal Court in connection with situations referred by the Security Council or
otherwise continue to be borne exclusively by States parties to the Rome Statute;
15. Emphasizes the importance of cooperation with States that are not parties to the Rome Statute;
16. Invites regional organizations to consider concluding cooperation agreements with the International
Criminal Court;
17. Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, if the acceptance of a State which is
not a party to the Rome Statute is required under article 12, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute, that State may, by
declaration lodged with the Registrar of the International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of jurisdiction by the
Court with respect to the crime in question;
18. Urges all States parties to take the interests, needs for assistance and mandate of the International Criminal
Court into account when relevant matters are being discussed in the United Nations, and invites all other States to
consider doing the same, as appropriate;
19. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of all aspects of the Relationship Agreement, which
forms a framework for close cooperation between the two organizations and for consultation on matters of mutual
interest pursuant to the provisions of that Agreement and in conformity with the respective provisions of the Charter
and the Rome Statute, as well as the need for the Secretary-General to continue to inform the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session of the expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations in connection with
assistance provided to the International Criminal Court;
20. Encourages further dialogue between the United Nations and the International Criminal Court, and
welcomes in this regard the increased interaction of the Security Council with the Court under various formats, including
the holding of open debates on peace and justice and working methods, with a special focus on the role of the Court;
21. Continues to welcome the statement by the President of the Security Council of 12 February 2013,42 in
which the Council reiterated its previous call regarding the importance of State cooperation with the International
Criminal Court, in accordance with the respective obligations of States, and expressed its commitment to effective
follow-up of Council decisions in this regard;
22. Expresses its appreciation for the work undertaken by the International Criminal Court liaison office to
United Nations Headquarters, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue to work closely with that office;

_______________
Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Relationship Agreement.
A/67/828-S/2013/210, annex.
41
A/74/325.
42
S/PRST/2013/2; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2012–31 July 2013 (S/INF/68).
39
40

25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

23. Encourages States to contribute to the trust fund established for the benefit of victims of crimes within the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court and the families of such victims, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to that trust fund thus far;
24. Recalls that, at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute, which was convened and opened by the
Secretary-General, States parties reaffirmed their commitment to the Rome Statute and its full implementation, as
well as its universality and integrity, and that the Review Conference undertook a stocktaking exercise of
international criminal justice, considering the impact of the Rome Statute on victims and affected communities,
peace and justice, complementarity and cooperation, called for the strengthening of the enforcement of sentences,
adopted amendments to the Rome Statute to expand the jurisdiction of the Court to cover three additional war crimes
when committed in armed conflicts not of an international character, and adopted amendments to the Rome Statute
to define the crime of aggression and to establish conditions under which the Court could exercise jurisdiction with
respect to that crime;
25. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization;43
26. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court at its fifteenth session, while recalling that, according to article 112, paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute,
the Assembly of States Parties shall meet at the seat of the Court or at United Nations Headquarters, to hold its
eighteenth session in The Hague, looks forward to the eighteenth session, to be held from 2 to 7 December 2019, and
requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary services and facilities in accordance with the Relationship
Agreement and resolution 58/318;
27. Encourages the widest possible participation of States in the Assembly of States Parties, invites States to
contribute to the trust fund for the participation of the least developed countries, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to that trust fund thus far;
28. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, if it deems it appropriate, in accordance with article 6
of the Relationship Agreement, a report on its activities for 2019/20, for consideration by the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/7
Adopted at the 28th plenary meeting, on 7 November 2019, by a recorded vote of 187 to 3, with 2 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.6, sponsored by Cuba
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Brazil, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Colombia, Ukraine

_______________
43

26

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/74/1).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

74/7.

Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba
The General Assembly,

Determined to encourage strict compliance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming, among other principles, the sovereign equality of States, non‑intervention and non-interference in
their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, which are also enshrined in many international
legal instruments,
Recalling the statements of the Heads of State or Government of Latin America and the Caribbean at the
Summits of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States regarding the need to put an end to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba,
Concerned about the continued promulgation and application by Member States of laws and regulations, such
as that promulgated on 12 March 1996 known as “the Helms-Burton Act”, the extraterritorial effects of which affect
the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction and the freedom
of trade and navigation,
Taking note of declarations and resolutions of different intergovernmental forums, bodies and Governments that
express the rejection by the international community and public opinion of the promulgation and application of
measures of the kind referred to above,
Recalling its resolutions 47/19 of 24 November 1992, 48/16 of 3 November 1993, 49/9 of 26 October 1994,
50/10 of 2 November 1995, 51/17 of 12 November 1996, 52/10 of 5 November 1997, 53/4 of 14 October 1998, 54/21
of 9 November 1999, 55/20 of 9 November 2000, 56/9 of 27 November 2001, 57/11 of 12 November 2002, 58/7 of
4 November 2003, 59/11 of 28 October 2004, 60/12 of 8 November 2005, 61/11 of 8 November 2006, 62/3 of
30 October 2007, 63/7 of 29 October 2008, 64/6 of 28 October 2009, 65/6 of 26 October 2010, 66/6 of 25 October
2011, 67/4 of 13 November 2012, 68/8 of 29 October 2013, 69/5 of 28 October 2014, 70/5 of 27 October 2015, 71/5
of 26 October 2016, 72/4 of 1 November 2017 and 73/8 of 1 November 2018,
Recalling also the measures adopted by the Executive of the United States of America in 2015 and 2016 to
modify several aspects of the application of the embargo, which contrast with the measures applied since 2017 to
reinforce its implementation,
Concerned that, since the adoption of its resolutions 47/19, 48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10, 53/4, 54/21, 55/20,
56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12, 61/11, 62/3, 63/7, 64/6, 65/6, 66/6, 67/4, 68/8, 69/5, 70/5, 71/5, 72/4 and 73/8, the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba is still in place, and concerned also about the adverse
effects of such measures on the Cuban people and on Cuban nationals living in other countries,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 73/8;44

2. Reiterates its call upon all States to refrain from promulgating and applying laws and measures of the kind
referred to in the preamble to the present resolution, in conformity with their obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, which, inter alia, reaffirm the freedom of trade and navigation;
3. Once again urges States that have and continue to apply such laws and measures to take the steps
necessary to repeal or invalidate them as soon as possible in accordance with their legal regime;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the appropriate organs and agencies of the United
Nations system, to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution in the light of the purposes and
principles of the Charter and international law and to submit it to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.

_______________
44

A/74/91/Rev.1.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/8
Adopted at the 30th plenary meeting, on 11 November 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.10 and
A/74/L.10/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino,
Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay

74/8.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency for 2018,45
Mourning the passing of Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the Agency,

Taking note of the statement by the Acting Director General of the Agency, in which he provided additional
information on the main developments in the activities of the Agency during 2019,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency,
Recognizing also the cooperation between the United Nations and the Agency and the Agreement governing
the relationship between the United Nations and the Agency as approved by the General Conference of the Agency
on 23 October 1957 and by the General Assembly in the annex to its resolution 1145 (XII) of 14 November 1957,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency;45

2. Takes note of resolutions GC(63)/RES/1 containing a tribute to the late Director General, Mr. Yukiya
Amano; GC(63)/RES/7 on nuclear and radiation safety; GC(63)/RES/8 on nuclear security; GC(63)/RES/9 on the
strengthening of the Agency’s technical cooperation activities; GC(63)/RES/10 on strengthening the Agency’s
activities related to nuclear science, technology and applications, comprising GC(63)/RES/10 A on non-power nuclear
applications and GC(63)/RES/10 B on nuclear power applications; GC(63)/RES/11 on strengthening the effectiveness
and improving the efficiency of Agency safeguards; GC(63)/RES/12 on the implementation of the Agreement
between the Agency and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for the application of safeguards in connection
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; GC(63)/RES/13 on the application of Agency
safeguards in the Middle East; and GC(63)/RES/14 on personnel matters, comprising GC(63)/RES/14 A on the
staffing of the Agency’s secretariat and GC(63)/RES/14 B on women in the secretariat; and decisions GC(63)/DEC/11
on the amendment to article XIV.A of the statute of the Agency; GC(63)/DEC/12 on the promotion of efficiency and
effectiveness of the Agency’s decision-making process; and GC(63)/DEC/13 on the amendment to article VI of the
statute of the Agency, adopted by the General Conference of the Agency at its sixty-third regular session, held from
16 to 20 September 2019;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the 10 years of distinguished service by the late Director General, Mr.
Amano, and his significant contribution to enhancing the Agency’s efforts towards international peace and security
and in support of the peaceful use of nuclear technologies, in particular through the motto “Atoms for peace and
development”;
4. Reaffirms its strong support for the indispensable role of the Agency in encouraging and assisting the
development and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses, in technology transfer to developing
countries and in nuclear safety, verification and security;
5.

Appeals to Member States to continue to support the activities of the Agency;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Acting Director General of the Agency the records of
the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly relating to the activities of the Agency.

_______________
45

28

See A/74/287.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/9
Adopted at the 36th plenary meeting, on 27 November 2019, by a recorded vote of 137 to none, with 2 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/74/L.13 and A/74/L.13/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Mongolia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Palau, Russian Federation

74/9.

The situation in Afghanistan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/88 of 6 December 2018 and all its previous relevant resolutions,

Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions and statements by the President of the Council on the
situation in Afghanistan, in particular resolutions 2189 (2014) of 12 December 2014, 2210 (2015) of 16 March 2015,
2274 (2016) of 15 March 2016, 2344 (2017) of 17 March 2017, 2405 (2018) of 8 March 2018 and 2489 (2019) of
17 September 2019,
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan, and respecting its multicultural, multi‑ethnic and historical heritage,
Welcoming the efforts by Afghanistan in the framework of the Transformation Decade (2015–2024) to
consolidate its sovereignty through strengthening a fully functioning, sustainable State in the service of its people,
with the goal of becoming fully self-reliant,
Recalling the importance of the development of the institutions of the Government of Afghanistan, including at
the subnational level, the strengthening of the rule of law, democratic processes and civil society, the fight against
corruption, the continuation of justice sector reform, the promotion of the peace process, including women’s full and
meaningful participation in the peace process, without prejudice to the fulfilment of the measures introduced by the
Security Council in its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 1267 (1999) of 15 October 1999 and 1988 (2011)
of 17 June 2011, and of an Afghan-led transitional justice process, the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable return
of Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons, the promotion and protection of all human rights, including the
rights of women and girls, interfaith and intrafaith tolerance and the advancement of economic and social
development,
Reaffirming the long-term partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community based on their renewed mutual commitments, as laid down in the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, as agreed upon at the Geneva Conference on Afghanistan held on 27 and 28 November 2018, and
recalling the long-term commitment of the international community to Afghanistan, reaffirmed at the Geneva
Conference, with the aim of continuing to strengthen national ownership and leadership,

29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming also the commitment of the international community to continuing to support the training,
equipping, financing and development of the capacity of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, including
as agreed upon in the Summit Declarations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization on Afghanistan, and honouring
the memory of the men and women of the Afghan and international security forces who have given their lives in the
course of duty,
Reiterating its serious concern about the security situation in Afghanistan and the urgent need to tackle the
challenges facing the country, in particular the region-based violence, attacks and all forms of terrorist and criminal
activities and violent extremist activities of the Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, as well as Al‑Qaida, Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) and their affiliates, in particular ISIL-Khorasan Province, and other
terrorist groups, and foreign terrorist fighters,
Expressing its deep concern about the continuing high level of violence in Afghanistan, especially the number
of civilian casualties, including the continuing high number of women and children killed and maimed, urging an
immediate reduction in current levels of violence, condemning in the strongest terms all terrorist activity and all violent
and unlawful attacks and killings, recalling that the Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, as well as Al-Qaida,
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) and their affiliates, in particular ISIL-Khorasan Province, and
other terrorist groups, and foreign terrorist fighters, are responsible for the significant majority of the civilian
casualties, including those involving humanitarian and medical personnel, in Afghanistan, calling for compliance with
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as applicable, calling upon all parties to armed
conflict to take all measures necessary and appropriate to ensure respect for and the protection of civilians and
humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as aid and humanitarian and medical facilities, and urging that credible
reports of civilian casualties be thoroughly investigated and steps taken to avoid such incidents,
Welcoming the efforts made by the Government of Afghanistan to promote an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process, and calling upon the Taliban to respond to the call for peace from the people and the Government of
Afghanistan,
Welcoming also the achievements of the National Unity Government in political, economic, governance and
social reforms and in the management of the transition, underlining the need to preserve past achievements, and urging
further improvement in this regard, in particular to address poverty and the delivery of services, stimulate economic
growth, create employment opportunities, tackle corruption, enhance transparency, increase domestic revenue and
promote and implement commitments on human rights, especially women’s full and equal enjoyment of these rights,
the rights of the child, the rights of persons belonging to minorities and the freedom of expression and opinion, as
envisaged in the Constitution of Afghanistan, including for journalists and in accordance with obligations under
international law,
Emphasizing the important role of regional cooperation to promote long-term peace, security, prosperity,
sustainable development and human rights in Afghanistan,
Welcoming the inauguration of the new parliament on 26 April 2019, noting the holding of the presidential
election on 28 September 2019, which marked another important step towards the consolidation of democracy in the
country, commending the people of Afghanistan for their courage and determination in defying terrorism and violence
to take part in that national process, as well as the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces for the effective
manner in which they provided security for the elections, and condemning in the strongest terms all terrorist activity
and violent attacks aimed at disrupting the elections,
Emphasizing the central and impartial role of the United Nations in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan, expressing its appreciation and strong support for all the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Afghanistan in this regard, expressing its appreciation also for the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in accordance with Security Council resolution 2489 (2019), and stressing the
important role of the Assistance Mission in seeking to further improve the coherence and coordination of international
civilian efforts, based on the “One United Nations” approach and guided by the principle of reinforcing Afghan
ownership and leadership,
Recalling with appreciation the visit of the Security Council to Kabul in January 2018 in the context of peace
and security, and welcoming the joint high-level visit by the Deputy Secretary-General and other senior United
Nations officials to Afghanistan in July 2019 in the context of women and peace and security,
30

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming also the reports of the Secretary-General and the recommendations contained therein,46
1. Pledges its continued support to the Government and people of Afghanistan as they rebuild a stable, secure
and economically self-sufficient State, free of terrorism and narcotics, and strengthen the foundations of a
constitutional democracy as a responsible member of the international community;
2. Encourages all partners to constructively support the reform agenda of the Government of Afghanistan,
as envisaged in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework and the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, so as to secure a prosperous and democratic Afghanistan, focusing on strengthening the constitutional
checks and balances that guarantee citizens’ rights and obligations and implementing structural reform to enable an
accountable and effective Government to deliver concrete progress to its people;
3. Supports the continuing and growing ownership of reconstruction and development efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan, emphasizes the crucial need to achieve ownership and accountability in all fields of
governance and to improve institutional capabilities, including at the subnational level, in order to use aid more
effectively, and reiterates in this regard the importance of effectively implementing mutual commitments of the
Government of Afghanistan and the international community on a reciprocal basis, as underscored in the Geneva
Mutual Accountability Framework;
4. Notes that the funding commitments made at the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan will end in 2020,
and underlines, in the light of the continued acute development and humanitarian needs, the necessity for a ministerial
pledging conference to be held in late 2020 to set frameworks both for sustained assistance for the remainder of the
Transformation Decade (2015–2024) to address this need and for future donor assistance to Afghanistan beyond 2024;
5. Recalls with appreciation the adoption of the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework, as reflected in
the communiqué adopted at the international Geneva Conference on Afghanistan, which underscores the importance
of effectively implementing mutual commitments of the Government of Afghanistan and the international community
on a reciprocal basis;
6. Emphasizes that threats to stability and development in Afghanistan and the region require closer and more
coordinated cooperation as well as greater coherence and complementarity of approach between countries of the
region and the international community, for the long-term peace, security, prosperity and sustainable development of
the country, and underscores in this regard the standing of Afghanistan as a platform for such international
cooperation;
Security
7. Recognizes the commitment of the international community to supporting the training, equipping,
financing and development of capacity-building for the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces throughout the
Transformation Decade (2015–2024), as agreed upon most recently in the Brussels Summit Declaration in 2018,
including through the Resolute Support Mission, as welcomed by the Security Council in its resolution 2189 (2014);
8. Welcomes the pledges and commitments made, most recently at the Brussels Summit of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, held on 11 and 12 July 2018, to continuing national contributions to the financial sustainment of
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces until the end of 2024, to sustaining the Resolute Support Mission
and to continuing to deliver training, advice and assistance to the Afghan security institutions, including the police,
the air force and special operations forces;
9. Recognizes the positive impact and ongoing importance of commitments made by the European Union as
part of the continued international support for security, development and stability in Afghanistan;
10. Reiterates once again its serious concern about the security situation in Afghanistan, stresses the need to
continue to address the threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan caused by the region-based violent extremist
and other illegal armed groups and criminals, including those involved in the narcotics trade, the Taliban, including
the Haqqani Network, as well as Al-Qaida, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) and their affiliates, in

_______________
A/71/682-S/2016/1049, A/71/826-S/2017/189, A/71/932-S/2017/508, A/72/392-S/2017/783, A/73/374/Rev.1-S/2018/824/Rev.1 and
A/74/348-S/2019/703.
46

31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

particular ISIL-Khorasan Province, and other terrorist groups, and foreign terrorist fighters, expresses concern about
the serious threat posed by the presence of foreign terrorist fighters, reiterates in this regard its call for the full and
serious implementation of measures and the application of procedures introduced in relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 1267 (1999), 1988 (2011), 1989 (2011) of 17 June 2011, 2082 (2012) and
2083 (2012) of 17 December 2012, 2160 (2014) and 2161 (2014) of 17 June 2014, 2253 (2015) of 17 December
2015, 2255 (2015) of 21 December 2015 and 2368 (2017) of 20 July 2017, and calls upon all States to strengthen
their international and regional cooperation to enhance information-sharing, border control, law enforcement and
criminal justice to better counter the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters and returning foreign terrorist fighters in
Afghanistan and the region;
11. Expresses its serious concern regarding the presence of terrorist organizations, such as Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) and its affiliates, in particular ISIL-Khorasan Province, and other terrorist groups,
and foreign terrorist fighters, and the increased number of cowardly and heinous terrorist attacks for which they have
claimed responsibility, including killings of Afghan nationals, and their deplorable attempts to undermine relations
between communities, posing a serious threat to the security of Afghanistan and the countries of the region, commends
the progress of the Government of Afghanistan in combating these threats in the country, calls for enhanced regional
cooperation in the fight against these groups, and affirms its support for continued efforts in this regard;
12. Condemns in the strongest terms all unlawful acts of violence, intimidation and attacks, including
improvised explosive device attacks, suicide attacks, assassinations, including of public figures, abductions,
indiscriminate attacks against civilians, violence perpetrated against women and children and sexual and gender-based
violence, killings, attacks against individuals, media groups and organs of society engaged in the promotion and
protection of universally recognized human rights, attacks against development aid, humanitarian and medical
personnel and civilian infrastructure facilities, including schools, health clinics and hospitals, as such, and the targeting
of Afghan and international forces, which have a deleterious effect on stabilization and development efforts in
Afghanistan, and condemns the use of civilians as human shields, as well as Taliban attacks and acts of international
terrorists;
13. Stresses the need for the Government of Afghanistan and the international community to continue to work
closely together and to improve coordination in countering such acts, which are threatening peace and stability in
Afghanistan and the democratic process, the achievements and the continued implementation of the development
process in Afghanistan, as well as humanitarian aid measures, recognizes the achievements of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces in this regard, and calls upon all Member States, in particular neighbouring countries, to
deny those groups any form of sanctuary, freedom of operations, movement, recruitment and financial, material or
political support;
14. Welcomes the assumption of full security responsibility by the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces, commends the resilience and courage displayed in this regard, calls upon the international community to
provide the support necessary to increase security, including public order, law enforcement, the security of
Afghanistan’s borders and the preservation of the constitutional rights of Afghan citizens, as well as to provide
continued support by training, equipping and contributing to the financing of the Forces to take on the task of securing
their country and fighting against terrorism, and underscores the importance of all the Summit Declarations of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization on Afghanistan and other relevant agreements with regional and international
partners;
15. Also welcomes, in this regard, the presence of the Resolute Support Mission, expresses its appreciation to
Member States for having contributed personnel, equipment and other resources to the Mission and for the support
provided to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces by all international partners, in particular by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization through its previous combat and current non-combat missions in Afghanistan, as well as
other bilateral training programmes, and encourages further coordination, where appropriate;
16. Further welcomes the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan, with a view to ensuring stability
and providing conditions for the effective rule of law and respect for human rights for all, including women’s full and
equal enjoyment of these rights, to continuing its security sector reform by making the security provision, management
and oversight of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces more effective and accountable, welcomes in this
regard the progress being made in the Afghan national security institutions, as presented at the Geneva Conference on
Afghanistan, and expresses its appreciation for the support that States have provided to the Forces;

32

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

17. Recalls that regional security cooperation plays a key role in maintaining stability in Afghanistan and the
region, welcomes the progress achieved by Afghanistan and regional partners in this regard, calls for further efforts
by Afghanistan and regional partners and organizations, including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, to
strengthen their partnership and cooperation, takes note of the discussion related to Afghanistan at the meeting of the
Council of Heads of State of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization held in Bishkek on 13 and 14 June 2019, and in
this regard also takes note of the meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group held
in Bishkek on 19 April 2019;
18. Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia to
address regional security cooperation, including its holding of a preventive diplomacy academy and cross-border
workshop with Afghan participants,
19. Remains deeply concerned about the persistent problem of anti-personnel landmines, explosive remnants
of war and improvised explosive devices, welcomes the achievements to date in the implementation of the Mine
Action Programme for Afghanistan, aimed at declaring Afghanistan mine-free by 2023, underscores the importance
of sustained international assistance, encourages the Government of Afghanistan, with the support of the United
Nations and all relevant actors, to continue its efforts to meet its responsibilities under the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,47
expresses concern at the use of improvised explosive devices by the Taliban against civilians and the Afghan security
forces, and notes the need to enhance coordination and information-sharing between both Member States and the
private sector to prevent the flow of improvised explosive device components to the Taliban;
Peace and reconciliation
20. Recognizes that an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned inclusive peace process backed by regional actors, in
particular Pakistan, and supported by the international community, is essential for achieving long-term peace and
stability in Afghanistan, reiterating its firm commitment to supporting the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts in
this regard, and that, to be successful, a political solution must ensure the renunciation of violence and the breaking
of all ties to international terrorism, protect the human rights of all, including women, children and persons belonging
to minorities, in accordance with international law and as enshrined in the Constitution of Afghanistan, and build a
peaceful Afghanistan, with full respect for the implementation of the measures and application of the procedures
introduced by the Security Council in its resolutions 1267 (1999), 1988 (2011), 2082 (2012), 2160 (2014) and
2255 (2015), as well as other relevant resolutions of the Council, calls upon all relevant States, especially neighbouring
countries, and international organizations to remain engaged in the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, and
recognizes the impact that terrorist attacks have on the Afghan people, while underlining that such acts should not
hinder efforts to achieve a peace settlement;
21. Welcomes the efforts made by the Government of Afghanistan to begin direct negotiations within the
framework of a comprehensive peace plan, as laid out in the declaration of the consultative peace loya jirga held from
29 April to 3 May 2019,48 calls upon the Taliban to accept this offer without any preconditions and without the threat
of violence, and calls for the resumption of the peace process, for the continuation of the intra-Afghan dialogue and
for the start of inclusive direct talks of the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban, with the aim of agreeing on a
political settlement that leads to sustainable peace for the people of Afghanistan;
22. Encourages Afghanistan and Pakistan to enhance their relationship, which could lead to cooperation to
combat terrorism effectively and move forward the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, and to effectively
implement the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity as an important mechanism of cooperation;
23. Recalls that women play a vital role in the peace process, as recognized by the Security Council in its
resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and in related resolutions, including resolution 2242 (2015) of 13 October
2015, welcomes the steps taken by the Government of Afghanistan in implementing its national action plan on
women, peace and security and in enhancing the role of women in the peace process, as manifested in their
contribution to the development of the Afghanistan peace and reconciliation strategy, and encourages the Government

_______________
47
48

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.
S/2019/410, annex.

33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of Afghanistan to further implement the women and peace and security agenda, including by supporting the full and
meaningful participation of women, locally and at the highest level, in peace and transition;
24. Recognizes that there is no purely military solution to ensure the stability of Afghanistan and that
sustainable peace can be achieved only through a negotiated political settlement that includes the Government of
Afghanistan, calls for an immediate halt to unlawful violence to create an environment conducive to peace
negotiations, welcomes the efforts made by the Government of Afghanistan, including the convening of the second
meeting of the Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation and the convening of the consultative peace loya
jirga, as well as all other ongoing efforts to initiate a peace process in Afghanistan with Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
negotiations inclusive of both the Government and civil society at its core, and commends the role of the Ulama of
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Indonesia in advancing the peace process by sending a message of peace through the
Trilateral Ulama Conference;
25. Calls upon all Afghan, regional and international parties to continue to support these peace efforts to
include the effective and meaningful participation of women and to safeguard and further consolidate the
achievements with regard to State-building, social, political and economic reforms and the implementation of
obligations and commitments relating to fundamental freedoms and human rights in Afghanistan, especially those of
women and children;
26. Notes the work of regional and international partners and formats, including the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, the International Contact Group on Afghanistan, the Tashkent dialogue consultations, the
Moscow format consultations and the intra-Afghan dialogue, including the dialogues held in Doha and in Moscow,
to facilitate Afghan-led and Afghan-owned efforts towards direct peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban, and calls upon all regional and international partners of Afghanistan to continue their efforts,
recognizing that success can be achieved only through the unified and close coordination of efforts under the
leadership and ownership of the Government of Afghanistan;
Democracy
27. Emphasizes the importance of all parties in Afghanistan working together to achieve a unified, peaceful,
democratic and prosperous future for all the people of Afghanistan;
28. Recalls the commitment and welcomes the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to improving and
reforming the electoral process in Afghanistan and the holding of presidential elections on 28 September 2019,
condemns in the strongest terms all terrorist activity and violent attacks aimed at disrupting the elections, commends
the commitment shown by Afghans in exercising their right to vote and their belief in democracy, emphasizes the
important role of the independent Afghan electoral institutions in upholding the integrity of the electoral process,
including by clearly communicating their decisions to all stakeholders, urges all stakeholders to support the elections
commissioners in delivering an election result that is credible and transparent, and calls upon the Government of
Afghanistan and its institutions, including the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, to ensure that future elections are credible and transparent by building on the lessons learned in 2019
and continuing to implement the electoral reforms and further technical and operational improvements necessary to
strengthen voter trust and confidence;
29. Welcomes the increasingly wide and comprehensive dialogue on the political transition towards
strengthening the unity of the Afghan people, and underscores its importance for consolidating democracy and Afghan
political stability;
30. Calls upon the Government of Afghanistan to continue to effectively reform the public administration
sector in order to implement the rule of law and to ensure good governance and accountability, and welcomes the
commitments, efforts and progress made by the Government in this regard;
Rule of law, human rights and good governance
31. Emphasizes that the rule of law, human rights and good governance form the foundation for the
achievement of a stable and prosperous Afghanistan;
32. Recalls the constitutional guarantee of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all Afghans,
without discrimination of any kind, stresses the need to fully implement the human rights provisions of the
34

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Constitution of Afghanistan, in accordance with obligations under applicable international law, in particular those
regarding the full enjoyment by women, children, persons with disabilities and persons belonging to ethnic and
religious minorities of their human rights, and acknowledges efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in this regard;
33. Recognizes the membership of Afghanistan in the Human Rights Council, and welcomes the commitment
and responsibility assumed in upholding and promoting human rights at the national, regional and international levels,
within the framework of relevant international human rights instruments to which it is a party;
34. Reiterates its concern at the destructive consequences of violent and terrorist activities, including against
persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities, for the enjoyment of human rights and for the capacity of the
Government to ensure human rights and fundamental freedoms for all Afghans, and stresses the need to further
promote tolerance and to ensure respect for the right to freedom of expression, including for journalists, and the right
to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief as enshrined in the Constitution of Afghanistan and the
international covenants to which Afghanistan is a party;
35. Emphasizes the necessity of investigating allegations of current and past violations, and stresses the
importance of facilitating the provision of efficient and effective remedies to the victims and of bringing the
perpetrators to justice in accordance with national and international law;
36. Calls for the full implementation of the Mass Media Law, while noting with concern and condemning the
continuing intimidation and violence targeting Afghan journalists, such as cases of abduction and even the killing of
journalists by terrorist and violent extremist and criminal groups, and urges that the harassment of and attacks on
journalists be investigated by Afghan authorities and that those responsible be brought to justice;
37. Reiterates its unwavering commitment and that of the Government of Afghanistan to the promotion and
protection of women’s full enjoyment of human rights in Afghanistan, in particular the achievement of equality
between men and women, the full and equal participation of women in all spheres of Afghan life, the eradication of
sexual and gender-based violence, including against children, and the provision of humanitarian responses that are
principled and targeted towards the individuals most in need, including by offering psychosocial support and seeking
to end all forms of gender-based violence;
38. Commends the achievements and efforts of the Government aimed at increasing women’s participation in
policymaking and decision-making, countering discrimination and protecting and promoting the equal rights of
women and men consistent with its international obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women49 and pursuant to the Constitution of Afghanistan, the National Action Plan for the
Women of Afghanistan, the Afghan national action plan on women, peace and security, the Law on the Elimination
of Violence against Women and the national strategy to prevent violence against women;
39. Welcomes recent measures taken by the Government of Afghanistan towards the protection of women’s
and girls’ full and equal enjoyment of human rights, including the establishment of a special secretariat within the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission to investigate allegations of harassment of women in
government institutions and the appointment of women ambassadors, deputy ministers, human rights commissioners
and heads of electoral bodies and a woman Inspector General;
40. Emphasizes the need to ensure respect for the rights of the child and their fundamental freedoms in
Afghanistan and to prevent grave human rights violations and abuses against children as a result of the ongoing armed
conflict, condemns the continued recruitment and use of child soldiers, including sexual violence and sexual
exploitation, recalls the need for the full implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,50 its Optional
Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography51 and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict52 by all States parties, as well as of Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
of 26 July 2005, and all other subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, and Council resolutions
1998 (2011) of 12 July 2011 and 2286 (2016) of 3 May 2016 on attacks against schools and hospitals, in particular

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
51
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
52
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
49
50

35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

by terrorist and violent extremist and criminal groups, commends the Government of Afghanistan for implementing the
law on the protection of child rights, adopting a new Penal Code that envisages punishment for the perpetrators of crimes
against children, including of bacha bazi, for introducing legislation banning the recruitment and use of child soldiers
and for establishing, equipping, staffing, training and providing adequate oversight of local child protection units;
41. Welcomes the progress made in the implementation of the action plan for the prevention of underage
recruitment, signed in January 2011, and the annex thereto on children associated with the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, and of the road map towards compliance, as well as the signing in 2017 of a child protection
policy to protect children from the effects of armed conflict, as reflected in the seventh report of the Government of
Afghanistan on the implementation of the Joint Action Plan on Children and Armed Conflict, released in April 2019,
continues to call for an end to the recruitment and use of children by all parties within all ranks, and stresses the need
to refrain from detaining children on national security-related charges and the importance of considering children
primarily as victims;
42. Recalls Security Council resolutions 2250 (2015) of 9 December 2015 on the maintenance of international
peace and security and 2419 (2018) of 6 June 2018 on youth, peace and security, in which the Council reaffirmed the
important role that youth can play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, welcomes the appointment of
Afghanistan’s youth representative to the United Nations, recognizes in this regard the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan in enhancing the representation of youth for the prevention and resolution of conflict, and encourages
continued efforts in this regard;
43. Reiterates its appreciation for the anti-corruption commitment made by the Government of Afghanistan,
welcomes in this respect the reform efforts of the Government, including the adoption of a law protecting whistleblowers, the revision of the access to information law, the continuation of reform measures in the civil service through
the successful completion of merit-based recruitment for 11,500 teaching positions and 6,500 entry-level civil servant
positions in the capital and provinces, the establishment of the National High Council for Rule of Law and AntiCorruption, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre and the National Procurement Commission, the adoption of the
updated Afghanistan National Strategy for Combating Corruption at the end of 2018, the enactment of the revised
Penal Code and the anti-corruption law of 2018 and the finalization of anti-corruption action plans for various
ministries as measures taken by the Government to implement its comprehensive reform agenda, strengthen
governance and achieve a more effective, accountable and transparent administration at the national, provincial and
local levels of government, takes note in this regard of the progress made thus far against the benchmarks of its
comprehensive reform agenda presented and endorsed at the third Senior Officials Meeting and at the Geneva
Conference on Afghanistan, urges the Government of Afghanistan to take continued decisive action and accelerate
implementation, promote the rule of law and address impunity for corruption, and establish a more effective,
accountable and transparent administration at the national, provincial and local levels of government in order to create
conditions for sustained future peace;
44. Calls upon the international community to support the efforts of Afghanistan to meet governance
objectives in this regard;
Counter-narcotics
45. Welcomes the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan in fighting drug production in Afghanistan,
including recent law enforcement operations aimed at seizing, dismantling and destroying drug stockpiles and
laboratories, as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General,53 encourages international and regional cooperation
with Afghanistan in its sustained efforts to address illicit drug production and trafficking, recognizes the threat
posed by illicit drug production, trade and trafficking to international peace and stability in different regions of the
world, and the important role played by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in this regard, expresses
its continued deep concern at the serious harm that opium cultivation, production and trafficking continue to cause
to the security, development and governance of Afghanistan, as well as to the region and beyond, and that such
activities can also significantly contribute to the financial resources of terrorist groups, as reflected in the report of
the Office entitled Afghanistan Opium Survey 2018: Challenges to Sustainable Development, Peace and Security,
released on 30 July 2019;

_______________
53

36

A/74/348-S/2019/703.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

46. Stresses the importance of a comprehensive and balanced approach in addressing the drug problem of
Afghanistan, which, to be effective, must be integrated into the wider context of efforts carried out in the areas of
security, governance, the rule of law, human rights, public health and economic and social development, in particular
in rural areas, including the development of improved alternative livelihood programmes;
47. Notes with great concern the strong nexus between drug trafficking and the terrorist activities of the
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, as well as Al‑Qaida, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh)
and their affiliates, in particular ISIL-Khorasan Province, and other terrorist groups, and foreign terrorist fighters,
which pose a serious threat to security, the rule of law and development in Afghanistan and the region, and stresses
the importance of the full implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions in this regard, including
resolutions 2255 (2015) and 2368 (2017), and in this regard emphasizes the need for the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) to continue to pay attention to the linkages between the proceeds of organized crime, inter alia, the
illicit production of and trafficking in drugs and their chemical precursors and the financing, respectively, of the
Taliban, including the Haqqani Network, and of ISIL (Da’esh), Al‑Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities;
48. Calls upon the international community to continue to assist the Government of Afghanistan in its
National Drug Control Strategy and National Drug Action Plan, calls for such efforts to eliminate the cultivation and
production of, trafficking in and consumption of illicit drugs, increase support for Afghan law enforcement and
criminal justice agencies, agricultural and rural development for the creation of improved alternative, licit livelihoods
for farmers and demand reduction support, increase public awareness of counter-narcotics issues and build the
capacity of drug control institutions and care and treatment centres for drug users, reiterates its call upon the
international community to channel counter-narcotics funding through the Government of Afghanistan, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant organizations and mechanisms to the extent possible, notes
that the problem of the production, cultivation, trafficking and consumption of narcotic drugs, as well as the problem
of precursors, should be addressed on the basis of the principle of common and shared responsibility of the
Government and the international community, and welcomes and supports relevant international and regional projects
and activities, including those carried out by Afghanistan, Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Pakistan within the
framework of the triangular initiative to counter narcotics, as well as the Paris Pact initiative,54 stresses the need to
further strengthen joint, coordinated and resolute efforts by the Government, supported by the international
community and regional partners, to intensify sustained efforts to address drug production and trafficking through a
balanced and integrated approach, in accordance with the principle of common and shared responsibility in addressing
the drug problem of Afghanistan, and welcomes the holding of the Joint Regional Conference on Counter-Terrorism
and Counter-Narcotics in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 22 July 2019, within the framework of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan;
Social and economic development
49. Recalls the position of Afghanistan as the top improver in the World Bank Doing Business 2019 report
and the work of the Government of Afghanistan in implementing reforms to improve the business regulatory
framework;
50. Welcomes the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework setting out the strategic policy
priorities of Afghanistan towards achieving self-reliance and the presentation of five national priority programmes,
on a citizens’ charter, women’s economic empowerment, urban development, comprehensive agriculture and national
infrastructure, to improve the conditions for advancing sustainable development and stability;
51. Renews its commitment to long-term support for the economic development of Afghanistan on the basis
of mutual accountability, as stated in the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework, urgently appeals to all States,
the United Nations system and international and non-governmental organizations, including the international and
regional financial institutions, to continue to provide, in close coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and
in accordance with the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework and the national priority
programmes contained therein, all possible and necessary humanitarian, recovery, reconstruction, development,

_______________
54

See S/2003/641, annex.

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

financial, educational, technical and material assistance for Afghanistan, and underscores the crucial importance of
continued and sequenced implementation of the reform agenda, national priority programmes and the development
and governance goals as agreed upon in the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework;
52. Recognizes the substantial development and notable progress achieved by Afghanistan with the steadfast
support of the international community in the past years, expresses its support for the reaffirmation and consolidation
of the partnership between Afghanistan and the international community midway through the Transformation Decade
(2015–2024), during which Afghanistan will consolidate its sovereignty through strengthening a fully functioning,
sustainable State in the service of its people, urges the Government of Afghanistan to involve all elements of Afghan
society, in particular women, in the development and implementation of relief, rehabilitation, recovery and
reconstruction programmes, recalls with appreciation the presentation by the Government of Afghanistan of the
National Priority Programme on Women’s Economic Empowerment and encourages its continued implementation,
and recalls with appreciation the launch of the women’s economic empowerment plan in March 2017 and the creation
of a coordination unit for the Programme within the Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled as
important measures for the implementation of the Programme;
53. Welcomes the progress made in implementing the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework and the commitment to continuing the reforms agreed upon in the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework and the monitoring mechanism included therein, in which the Government of Afghanistan reaffirmed its
commitment to strengthening governance, grounded in human rights, the rule of law and adherence to the Constitution
of Afghanistan and held it as integral to sustained growth and economic development, and in which the international
community committed to enhancing the efficiency of development aid by aligning assistance with the Afghan national
priority programmes and by channelling assistance through the national budget of the Government, as outlined in the
Tokyo Declaration: Partnership for Self-Reliance in Afghanistan – From Transition to Transformation55 and
reaffirmed in the communiqué of the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan and the new Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework indicators;
54. Commends the Government of Afghanistan for aligning its new development strategy with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development,56 and urges the international community to assist the Government in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals;
55. Also commends the Government of Afghanistan for improving budgetary transparency and its efforts to
reach fiscal sustainability, notes the challenges ahead, and urges that continued efforts be made to meet revenue targets;
56. Recognizes the necessity for further improvement in the living conditions of the Afghan people, and
emphasizes the need to strengthen and support the development of the capacity of the Government of Afghanistan to
deliver basic social services at the national, provincial and local levels, in particular education and public health
services;
57. Reiterates the necessity of providing Afghan children, especially Afghan girls, with educational and health
facilities in all parts of the country, and welcomes the progress achieved in the sector of public education;
58. Notes with concern the dire humanitarian situation affecting Afghanistan, with millions of people facing
emergency levels of food insecurity and hundreds of thousands of Afghans displaced by conflict since January 2019,
and urges the international community to assist in providing the necessary support and to work with the Government
of Afghanistan and humanitarian organizations to respond effectively to the needs identified in the Humanitarian
Response Plan;
59. Recognizes the need to address the impacts of climate change in Afghanistan, and emphasizes the need
for local, subnational, national, regional and international action to enhance efforts to build resilience, especially for
the most vulnerable, by investing in resilience, including disaster risk reduction, strengthening adaptation strategies
and enhancing joint risk assessments and risk management strategies, including early warning systems in the country
to monitor environmental changes, to cut the impact and cost of natural disasters;

_______________
55
56

38

A/66/867-S/2012/532, annex I.
Resolution 70/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Refugees
60. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that continue to host Afghan refugees, in particular
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran, acknowledging the huge burden that they have so far shouldered in this
regard, asks for continued generous support by the international community, and also asks relevant international
organizations, in particular the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, to continue to work closely with Afghanistan and the countries hosting Afghan refugees
with a view to facilitating their voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return, rehabilitation and reintegration;
61. Welcomes the outcome of the high-level segment on the Afghan refugee problem of the sixty-sixth session
of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,57 emphasizes
the importance of the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to Support Voluntary Repatriation, Sustainable
Reintegration and Assistance to Host Countries, and looks forward to the further implementation of the joint
communiqué of the Conference, aimed at increased sustainability of returns and continued support for host countries,
through the sustained support and the directed efforts of the international community;
62. Expresses its concern over the increase in the number of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Afghanistan, stresses that stability and development in Afghanistan can be achieved if its citizens can see a future for
themselves within their country, reiterates to host countries and the international community the obligations under
international refugee law with respect to the protection of refugees, the principle of voluntary return and the right to
seek asylum and to ensure full, safe and unhindered access for humanitarian relief agencies in order to provide
protection and assistance to internally displaced persons and refugees, and calls upon countries to continue to accept
an appropriate number of Afghan refugees for resettlement, as a manifestation of their shared responsibility and
solidarity;
63. Takes note of the cooperation framework signed between the Government of Afghanistan and the
European Union, entitled “Joint way forward on migration issues”, and in this context underscores the importance of
close and effective cooperation to address the problem of irregular migration in a comprehensive manner, with due
focus on and consideration of addressing the root causes of migration, including through job creation and the
establishment of returnees’ livelihoods in Afghanistan, and in accordance with international commitments and
obligations, including the human rights and legal rights of all migrants and the rights of persons in need of international
protection in line with the provisions of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees58 and the 1967 Protocol
thereto,59 as applicable;
64. Welcomes the commitment of the Government of Afghanistan to making the repatriation and reintegration
of Afghan refugees one of its highest national priorities, including their voluntary, safe and dignified return and their
sustainable reintegration into national development planning and prioritization processes, takes note in this regard of
the accession of Afghanistan to the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,60 on 2 February 2017, and encourages and
supports all efforts of the Government towards the implementation of this commitment;
65. Reaffirms its firm support for the implementation of the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to
Support Voluntary Repatriation, Sustainable Reintegration and Assistance to Host Countries endorsed by the
international community in 2012, and acknowledges the Enhanced Voluntary Return and Reintegration Package for
Afghan Refugees as an innovative way to enhance sustainable return and reintegration;
66. Welcomes the continued return of Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons, in a voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable manner, while noting with concern the security challenges of Afghanistan;
Regional cooperation
67. Stresses the crucial importance of advancing constructive and sustainable regional cooperation as an
effective means of promoting and complementing peace, security, stability and economic and social development in

_______________
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/70/12/Add.1), annex II.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
59
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
60
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
57
58

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Afghanistan, recognizes in this regard the importance of the contribution of neighbouring and regional partners and
regional organizations, recalls the importance of the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly Relations of
22 December 2002,61 welcomes in this regard the continued commitment of the international community to
supporting the stability and development of Afghanistan, encourages further improved relations and enhanced
engagement between Afghanistan and its neighbours, calls for further efforts in this regard, including in the framework
of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan and
by regional organizations and long-term strategic partnerships and other agreements aimed at achieving a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan, and welcomes international and regional initiatives in this regard, such as those of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the Economic
Cooperation Organization, the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan process, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination
Mechanism in Counter-Terrorism comprising the armed forces of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and Tajikistan, the
China-Afghanistan-Pakistan dialogues and the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia;
68. Welcomes the important initiatives for regional connectivity, notably in the frameworks for ongoing
cooperation under the auspices of the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Programme and of the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, including the inauguration of its Chamber of Commerce and
Industries in Kabul on 10 July, and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process confidence-building measures to facilitate
increased trade throughout the region, welcomes in this regard the holding of Senior Official Meetings of the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process in June and September 2019, with a focus on the revision of the confidence-building
measures, and looks forward to the forthcoming Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference, to be held in Istanbul, Turkey,
on 9 December 2019;
69. Emphasizes, in this regard, the importance of strengthening local and regional networks of transportation
that will facilitate connectivity for economic development, stability and self-sustainability, particularly the completion
and maintenance of local railroad and land routes, the development of regional projects to foster further connectivity
and the enhancement of international civil aviation capabilities, and expresses its appreciation for all initiatives and
efforts to advance partnership on connectivity;
70. Welcomes and urges further efforts to strengthen the process of regional economic cooperation, also
welcomes joint efforts to enhance dialogue and collaboration and to advance economic development across the region,
including measures to facilitate regional connectivity, trade and transit, acknowledges the progress made on such
projects and initiatives as the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) gas pipeline project, the Central Asia
South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA-1000), the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan
(TAP) 500 and Turkmenistan-Uzbekistan-Tajikistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan (TUTAP) electricity projects, the
Pakistan-Afghanistan-Tajikistan Regional Integration Programme (PATRIP), the Chabahar agreement between
Afghanistan, India and Iran (Islamic Republic of) and the transport of development assistance from India to
Afghanistan through the Chabahar port, the Lapis Lazuli Transit, Trade and Transport Route agreement and the
Turkmenistan-Aqina railway segment and on bilateral transit trade agreements, expanded consular visa cooperation
and the facilitation of business travel, to expand trade, increase foreign investments and develop infrastructure,
including infrastructural connectivity, energy supply, transport and integrated border management, with a view to
promoting sustainable economic growth and the creation of jobs in Afghanistan and the region, notes the historical
role of Afghanistan as a land bridge in Asia, recalls that such regional economic cooperation plays an important role
in achieving stability and development in Afghanistan, in this regard urges all relevant stakeholders to create a feasible
and secure environment for the full implementation of these development initiatives and trade agreements, and
welcomes the progress made by these initiatives and projects in enhancing regional connectivity, trade and transit,
including the creation of direct air freight corridors between Afghanistan and China, India, Italy, Kazakhstan, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates;
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
71. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as
mandated by the Security Council in its resolution 2489 (2019), stresses the continued importance of the central and

_______________
61

40

S/2002/1416, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

impartial coordinating role of the United Nations in promoting a more coherent international engagement, and
acknowledges the central role played by the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board in this regard;
72. Emphasizes the importance of the strategic review of the mandated tasks, priorities and related resources
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and calls for the continued implementation of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, with a view to supporting efforts for peace and ensuring greater
coordination, coherence and efficiency among relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, based on
the “One United Nations” approach, in line with the reform agenda and the national priority programmes of the
Government of Afghanistan;
73. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan,
as well as on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
74. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”.
RESOLUTION 74/10
Adopted at the 38th plenary meeting, on 3 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 92 to 13, with 61 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.14 and A/74/L.14/Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, State of
Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Czechia, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu

74/10.

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 181 (II) of 29 November 1947, 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 3236 (XXIX) of
22 November 1974, 3375 (XXX) and 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/20 of 24 November 1976 and all its
subsequent relevant resolutions, including those adopted at its emergency special sessions and its resolution 73/18 of
30 November 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,62

_______________
62

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/74/35).

41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the mutual recognition between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, as well as the existing agreements between the two sides
and the need for full compliance with those agreements,
Affirming its support for a comprehensive, just, lasting and peaceful settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at its
fourteenth session63 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,64
endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003,
Recalling the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016) of 23 December 2016,
and underscoring in this regard, inter alia, the call upon all parties to continue, in the interest of the promotion of peace
and security, to exert collective efforts to launch credible negotiations on all final status issues in the Middle East peace
process and within the time frame specified by the Quartet in its statement of 21 September 2010,
Recalling also the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,65 and recalling further its resolutions
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Taking note of the application of Palestine for admission to membership in the United Nations, submitted on
23 September 2011,66
Recalling its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, by which, inter alia, Palestine was accorded non-member
observer State status in the United Nations, and taking note of the follow-up report of the Secretary-General,67
Taking note of the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law
conventions, as well as other international treaties,
Noting with deep regret the passage of 52 years since the onset of the Israeli occupation and over 72 years since
the adoption of resolution 181 (II) on 29 November 1947 and the Nakba without tangible progress towards a peaceful
solution, and stressing the urgent need for efforts to reverse the negative trends on the ground and to restore a political
horizon for advancing and accelerating meaningful negotiations aimed at the achievement of a peace agreement that
will bring a complete end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and the resolution of all core final status issues,
without exception, leading to a peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the question of Palestine,
Reaffirming that the United Nations has a permanent responsibility towards the question of Palestine until the
question is resolved in all its aspects in a satisfactory manner in accordance with international legitimacy,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the General Assembly, and takes note of its annual
report,62 including the conclusions and valuable recommendations contained in chapter VII thereof, inter alia, the
recommendations for the redoubling of international efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine, for an expanded multilateral framework for the revitalization of peace efforts and for efforts to ensure
fullest accountability and implementation of the long-standing parameters for peace in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions;
2. Requests the Committee to continue to exert all efforts to promote the realization of the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination, to support the achievement without delay of an
end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and of the two-State solution on the basis of the pre‑1967 borders and
the just resolution of all final status issues and to mobilize international support for and assistance to the Palestinian

_______________
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
S/2003/529, annex.
65
See A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1.
66
A/66/371-S/2011/592, annex I.
67
A/67/738.
63
64

42

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

people, and in this regard authorizes the Committee to make such adjustments in its approved programme of work as
it may consider appropriate and necessary in the light of developments and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session and thereafter;
3. Also requests the Committee to continue to keep under review the situation relating to the question of
Palestine and to report and make suggestions to the General Assembly, the Security Council or the Secretary-General,
as appropriate;
4. Further requests the Committee to continue to extend its cooperation and support to Palestinian and other
civil society organizations and to continue to involve additional civil society organizations and parliamentarians in its
work in order to mobilize international solidarity and support for the Palestinian people, particularly during this critical
period of political instability, humanitarian hardship and financial crisis, with the overall aim of promoting the
achievement by the Palestinian people of their inalienable rights and a just, lasting and peaceful settlement of
the question of Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative63
and the Quartet road map;64
5. Commends the Committee on its efforts and activities in upholding its mandate, including through
cooperative initiatives with Governments, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
organizations and civil society organizations;
6. Commends the Working Group of the Committee on its efforts in coordinating the efforts of international
and regional civil society organizations regarding the question of Palestine;
7. Requests the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, established under General Assembly
resolution 194 (III), and other United Nations bodies associated with the question of Palestine to continue to cooperate
fully with the Committee and to make available to it, at its request, the relevant information and documentation that
they have at their disposal;
8. Invites all Governments and organizations to extend their cooperation and support to the Committee in the
performance of its tasks, recalling its repeated call for all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system to continue to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their right to
self-determination, including the right to their independent State of Palestine;
9. Requests the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to continue to report to the General
Assembly on the economic costs of the Israeli occupation for the Palestinian people, and, while drawing attention
to the alarming findings, as reflected in the recent reports68 in this regard, calls for the exertion of all efforts for the
provision of the resources necessary to expedite the completion and publication of the report, including the
facilitation and coordination of pertinent inputs from the relevant organs, bodies and agencies of the United Nations
system;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the report of the Committee to all the competent bodies of the
United Nations, and urges them to take the necessary action, as appropriate;
11. Requests the Committee, bearing in mind the regrettable absence of tangible progress towards a peaceful
solution, to continue to focus its activities throughout 2020 on efforts and initiatives to end the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967 and to organize activities in this regard, within existing resources and in cooperation with Governments,
relevant organizations of the United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations and civil society organizations,
aimed at raising international awareness and mobilizing diplomatic efforts to launch credible negotiations aimed at
achieving without delay a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine in all its
aspects;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Committee with all the facilities necessary for
the performance of its tasks.

_______________
68

A/73/201 and A/74/272.

43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/11
Adopted at the 38th plenary meeting, on 3 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 147 to 7, with 13 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.15 and A/74/L.15/Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam,
Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining: Brazil, Cameroon, Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
South Sudan, Tonga, Vanuatu

74/11.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including those adopted at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling also its resolution 73/89 of 6 December 2018, entitled “Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East”,
Recalling further relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967,
338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 478 (1980) of 20 August 1980, 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002, 1515 (2003) of
19 November 2003, 1544 (2004) of 19 May 2004, 1850 (2008) of 16 December 2008 and 2334 (2016) of
23 December 2016,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to the request made in its resolution
73/19 of 30 November 2018,69
Recalling its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Reaffirming the permanent responsibility of the United Nations with regard to the question of Palestine until it
is resolved in all its aspects in accordance with international law and relevant resolutions,
Convinced that achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the question of Palestine, the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, is imperative for the attainment of comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East,
Stressing that the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples is among the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,

_______________
69

44

A/74/333-S/2019/685.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and reiterating the importance of maintaining and
strengthening international peace founded upon freedom, equality, justice and respect for fundamental human rights
and of developing friendly relations among nations irrespective of their political, economic and social systems or the
level of their development,
Emphasizing the need for respect for, and the preservation of, the territorial integrity and unity of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,70 and recalling also its resolutions
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Reaffirming the illegality of Israeli settlement activities and all other unilateral measures aimed at altering the
demographic composition, character and status of the City of Jerusalem and of the Occupied Palestinian Territory as
a whole, including the wall and its associated regime, and demanding their immediate cessation,
Emphasizing the importance of the safety, protection and well-being of all civilians in the whole Middle East
region, and condemning all acts of violence and terror against civilians on all sides,
Calling for full respect for international law, including for the protection of civilian life, as well as for the
promotion of human security, the de-escalation of the situation, the exercise of restraint, including from provocative
actions and rhetoric, and the establishment of a stable environment conducive to the pursuit of peace,
Stressing the need for measures to be taken to guarantee the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilian
population throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, consistent with the provisions and obligations of
international humanitarian law, and taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population,71
Stressing also the need to ensure accountability for all violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law in order to end impunity, ensure justice, deter further violations, protect civilians and
promote peace,
Recalling the mutual recognition 26 years ago between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people,72 and stressing the urgent need for efforts to
ensure full compliance with the agreements concluded between the two sides,
Stressing the need, in particular, for an immediate halt to all actions contrary to international law that undermine
trust and prejudge final status issues,
Urging renewed and coordinated efforts by the international community aimed at restoring a political horizon
and advancing and accelerating the conclusion of a peace treaty to achieve without delay an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 by resolving all outstanding issues, including all final status issues, without exception,
for a just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in accordance with the internationally
recognized basis of the two-State solution, and of the Arab-Israeli conflict, for the realization of a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East,
Recognizing the efforts being undertaken by the Palestinian Government, with international support, to reform,
develop, strengthen and preserve its institutions and infrastructure, despite the obstacles presented by the ongoing
Israeli occupation, commending in this regard the ongoing efforts to develop the institutions of an independent
Palestinian State, and stressing the need to promote intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
Expressing concern about the risks posed to the significant achievements made, as confirmed by the positive
assessments by the international institutions regarding readiness for statehood, owing to the negative impact of the
current instability and financial crisis being faced by the Palestinian Government and the continued absence of a
credible political horizon,

_______________
See A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1.
A/ES-10/794.
72
See A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
70
71

45

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the ongoing efforts of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, chaired by Norway, and noting its recent meeting at United Nations Headquarters, on
26 September 2019,
Recognizing the positive contribution of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,
which is aimed, inter alia, at enhancing development support and assistance to the Palestinian people and
strengthening institutional capacity in line with Palestinian national priorities,
Welcoming the holding of the meeting of the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development in Ramallah and Jericho in July 2019 to support Palestinian efforts towards an independent
Palestinian State through the sharing of the experience of East Asian countries in economic development and
exploring effective means of cooperation, aimed at contributing to the promotion of Palestinian development, the
Middle East peace process and regional stability,
Taking note of the application of Palestine for admission to membership in the United Nations, submitted on
23 September 2011,73
Taking note also of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, by which, inter alia, Palestine was accorded
non-member observer State status in the United Nations, and taking note further of the follow-up report of the
Secretary-General,74
Acknowledging the efforts being undertaken by civil society to promote a peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine,
Stressing the urgency of achieving without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967,
Affirming once again the right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders,
Recalling the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at its fourteenth session,
held in Beirut on 27 and 28 March 2002,75 and stressing its importance in the efforts to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace,
1. Reiterates its call for the achievement, without delay, of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, including Security Council resolution
2334 (2016), the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative75 and
the Quartet road map,76 and an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967, including of East Jerusalem, and
reaffirms in this regard its unwavering support, in accordance with international law, for the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967 borders;
2. Stresses the need to urgently exert collective efforts to launch credible negotiations on all final status issues
in the Middle East peace process based on the long-standing terms of reference and clear parameters and within the
time frame specified by the Quartet in its statement of 21 September 2010, and calls once more for the intensification
of efforts by the parties, including through meaningful negotiations, with the support of the international community,
towards the conclusion of a final just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement;
3. Calls for the timely convening of an international conference in Moscow, as envisioned by the Security
Council in its resolution 1850 (2008), for the advancement and acceleration of the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace settlement;
4. Stresses that compliance with and respect for the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
including international humanitarian law and international human rights law, is a cornerstone of peace and security in
the region;

_______________
A/66/371-S/2011/592, annex I.
A/67/738.
75
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
76
S/2003/529, annex.
73
74

46

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Calls upon both parties to act responsibly and in compliance with international law and their previous
agreements and obligations, in both their policies and actions, in order to, with the support of the Quartet and other
interested parties, urgently reverse negative trends, including all measures taken on the ground that are contrary to
international law, and create the conditions necessary for a credible political horizon and the advancement of peace
efforts;
6. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply strictly with its obligations under international law and
to cease all of its measures that are contrary to international law, including all unilateral actions in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, that are aimed at altering the demographic composition, character and
status of the Territory, and thus at prejudging the final outcome of peace negotiations, and recalls in this regard the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land by force and therefore the illegality of the annexation of any
part of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, which constitutes a breach of international law,
undermines the viability of the two-State solution and challenges the prospects for the achievement of a peaceful
settlement and of just, lasting and comprehensive peace;
7. Stresses the need, in particular, for an immediate halt to all settlement activities, land confiscation and
home demolitions, for the pursuit of measures to ensure accountability and for the release of prisoners and an end to
arbitrary arrests and detentions;
8. Also stresses the need for respect for and preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
9. Further stresses the need for an immediate and complete cessation of all acts of violence, including
military attacks, destruction and acts of terror, as well as all acts of provocation and incitement;
10. Reaffirms its commitment, in accordance with international law, to the two‑State solution of Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967 borders;
11. Underscores in this regard the affirmation by the Security Council in its resolution 2334 (2016) of its
determination to examine practical ways and means to secure the full implementation of its relevant resolutions;
12. Calls for:
(a)

The withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem;

(b) The realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, primarily the right to self-determination
and the right to their independent State;
(c) A just resolution of the problem of Palestine refugees in conformity with its resolution 194 (III) of
11 December 1948;
13. Calls upon all States, consistent with their obligations under the Charter and relevant Security Council
resolutions, inter alia:
(a) Not to recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed by the parties through negotiations, including by ensuring that agreements with Israel do not imply recognition
of Israeli sovereignty over the territories occupied by Israel in 1967;
(b) To distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967;
(c) Not to render aid or assistance to illegal settlement activities, including not to provide Israel with any
assistance to be used specifically in connection with settlements in the occupied territories, in line with Security
Council resolution 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980;
(d) To respect and ensure respect for international law, in all circumstances, including through measures of
accountability, consistent with international law;
14. Urges all States and the United Nations to continue and expedite the provision of economic, humanitarian
and technical assistance to the Palestinian people and the Palestinian Government during this critical period in order
to help to alleviate the serious humanitarian situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
47

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

which is dire in the Gaza Strip, to rehabilitate the Palestinian economy and infrastructure and to support the
development and strengthening of Palestinian institutions and Palestinian State-building efforts in preparation for
independence;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, including through his Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority, to
continue his efforts with the parties concerned, and in consultation with the Security Council, including with regard
to the reporting required pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016), towards the attainment of a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine and the promotion of peace in the region and to submit to the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session a report on these efforts and on developments on this matter.
RESOLUTION 74/12
Adopted at the 38th plenary meeting, on 3 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 87 to 23, with 54 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.16 and A/74/L.16/Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, State of
Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Israel, Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Netherlands, Romania,
Slovakia, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde, Cameroon,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Ghana, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu

74/12.

Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,77
Taking note, in particular, of the action taken by the Committee and the Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat in accordance with their mandates,
Recalling its resolution 32/40 B of 2 December 1977 and all its subsequent relevant resolutions, including its
resolution 73/21 of 30 November 2018,
1.

Notes with appreciation the action taken by the Secretary-General in compliance with its resolution 73/21;

2. Considers that, by providing substantive support to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People in the implementation of its mandate, the Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat continues to make a constructive and positive contribution to raising international awareness of the

_______________
77

48

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/74/35).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

question of Palestine and of the urgency of a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine in all its aspects on the
basis of international law and United Nations resolutions and the efforts being exerted in this regard and to generating
international support for the rights of the Palestinian people;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Division with the necessary resources and to
ensure that it continues to effectively carry out its programme of work as detailed in relevant earlier resolutions, in
consultation with the Committee and under its guidance;
4. Requests the Division, in particular, to continue to monitor developments relevant to the question of
Palestine, to organize international meetings and activities in support of the Committee’s mandate with the
participation of all sectors of the international community and to ensure, within existing resources, the continued
participation of eminent persons and international renowned experts in these meetings and activities, to be invited on
a par with the members of the Committee, to liaise and cooperate with civil society and parliamentarians, including
through the Working Group of the Committee, to develop and expand the “Question of Palestine” website and the
documents collection of the United Nations Information System on the Question of Palestine, to prepare and widely
disseminate the publications listed in paragraph 81 of the report of the Committee for the period 2017/18,78 in the
relevant official languages of the United Nations, and information materials on various aspects of the question of
Palestine and to develop and enhance the annual training programme for staff of the Palestinian Government in
contribution to Palestinian capacity-building efforts;
5. Also requests the Division, as part of the observance of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People on 29 November, to continue to organize, under the guidance of the Committee, an annual exhibit
on Palestinian rights or a cultural event in cooperation with the Permanent Observer Mission of the State of Palestine
to the United Nations, and encourages Member States to continue to give the widest support and publicity to the
observance of the Day of Solidarity;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the continued cooperation with the Division of the United
Nations system entities with programme components addressing various aspects of the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
7. Invites all Governments and organizations to extend their cooperation to the Division in the performance
of its tasks.
RESOLUTION 74/13
Adopted at the 38th plenary meeting, on 3 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 144 to 8, with 14 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.17 and A/74/L.17/Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United

_______________
78

Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/73/35).

49

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United States of
America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Fiji, Ghana, Honduras, Mexico, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
South Sudan, Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu

74/13.

Special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department of Global
Communications of the Secretariat

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/20 of 30 November 2018,
Recalling also its resolutions 73/102 A, entitled “Information in the service of humanity”, and 73/102 B, entitled
“United Nations public information policies and activities”, of 7 December 2018,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Information on its forty-first session,79
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People,80
Convinced that the worldwide dissemination of accurate and comprehensive information and the role of civil
society organizations and institutions remain of vital importance in heightening awareness of and support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination and independence, and for the
efforts to achieve a just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,
Recalling the mutual recognition between the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people, as well as the existing agreements between the two sides,
Affirming its support for a comprehensive, just, lasting and peaceful settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at its
fourteenth session,81 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,82
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003 and recalled by the Council in
its resolution 2334 (2016) of 23 December 2016,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,83
Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Reaffirming that the United Nations has a permanent responsibility towards the question of Palestine until the
question is resolved in all its aspects in a satisfactory manner in accordance with international legitimacy,
1. Notes with appreciation the action taken by the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat
in compliance with its resolution 73/20;
2. Considers that the special information programme on the question of Palestine of the Department is very
useful in raising the awareness of the international community concerning the question of Palestine and the situation
in the Middle East and that the programme is contributing effectively to an atmosphere conducive to dialogue and
supportive of peace efforts and should receive the necessary support for the fulfilment of its tasks;

_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/74/21).
Ibid., Supplement No. 35 (A/74/35).
81
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
82
S/2003/529, annex.
83
See A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1.
79
80

50

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Requests the Department, in full cooperation and coordination with the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to continue, with the necessary flexibility as may be required by
developments affecting the question of Palestine, its special information programme for 2020–2021, in particular,
inter alia:
(a) To disseminate information on all the activities of the United Nations system relating to the question of
Palestine and peace efforts, including reports on the work carried out by the relevant United Nations organizations, as
well as on the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy vis-à-vis the objective of peace;
(b) To continue to issue, update and modernize publications and audiovisual and online materials on the
various aspects of the question of Palestine in all fields, including materials concerning relevant recent developments,
in particular the efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine;
(c) To expand its collection of audiovisual material on the question of Palestine, to continue the production
and preservation of such material and to update, on a periodic basis, the public exhibit on the question of Palestine
displayed in the General Assembly Building as well as at United Nations headquarters in Geneva and Vienna;
(d) To organize and promote fact-finding news missions for journalists to the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and Israel;
(e) To organize international, regional and national seminars or encounters for journalists aimed, in particular,
at sensitizing public opinion to the question of Palestine and peace efforts and at enhancing dialogue and
understanding between Palestinians and Israelis for the promotion of a peaceful settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, including by fostering and encouraging the contribution of the media in support of peace between the two
sides;
(f) To continue to provide assistance to the Palestinian people in the field of media development, in particular
through its annual training programme for Palestinian broadcasters and journalists, and recommends that
arrangements be made for the provision of such training in the region;
4. Encourages the Department to continue organizing encounters for the media and representatives of civil
society to engage in open and positive discussions to explore means for encouraging people-to-people dialogue and
promoting peace and mutual understanding in the region.
RESOLUTION 74/14
Adopted at the 38th plenary meeting, on 3 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 91 to 9, with 65 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.9 and A/74/L.9/Add.1, sponsored: by Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei
Darussalam, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, State of Palestine
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine, Vanuatu

51

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

74/14.

The Syrian Golan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “The situation in the Middle East”,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Middle East,84
Recalling Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
Reaffirming the fundamental principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming once more the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,85 to the occupied Syrian Golan,
Deeply concerned that Israel has not withdrawn from the Syrian Golan, which has been under occupation since
1967, contrary to the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
Stressing the illegality of the Israeli settlement construction and other activities in the occupied Syrian Golan
since 1967,
Noting with satisfaction the convening in Madrid on 30 October 1991 of the Peace Conference on the Middle
East, on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973
and 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 and the formula of land for peace,
Expressing grave concern over the halt in the peace process on the Syrian track, and expressing the hope that
peace talks will soon resume from the point they had reached,
1.

Declares that Israel has failed so far to comply with Security Council resolution 497 (1981);

2. Also declares that the Israeli decision of 14 December 1981 to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration on the occupied Syrian Golan is null and void and has no validity whatsoever, as confirmed by the
Security Council in its resolution 497 (1981), and calls upon Israel to rescind it;
3. Reaffirms its determination that all relevant provisions of the Regulations annexed to the Hague
Convention of 1907, and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,85 continue to apply to the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since 1967, and calls upon the parties
thereto to respect and ensure respect for their obligations under those instruments in all circumstances;
4. Determines once more that the continued occupation of the Syrian Golan and its de facto annexation
constitute a stumbling block in the way of achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the region;
5. Calls upon Israel to resume the talks on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks and to respect the commitments
and undertakings reached during the previous talks;
6. Demands once more that Israel withdraw from all the occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967 in
implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions;
7. Calls upon all the parties concerned, the co-sponsors of the peace process and the entire international
community to exert all the necessary efforts to ensure the resumption of the peace process and its success by
implementing Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973);
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.

_______________
84
85

52

A/74/310.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/15
Adopted at the 39th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.7, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

74/15.

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

The General Assembly
Adopts the following political declaration:
Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna Programme
of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024
Preamble
1. We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and High Representatives, gathered at the United Nations on
5 and 6 December 2019 to review the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014–2024,86 reaffirm our commitment to the overarching goal of the Vienna Programme
of Action to address the special development needs and challenges of landlocked developing countries arising from
landlockedness, remoteness and geographical constraints in a more coherent manner and we collectively commit to
strengthened cooperation in the context of sustainable development for landlocked developing countries.
2. We reaffirm our commitment to the full, effective and timely implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action, which is integral to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development87 and which is in line with the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,88 the Paris Agreement89 and the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,90 as well as with other international frameworks, such as
the New Urban Agenda.91 Effective implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda are
mutually reinforcing and crucial for the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals.
3. We emphasize that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development.
4. We are committed in our endeavour to help to turn landlocked developing countries into land-linked countries;
for this we must come together in durable, transparent, accountable and effective partnerships between landlocked
developing countries and transit countries and their development partners, as well as with a range of stakeholders,
including civil society, the private sector, academia and youth. We further reaffirm that gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls will make a crucial contribution to the achievement of the Vienna Programme
of Action.
5. We recognize the importance of unfettered, efficient and cost-effective access for landlocked developing
countries to and from the sea, on the basis of freedom of transit and other related matters, in accordance with the
applicable rules of international law.
Review and assessment of progress, gaps and challenges
6. We take note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action92
and recognize the many efforts at all levels made by landlocked developing countries and transit countries, with the

_______________
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
Resolution 70/1.
88
Resolution 69/313, annex.
89
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
90
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
91
Resolution 71/256, annex.
92
A/74/113.
86
87

53

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

support of development partners, and the progress achieved since 2014, building on the Almaty Programme of
Action.93 At the same time, we remain concerned that the progress made is not enough for landlocked developing
countries to achieve the Vienna Programme of Action targets and sustainable development. We note with concern that
one third of the population of landlocked developing countries is still living in extreme poverty, the prevalence of
moderate to severe food insecurity persists, the average human development index of landlocked developing countries
lags behind the world average and economic growth of landlocked developing countries has declined during the
review period.
7. We commend those landlocked developing countries that have met the criteria for graduation from least
developed country status.
8. We recognize that a key challenge faced by landlocked developing countries is the lack of reliable and regular
data to inform policy and ensure follow-up, including on some of the specific objectives of the Vienna Programme of
Action.
9. We recognize the progress that has been made by landlocked developing countries and transit developing
countries in ratifying the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade Facilitation, the revised Kyoto Convention,94
the TIR Convention95 and other relevant international conventions. We note, however, that there is a need for
landlocked developing countries and transit countries to effectively implement their obligations under these
conventions and agreements.
10. We welcome the recent developments among landlocked developing countries and their transit neighbours in
building transit transport and economic corridors. Progress has been made in reducing travel time and corresponding
costs along corridors, significantly reducing the time spent at borders and at intermodal points.
11. Progress has been made in landlocked developing countries and transit developing countries towards the
expansion and upgrading of railways, roads, ports, air transport and inland waterways. Some missing links have been
closed, and regional integration has been strengthened, but limited connectivity of landlocked developing countries
remains one of the main obstacles to their enhanced trade integration.
12. We note that infrastructure in landlocked developing countries for the production, supply, transmission and
distribution of modern and renewable energy services has been expanded and upgraded. However, more than
40 per cent of the population of landlocked developing countries still does not have access to electricity, and the ruralurban gap remains significant. The pace of completion of power projects is too slow.
13. We recognize that access to information and communications technologies in landlocked developing countries
has increased. However, we note that landlocked developing countries continue to face major constraints that include
infrastructural gaps and the relatively high cost of information and communications technology services, in particular
accessing submarine cables.
14. The major challenges in infrastructure development include limited financial resources to close the significant
infrastructure financing gaps, lack of capacity to develop bankable infrastructure projects, limited technologies and
lack of resilient infrastructure.
15. We welcome efforts made by landlocked developing countries to enhance their participation in global trade,
including through mainstreaming trade into their national strategies and updating their trade-related policies.
However, we note that landlocked developing countries continue to face greater difficulties than coastal countries in
expanding international trade. The competitiveness of landlocked developing countries remains limited owing to the
high cost of trade, which is double that of transit developing countries. In that regard, we note with concern that the

_______________
Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for
Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries (Report of the International Ministerial Conference of
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit
Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I).
94
Protocol of Amendment to the International Convention on the Simplification and Harmonization of Customs Procedures (United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 2370, No. 13561).
95
Customs Convention on the International Transport of Goods under Cover of TIR Carnets (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1079,
No. 16510).
93

54

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

share of landlocked developing countries in global trade has declined and their share of global merchandise exports
has decreased, while the total value of merchandise imports has increased.
16. We are concerned that most of the exports of landlocked developing countries remain highly concentrated on a
few primary commodities and that service exports are still dominated by the tourism sector. The lack of diversification
of exports of landlocked developing countries exacerbates their vulnerability to excessive price volatility and
exogenous economic and environmental shocks.
17. We note the lack of availability of trade finance in landlocked developing countries. We reaffirm that
international trade is an engine for inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction and contributes to the promotion
of sustainable development.
18. We note with concern the lack of access to capital for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, including
women- and youth-owned enterprises, which affects overall private sector development and economic growth in
landlocked developing countries. We are further concerned that landlocked developing countries still fall behind in
their electronic commerce (e-commerce) readiness.
19. We recognize that the participation of landlocked developing countries in regional and subregional trade,
transport and transit facilitation agreements and initiatives aimed at deepening regional integration, enhancing
infrastructure connectivity and facilitating the movement of cargo across borders has increased. Landlocked
developing countries have entered into bilateral and plurilateral trade, transport and transit-related agreements with
their neighbours. In this regard, we take note of the entry into force of the agreement establishing the African
Continental Free Trade Area.
20. We are encouraged by signs that broader cooperation in areas such as investment, research and development
and policies supportive of regional industrial development and regional connectivity is taking place both among
landlocked developing countries and between landlocked developing countries and their neighbours.
21. Since 2014, many landlocked developing countries have placed structural economic transformation at the centre
of their national development plans and adopted strategies for diversification and upgrading of their economies,
industrialization, export promotion and private sector development, but landlocked developing countries have made
limited advancement towards achieving structural transformation, still have limited manufacturing and industrial
capacity to create high value added products, some landlocked developing countries even showing signs of
de-industrialization of their economies.
22. We acknowledge the efforts by landlocked developing countries to support private sector development and
emphasize that an enabling legal and regulatory environment for the local private sector is one of the most important
requirements for promoting sustainable, inclusive and sustained economic growth, developing an industrial base,
attracting investment and bringing about structural transformation.
23. We express concern at the limited technological capabilities, low technology intensity and acquisition and low
investments in research and development in landlocked developing countries.
24. Landlocked developing countries are highly vulnerable to the adverse impact of climate change and remain
heavily affected by desertification, land degradation, biodiversity loss, drought and receding glaciers. We are
concerned about the economic, social and environmental impacts of sudden- and slow-onset disasters in landlocked
developing countries, as well as the impacts of disasters in transit countries on the economies of landlocked developing
countries.
25. We note that lack of adequate financial resources and capacity constraints are some of the biggest challenges
that landlocked developing countries face in their efforts to implement the Vienna Programme of Action and achieve
sustained growth and sustainable development.
26. We recognize that landlocked developing countries and their transit country neighbours need to effectively
mobilize adequate domestic and external resources, both public and private, for the effective implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action. We acknowledge the importance of cohesive, nationally owned sustainable
development strategies, supported by integrated national financing frameworks. We note that the average tax revenue
in landlocked developing countries is not sufficient to meet development needs. We express concern that illicit
financial flows have an adverse impact on domestic resource mobilization and on the sustainability of public finances
in landlocked developing countries.
55

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

27. We commend the greater international attention that has been given to landlocked developing countries since
the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action, including increased official development assistance and aid for trade
and South-South and triangular cooperation. We reaffirm the need for renewed and strengthened partnerships for the
landlocked developing countries’ development. We welcome that official development assistance flows to landlocked
developing countries have increased in real terms. At the same time, we note that much of the official development
assistance continues to be concentrated in a few landlocked developing countries. We also express concern over the
continued decline in foreign direct investment flows to landlocked developing countries, which is an impediment to
their economic growth.
Call for action to accelerate the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
28. Having noted the progress made and challenges encountered by landlocked developing countries in the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action, which is integral to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we call for action in the following key areas.
29. We underscore the need to capture data to monitor the specific objectives of the Vienna Programme of Action
and commit to providing landlocked developing countries with capacity-building support to strengthen their national
statistical systems.
30. We commit to targeted and accelerated action to remove all legal, social and economic barriers to achieve gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, and the realization and enjoyment of their human rights.
31. We underscore the importance of mobilizing adequate resources to accelerate the implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action and to support the landlocked developing countries in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and targets by 2030.
32. We call upon landlocked developing countries and transit countries to effectively implement their obligations
under all relevant international, regional and bilateral agreements to improve transit in a manner consistent with their
trade and development objectives.
33. Landlocked developing countries and transit countries should consider promoting a corridor approach to
improve trade and transit transport. We call upon landlocked developing countries and transit countries to make
additional efforts to reduce travel time along the corridors and to adopt an integrated and sustainable approach to the
management of international transport corridors in order to avoid the duplication of efforts, to promote regional
connectivity and to maximize the associated economic opportunities.
34. We call upon the United Nations system and other relevant international and regional organizations to provide,
within their mandates, policy, analytical and technical support towards the development, functioning and management
of corridors.
35. We encourage landlocked developing countries and transit countries to integrate the development, upgrading
and maintenance of national and transboundary transport infrastructure into their national development strategies.
36. We call upon landlocked developing countries and transit countries, with the support of their development and
trade partners, to develop regionally integrated, sustainable, climate- and disaster-resilient transport infrastructure and
to close missing links in order to reduce the cost of doing business and increase intraregional trade.
37. We encourage landlocked developing countries and transit countries to create an enabling environment for
public and private sustainable investment and infrastructure operations.
38. We encourage landlocked developing countries and transit countries to expand and upgrade supply, transmission
and distribution infrastructure for electricity, including off-grid solutions, to accelerate the preparation of power
projects, especially renewables, while acknowledging the role of all energy sources and technologies in the energy
mix, to scale up projects on cross-border interconnectors and to improve transformational energy access and ensure
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all.
39. We invite landlocked developing countries and transit countries to collaborate to establish information and
communications technology infrastructure, applications and services with the support of Governments, the private
sector, development partners, multilateral financial and development institutions and regional banks. The substantial
digital divides between landlocked developing countries and the developed countries need to be addressed.
56

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

40. We call upon development partners, the United Nations system, international financial institutions and
international and regional organizations to provide technical support to landlocked developing countries for the
formulation and implementation of bankable infrastructure and transport development projects.
41. We encourage landlocked developing countries to continue to formulate policies and strategies aimed at
diversifying their export structure and adding value to their exports in order to expand their participation in sustainable
regional and global value chains.
42. We encourage landlocked developing countries, with the support of their development and trade partners, to
reduce “before the border” trade costs by improving transport networks and customs procedures, as well as by the
application of technology-driven and information and communications technology solutions to expedite international
trade.
43. We reaffirm the importance of the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade Facilitation in addressing
high trade and transit costs and call for full and timely implementation of the Agreement by all the members of the
World Trade Organization. Landlocked developing countries should promptly notify their technical assistance needs.
We also invite development partners and relevant organizations to enhance support to landlocked developing countries
to implement their World Trade Organization commitments.
44. We call upon all Member States to enhance market access for exports from landlocked developing countries,
except for arms and armaments. We also call upon development partners to support efforts by landlocked developing
countries to diversify their exports, including through supporting their national export strategies and trade policies.
45. We call upon development partners and multilateral development banks to support landlocked developing
countries in strengthening trade financing for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises and promoting trade finance
facilitation programmes.
46. We underscore the potential for landlocked developing countries to facilitate their integration into regional and
global value chains and to expand their trade capabilities and connectivity by strengthening productive linkages,
supporting the development of supply chains within the region and improving the quality and the effective
implementation of regional integration agreements.
47. We call upon the United Nations system, regional and international development partners and other international
organizations to support landlocked developing countries and transit countries in leveraging the opportunities
provided by regional initiatives and integration.
48. We encourage landlocked developing countries to promote innovative solutions in sectors such as agriculture,
transport, information and communications, finance, energy, health, water and sanitation and education, and effective
public-private partnerships through investments in education and skills development, including technical, vocational
and tertiary education and training, while ensuring gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls at all
levels. We recognize that these investments are required to reduce economic volatility, enable landlocked developing
countries to reap the demographic dividend, and achieve lifelong learning and broader human development.
49. We call upon landlocked developing countries to encourage private sector development by enhancing private
sector capabilities, as well as improving economic governance and business regulations.
50. We are determined to build economies and societies in landlocked developing countries that are resilient to
external economic shocks, disasters and the adverse impact of climate change and environmental degradation. We
urge development partners, the United Nations system and other international and regional organizations to support
landlocked developing countries’ efforts to develop and implement nationally determined contributions and national
long-term climate change strategies in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement and to develop tools to prevent and
combat desertification, land degradation, biodiversity loss, drought and receding glaciers, as well as to strengthen
integrated water resources management, disaster risk prevention, preparedness and response, and early warning and
early action systems.
51. We encourage development partners to support landlocked developing countries in building institutional and
human capacities.
52. We call upon the United Nations system to provide assistance to countries graduating from the least developed
country category in the implementation of their national transition strategies and to consider country-specific support
57

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

for graduated countries for a fixed period of time and in a predictable manner, and call upon development partners to
support smooth transition.
53. We encourage landlocked developing countries to strengthen their services sector and enhance their efforts to
integrate into e-commerce. In this regard, we encourage international partners to provide capacity-building to assist
landlocked developing countries in addressing gaps in legal and regulatory frameworks and developing digital skills.
54. We encourage landlocked developing countries to develop national science, technology and innovation policies
and to create enabling science, technology and innovation infrastructure. We invite development partners and
international organizations to support efforts by landlocked developing countries to establish or strengthen national
and regional centres for science, technology and innovation development.
55. We welcome existing technology and research funds established by development partners and international and
regional financial institutions, and encourage similar initiatives to support landlocked developing countries for a
greater use and adaptation of technology.
56. We encourage landlocked developing countries to continue to make improvements in the regulatory
environment for business, in particular for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises. We also urge enhanced
international and domestic investments in research and development in landlocked developing countries.
57. We encourage landlocked developing countries to strengthen their efforts in raising domestic resources,
including through carrying out reforms in tax administration, broadening the tax base and strengthening domestic
capital markets, and call upon the international community to assist these efforts in line with national priorities.
58. We call upon development partners to strengthen support to landlocked developing countries, taking into
account all sources. At the same time, we encourage landlocked developing countries to better leverage official
development assistance for attracting further finance from other sources, such as foreign direct investment, publicprivate sector partnerships and other sources of finance.
59. We encourage Member States to facilitate foreign direct investment flows to landlocked developing countries
and call upon landlocked and transit developing countries to promote an enabling environment to attract foreign direct
investment and private sector involvement.
60. We call upon development partners to continue to provide aid for trade to landlocked developing countries,
consistent with World Trade Organization guidelines.
61. We call upon the developing and developed countries to continue to support landlocked developing countries
through South-South and triangular cooperation in line with the respective modalities of cooperation.
62. We welcome the establishment of the International Think Tank for Landlocked Developing Countries and call
upon all landlocked developing countries that have not done so to ratify or accede to the multilateral agreement for its
establishment. We invite Member States and other relevant stakeholders to consider making voluntary contributions
to the Think Tank budget.
63. We call upon the United Nations system, including the regional economic commissions, as well as all relevant
international and regional organizations, to continue to provide the support necessary to accelerate the implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action.
64. We call upon the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States to continue to ensure the coordinated follow-up to, effective monitoring
of and reporting on the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action.
65. We call upon the Secretary-General to continue to mobilize the resources necessary to enable the Landlocked
Developing Countries Unit of the Office of the High Representative to fulfil its mandate in support of the landlocked
developing countries.
Third United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
66. We invite the General Assembly to consider holding the third United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries in 2024.

58

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/16
Adopted at the 41st plenary meeting, on 9 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.18 and
A/74/L.18/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe

74/16.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 72/6 of 13 November 2017, in which it decided to include in the provisional agenda of
its seventy-fourth session the sub-item entitled “Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic
ideal”, and recalling also its prior decision to consider the sub-item every two years, in advance of the Summer and
Winter Olympic Games,
Recalling also its resolution 48/11 of 25 October 1993, which, inter alia, revived the ancient Greek tradition of
ekecheiria (“Olympic Truce”) calling for a truce during the Olympic Games to encourage a peaceful environment
and ensure safe passage, access and participation for athletes and relevant persons at the Games, thereby mobilizing
the youth of the world to the cause of peace,
Recalling further that the core concept of ekecheiria, historically, has been the cessation of hostilities from seven
days before until seven days after the Olympic Games, which, according to the legendary oracle of Delphi, was to
replace the cycle of conflict with a friendly athletic competition every four years,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of sport in promoting education, sustainable development, peace,
cooperation, solidarity, fairness, social inclusion and health at the local, regional and international levels, and noting
that, as declared in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,96 sports can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance and
understanding among peoples and nations,
Recognizing also the role that sports can play to prevent and counter terrorism and violent extremism as and
when conducive to terrorism, and its contributions to building resilience against radicalization to violence and terrorist
recruitment,
Welcoming the designation of 6 April as the International Day of Sport for Development and Peace,
Recalling the inclusion in the United Nations Millennium Declaration97 of an appeal for the observance of the
Olympic Truce now and in the future and for support for the International Olympic Committee in its efforts to promote
peace and human understanding through sport and the Olympic ideal,

_______________
96
97

Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 55/2.

59

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also that, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,98 sport is recognized as an important
enabler of sustainable development, in particular for its growing contribution to the realization of development and
peace in its promotion of tolerance and respect and the contributions it makes to the empowerment of women and of
young people, individuals and communities as well as to health, education and social inclusion objectives,
Acknowledging the valuable contribution that the appeal launched by the International Olympic Committee on
21 July 1992 for an Olympic Truce could make towards advancing the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 73/24 of 3 December 2018 on sport as an enabler of sustainable development, in which
it called upon future hosts of the Olympic Games and the Paralympic Games and other Member States to include
sport, as appropriate, in conflict prevention activities and to ensure the effective implementation of the Olympic Truce
during the Games,
Noting that the Games of the XXXII Olympiad will be held from 24 July to 9 August 2020 and that the
XVI Paralympic Games will be held from 25 August to 6 September 2020, in Tokyo,
Noting also that the vision of the Tokyo 2020 Games is to bring positive reform by encouraging people to
achieve their personal best, raising awareness of unity in diversity among citizens of the world and leaving a positive
legacy for future generations,
Expressing the expectation that the Tokyo 2020 Games will be a meaningful opportunity to harness the power
of sport to advance the world by fostering an atmosphere of peace, development, resilience, tolerance and
understanding, and welcoming all the delegations of National Olympic and Paralympic Committees and the Refugee
Olympic and Paralympic Teams admitted by the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic
Committee to participate in the Games,
Recalling that Tokyo 2020 is the second of three consecutive Olympic and Paralympic Games to be held in
Asia, following Pyeongchang 2018 and preceding Beijing 2022, thereby enhancing trilateral partnership in sports and
beyond,
Recognizing the contribution of Japan through the Sport for Tomorrow programme, a public-private initiative
to promote the Olympic and Paralympic Movements that aims to share the values of sports with people of all
generations around the world, including in developing countries, as well as the efforts by Japan to promote exchanges
between Japan’s local citizens and participating athletes from other countries through the Host Town Initiative,
through which the long-lasting relationships at the grass-roots level can be expected well beyond 2020,
Recognizing also that Tokyo 2020 aims to ensure a sustainable delivery of the Games, building on its
sustainability principle “Be better, together: for the planet and the people”, thereby contributing to the achievement of
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals,
Noting that the Tokyo 2020 Games will present an opportunity for Japan to express its people’s heartfelt
gratitude for the solidarity and support demonstrated from all around the world at the time of the 2011 great east-Japan
earthquake and to deliver a powerful message to the world on how it has been recovering from the earthquake, thereby
encouraging not only those who suffered from the earthquake, but also those afflicted by natural disasters around the
world,
Recognizing the imperative need to engage women and girls in the practice of sport for development and peace,
and welcoming activities that aim to foster and encourage initiatives in this regard at the global level,
Recalling article 31 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,99 which outlines the right of the child to engage
in play and recreational activities, and the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General
Assembly on children, entitled “A world fit for children”,100 which stresses the promotion of physical, mental and
emotional health through play and sports,

_______________
Resolution 70/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
100
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
98
99

60

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the significant impetus that the Olympic Games, the Paralympic Games and the Youth Olympic
Games give to the volunteer movement around the world, acknowledging the contributions of volunteers to the
success of the Games, and in this regard calling upon host countries to promote social inclusion without discrimination
of any kind,
Noting the successful conclusion of the XXIII Olympic Winter Games and the XII Paralympic Winter Games,
held in Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea, from 9 to 25 February and from 9 to 18 March 2018, respectively, and
welcoming the XXIV Olympic Winter Games and the XIII Paralympic Winter Games, to be held in Beijing
from 4 to 20 February and from 4 to 13 March 2022, respectively, and the Games of the XXXIII Olympiad and the
XVII Paralympic Games, to be held in Paris from 26 July to 11 August and from 28 August to 8 September 2024,
respectively,
Acknowledging the joint endeavours of the International Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic
Committee and relevant United Nations entities in such fields as the promotion of human rights, human development,
poverty alleviation, humanitarian assistance, health promotion, HIV and AIDS prevention, child and youth education,
gender equality, peacebuilding and sustainable development,
Acknowledging also the importance of the Youth Olympic Games in inspiring youth through integrated sports
and cultural and educational experiences, noting in this regard the successful conclusion of the third Youth Summer
Olympic Games, held in Buenos Aires from 6 to 18 October 2018, and welcoming the third Youth Olympic Winter
Games to be held in Lausanne, Switzerland, from 9 to 22 January 2020,
Recognizing the role that the Paralympic Movement plays in showcasing the achievements of athletes with
disabilities to a global audience and in acting as a primary vehicle to promote positive perceptions and greater
inclusion of persons with disabilities in sport and society,
Recognizing also the important role of supporters working alongside persons with disabilities to organize and
develop disability-specific sports,
Recognizing further that the active involvement of persons with disabilities in sports and the Paralympic Games
contributes to the full and equal realization of their human rights, as well as respect for their inherent dignity, recalling
articles 1 and 30 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,101 in which States parties recognized
the right of persons with disabilities, including those with long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory
impairments, to take part on an equal basis with others in cultural life, with a view to enabling persons with disabilities
to participate on an equal basis with others in recreational, leisure and sporting activities, and noting in this regard the
need for appropriate instruction, training and resources alongside accessibility of venues, and welcoming plans to
stage integrated and inclusive Games,
Welcoming the commitment made by various States Members of the United Nations and other relevant
stakeholders to developing national and international programmes that promote peace and conflict resolution, the
Olympic and Paralympic values and the Olympic Truce ideals through sport and through culture, education,
sustainable development and wider public engagement, and acknowledging the contribution of former hosts of the
Olympic and Paralympic Games in this regard,
Recognizing the humanitarian opportunities presented by the Olympic Truce and by other initiatives supported
by the United Nations to achieve the cessation of conflict,
Recalling that, in its resolution 73/24, it supported the independence and autonomy of sport as well as the
mission of the International Olympic Committee in leading the Olympic Movement and of the International
Paralympic Committee in leading the Paralympic Movement, and recognized the unifying and conciliative nature of
major international sport events and that such events should be organized in the spirit of peace, mutual understanding,
friendship, tolerance and inadmissibility of discrimination of any kind,
Acknowledging the fundamental principles of the Olympic Charter, including principle 6, which states that the
enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in the Olympic Charter shall be secured for all, without discrimination
of any kind,

_______________
101

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.

61

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations flag will be flown at the Olympic stadium and in the Olympic
and Paralympic villages of the Games of the XXXII Olympiad and the XVI Paralympic Games,
1. Urges Member States to observe the Olympic Truce individually and collectively, within the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations, throughout the period from the seventh day before the start of the Games of the
XXXII Olympiad until the seventh day following the end of the XVI Paralympic Games, to be held in Tokyo in 2020,
in particular, to ensure the safe passage, access and participation of athletes, officials and all other accredited persons
taking part in the Games of the Olympiad and the Paralympic Games, and to contribute through other appropriate
measures to the safe organization of the Games;
2. Underlines the importance of cooperation among Member States to collectively implement the values of
the Olympic Truce around the world, and emphasizes the important role of the International Olympic Committee, the
International Paralympic Committee and the United Nations in this regard;
3. Welcomes the work of the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic Committee,
as well as the International Olympic Truce Foundation and the International Olympic Truce Centre, in mobilizing
national and international sports federations and organizations, National Olympic and Paralympic Committees and
associations of these organizations to take concrete actions at the local, national, regional and international levels to
promote and strengthen a culture of peace based on the spirit of the Olympic Truce, and invites those organizations
and national committees to cooperate and share information and best practices, as appropriate;
4. Also welcomes the leadership of Olympic and Paralympic athletes in promoting peace and human
understanding through sport and the Olympic ideal;
5. Calls upon all Member States to cooperate with the International Olympic Committee and the
International Paralympic Committee in their efforts to use sport as a tool to promote peace, dialogue and reconciliation
in areas of conflict during and beyond the period of the Olympic and Paralympic Games;
6. Recognizes that sport and the Olympic and Paralympic Games can be used to promote human rights and
strengthen universal respect for such rights, thus contributing to their full realization;
7. Welcomes the cooperation among Member States, the United Nations and the specialized agencies, funds
and programmes, and the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic Committee, to
maximize the potential of sport to make a meaningful and sustainable contribution to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals within the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,98 and encourages the Olympic
and Paralympic Movements to work closely with national and international sports organizations on the use of sport
to this end;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly to promote the observance of
the Olympic Truce among Member States and support for human development initiatives through sport and to
continue to cooperate effectively with the International Olympic Committee, the International Paralympic Committee
and the sporting community in general in the realization of those objectives;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session the sub-item entitled “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal” of the item entitled “Sport for development and peace”
and to consider the sub-item before the XXIV Olympic Winter Games and the XIII Paralympic Winter Games, to be
held in Beijing in 2022.
RESOLUTION 74/17
Adopted at the 41st plenary meeting, on 9 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 63 to 19, with 66 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.12/Rev.1 and A/74/L.12/Rev.1/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,

62

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New
Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu,
Zambia
Against: Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen

74/17.

Problem of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol,
Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Charter of the United Nations, in which it is stated, inter alia, that all Members of the United
Nations shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolution 68/262 of 27 March 2014 on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, in which it affirmed
its commitment to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders,
Recalling further its resolution 73/194 of 17 December 2018 on the problem of the militarization of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azov,
Recalling its resolutions 71/205 of 19 December 2016, 72/190 of 19 December 2017 and 73/263 of
22 December 2018 on the situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol,
Ukraine,
Deeply concerned that the provisions of those resolutions and relevant decisions of international organizations,
specialized agencies and bodies within the United Nations system have not been implemented by the Russian
Federation,
Recalling its resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974,
Condemning the ongoing temporary occupation of part of the territory of Ukraine, namely, the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol (hereinafter referred to as “Crimea”), by the Russian Federation, and
reaffirming the non-recognition of its annexation,
Recalling that the temporary occupation of Crimea and the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of Ukraine by the Russian Federation is in contravention of commitments made under the
Memorandum on Security Assurances in Connection with Ukraine’s Accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (Budapest Memorandum) of 5 December 1994,102 in which, inter alia, the obligations to refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of Ukraine and the commitment
to respect the independence and sovereignty and the existing borders of Ukraine were reaffirmed,
Expressing concern over the efforts of the Russian Federation to extend its jurisdiction over the nuclear facilities
and material in Crimea,
Affirming that the seizure of Crimea by force is illegal and a violation of international law, and affirming also
that those territories must be immediately returned,

_______________
102

A/49/765-S/1994/1399, annex I.

63

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the prohibition, in accordance with international humanitarian law, for the occupying Power to compel
protected persons to serve in its armed or auxiliary forces, including through pressure or propaganda that is aimed at
securing voluntary enlistment, and condemning the ongoing recruitment campaign in Crimea and criminal
prosecutions of Crimean residents for draft evasion,
Concerned by efforts to use the education of children in Crimea in order to indoctrinate them to join the Russian
military forces,
Taking note of the order of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea of 25 May 2019 on provisional
measures in the Case concerning the detention of three Ukrainian naval vessels (Ukraine v. Russian Federation) and
Procedural Order No. 1 of the Arbitral Tribunal Constituted under Annex VII to the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea between Ukraine and the Russian Federation in respect of a Dispute concerning the Detention
of Ukrainian Naval Vessels and Servicemen of 22 November 2019,
Noting the fact that security concerns and the build-up of forces in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov regions
further destabilize the economy and social services, particularly in the coastal regions of Ukraine,
Supporting the commitment by Ukraine to adhere to international law in its efforts to put an end to the temporary
Russian occupation of Crimea,
1. Stresses that the presence of Russian troops in Crimea is contrary to the national sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine and undermines the security and stability of neighbouring countries
and the European region;
2. Expresses its grave concern over the progressive militarization of Crimea by the Russian Federation as
the occupying Power, and also expresses concern over reports of the continuing destabilization of Crimea owing to
transfers by the Russian Federation of weapon systems, including nuclear-capable aircraft and missiles, weapons,
ammunition and military personnel to the territory of Ukraine, and urges the Russian Federation to stop such activity;
3. Expresses its deep concern over the use of seized Ukrainian military industry enterprises in the occupied
Crimea by the Russian Federation;
4. Calls upon the Russian Federation to refrain from efforts to extend its jurisdiction over the nuclear facilities
and material in Crimea;
5. Expresses its deep concern over the conscription by the Russian Federation of the residents of Crimea into
its armed forces, including assignment to military bases in the Russian Federation, and urges the Russian Federation
to stop such illegal activity;
6. Expresses its concern regarding multiple military exercises of Russian armed forces held in Crimea, which
undermine regional security and entail considerable long-term negative environmental consequences in the region;
7. Also expresses its concern over the ongoing actions of the Russian Federation in parts of the Black Sea
surrounding Crimea, in the Sea of Azov and in the Kerch Strait, including their militarization, which pose further
threats to Ukraine and undermine the stability of the broader region;
8. Expresses its utmost concern about the dangerous increase in tensions and the unjustified use of force by
the Russian Federation against Ukraine, including against three vessels of the naval forces of Ukraine, namely, the
Berdyansk, the Nikopol and the tugboat Yani Kapu, on 25 November 2018 in the Black Sea, which involved the
serious wounding of some of their crew members and the intentional obstruction of traffic through the Kerch Strait;
9. Welcomes the release by the Russian Federation of 24 crew members of three vessels of the naval forces
of Ukraine, namely, the Berdyansk, the Nikopol and the tugboat Yani Kapu;
10. Calls upon the Russian Federation to return unconditionally and without delay all equipment and weapons
seized from the released vessels, the Berdyansk, the Nikopol and the tugboat Yani Kapu, to the custody of Ukraine;
11. Encourages further negotiations to ensure the release by the Russian Federation of all illegally detained
Ukrainian citizens and their safe return to Ukraine;
12. Calls upon the Russian Federation to refrain from impeding the lawful exercise of navigational rights and
freedoms, including but not limited to closure of sea areas under the pretext of military exercises, in the Black Sea, the
64

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait in accordance with applicable international law, including provisions of the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea;103
13. Condemns the construction and opening by the Russian Federation of the Kerch Strait bridge between the
Russian Federation and temporarily occupied Crimea, which facilitates the further militarization of Crimea and
restricts the size of ships that can reach the Ukrainian ports on the Azov coast, and also condemns the increasing
military presence of the Russian Federation in parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, including the Kerch Strait,
and the harassment of commercial vessels by the Russian Federation and its restriction of international shipping there,
which further aggravates the economic and social situation in the broader Donetsk region already affected by the
temporary occupation of Crimea;
14. Also condemns visits of Russian officials to the temporarily occupied Crimea, including those in
connection with conducting military exercises;
15. Calls upon all Member States, as well as international organizations and specialized agencies, to refrain
from any visits to Crimea that are not agreed with Ukraine;
16. Urges the Russian Federation, as the occupying Power, to withdraw its military forces from Crimea and
to end its temporary occupation of Ukrainian territory without delay;
17. Calls upon all Member States to cooperate with the United Nations to encourage and support efforts to
put an end to the Russian occupation of Crimea as rapidly as possible and to refrain from any dealings with the Russian
Federation regarding Crimea that are inconsistent with this aim;
18. Decides to continue its consideration of the matter at its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/18
Adopted at the 43rd plenary meeting, on 10 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.21 and
A/74/L.21/Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Canada, Djibouti, Eritrea, Fiji, Ghana, Iceland,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Kiribati, Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Samoa, Seychelles, Somalia, Thailand, United States of America

74/18.

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks,
and related instruments

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its annual resolutions on sustainable fisheries, including resolution 73/125 of 11 December 2018,
and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (the Convention),104
and bearing in mind the relationship between the Convention and the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (the Agreement),105
Noting with satisfaction that 16 November 2019 marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of the entry into force of
the Convention,
Welcoming ratifications of and accessions to the Agreement and the fact that a growing number of States, entities
referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement, and subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, have taken measures, as appropriate, towards the implementation of
the provisions of the Agreement, in order to improve their management regimes,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
105
Ibid., vol. 2167, No. 37924.
103
104

65

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with satisfaction that 4 December 2020 will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the opening for
signature of the Agreement, and welcoming the work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and its Committee on Fisheries, and recognizing in particular the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (the Code), which will mark its twenty-fifth anniversary in
2020, and other related instruments, including the international plans of action, which set out principles and global
standards of behaviour for responsible practices for the conservation of fisheries resources and the management and
development of fisheries, as well as the 2005 Rome Declaration on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing,
Recognizing the importance of data collection through accurate and reliable reporting and monitoring of catches,
including by-catch and discards, as a fundamental element of effective fisheries management that provides a basis for
scientific stock assessment, and ecosystem approaches to fisheries management,
Noting that the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
focused its discussions at its twentieth meeting, held from 10 to 14 June 2019, on “Ocean science and the United
Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development”,106
Noting also the holding of the Forum on Fisheries Science in the Mediterranean and the Black Sea by the
General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean, in Rome from 10 to 14 December 2018,
Noting further the convening of the International Symposium on Fisheries Sustainability: Strengthening
the Science-Policy Nexus, organized by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations from
18 to 21 November 2019,
Noting with concern that the effective management of marine capture fisheries has been made difficult in some
areas by unreliable and incomplete information and data caused by, inter alia, unreported and misreported fish catch
and fishing effort and that this lack of accurate data undermines the assessment of fish stocks and contributes to
overfishing in some areas, and in this regard recalling that members of regional fisheries management organizations
or arrangements must fully comply with their associated data-collection and reporting obligations, including to ensure
that required data submissions are complete, reliable and submitted in a timely manner,
Recognizing the First Global Integrated Marine Assessment (first World Ocean Assessment), which provides
information on the state of the marine environment, including socioeconomic aspects, in relation to, inter alia,
fisheries,
Recognizing also the significant contribution of sustainable fisheries to food security and nutrition, income,
wealth and poverty alleviation for present and future generations,
Welcoming in this regard the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”, as endorsed by
the General Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012,
Welcoming the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda, held from 25 to 27 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”, as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, and in this regard
reaffirming the commitment to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development, as reflected in Goal 14 of the outcome document,
Noting the voluntary national reviews on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and its Sustainable Development Goals, particularly on Goal 14,
Recalling its resolution 71/312 of 6 July 2017, in which it endorsed the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our
future: call for action” adopted by the high-level United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development, held at United Nations Headquarters from 5 to 9 June 2017, coinciding with World Oceans
Day on 8 June, and in this regard reaffirming the important role of the declaration in demonstrating the collective will
to take action to conserve and sustainably use our oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development,

_______________
106

66

See A/74/119.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the important contributions of the partnership dialogues and voluntary commitments made in the
context of the United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development to the effective and
timely implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14,
Recalling its decision to convene the high-level 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development in Lisbon, from 2 to 6 June 2020,107
Welcoming in this regard the continuous attention given by the international community to the role of fish and
fish products in nutrition and food security, including by the Committee on World Food Security of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, especially noting the importance of the availability of highly
nutritious food for low-income populations,
Recalling the decision in its resolution 71/124 of 7 December 2016 to designate 2 May as World Tuna Day,
Recalling also the decision in its resolution 72/72 of 5 December 2017 to proclaim 5 June the International Day
for the Fight against Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, to draw attention to the threats posed by illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing activities to the sustainable use of fisheries resources as well as to ongoing efforts
to fight these activities,
Recalling further the decision in its resolution 72/72 to proclaim the year beginning on 1 January 2022 the
International Year of Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture,
Recalling that, in “The future we want”, States were encouraged to give due consideration to implementing the
Committee on World Food Security Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security,108
Noting that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has developed the Global Work
Programme to Advance Knowledge on Rights-based Approaches for Fisheries as a means to support the
implementation of the Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-scale Fisheries in the Context of Food
Security and Poverty Eradication and to facilitate the formalization of appropriate access and resource rights in smallscale and artisanal fisheries in both developing and developed countries, in order to improve the governance of
fisheries,
Recalling the Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-scale Fisheries in the Context of Food
Security and Poverty Eradication,
Recognizing the urgent need for action at all levels, relying on the best available scientific information to ensure
the long-term sustainable use and management of fisheries resources through the wide application of the precautionary
approach and ecosystem approaches,
Reiterating its concern over the current and projected adverse effects of climate change on food security and the
sustainability of fisheries, noting in that regard the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the United Nations Environment Programme, and noting
with concern the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel in its special report on the ocean and cryosphere in a
changing climate,
Recalling the entry into force of the Paris Agreement,109 and noting that it aims to strengthen the global response
to the threat of climate change, including by increasing the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change
and foster climate resilience,
Noting with appreciation the comprehensive review of the impacts of climate change on fisheries and
aquaculture and adaptation options undertaken by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,

_______________
See resolution 73/292.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.
109
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
107
108

67

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming its commitment to ensuring that conservation and management measures adopted by regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements are based on the best available scientific information,
Taking note of the report of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations entitled The State of
World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2018, in which it was stated that 33.1 per cent of assessed marine fish stocks were
estimated to be fished at a biologically unsustainable level and therefore overfished as of 2015, and recalling the report
of the Committee on Fisheries, at its thirty-third session,110 in which serious concern about the state of the world’s fish
stocks was expressed, noting the continued increase in the proportion of overfished stocks, and in which it was also
recognized that the situation was very different in different areas of the world,
Expressing its support for accelerating work to complete the ongoing negotiations in the World Trade
Organization to strengthen disciplines on subsidies in the fisheries sector, including through the prohibition of certain
forms of fisheries subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing,
Noting the ministerial decision on fisheries subsidies, adopted at the eleventh Ministerial Conference of the
World Trade Organization, held in Buenos Aires from 10 to 13 December 2017,
Concerned that only a limited number of States have taken measures to implement, individually and through
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, the International Plan of Action for the Management
of Fishing Capacity adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Recalling the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated
Fishing adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Particularly concerned that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing continues to constitute a serious threat
to fish stocks and marine habitats and ecosystems, to the detriment of sustainable fisheries as well as the food security
and the economies of many States, particularly developing States,
Concerned that some operators increasingly take advantage of the globalization of fishery markets to trade
fishery products stemming from illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and make economic profits from those
operations, which constitutes an incentive for them to pursue their activities,
Recognizing that the effective deterrence and combating of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing has
significant financial and other resource implications for all States, in particular developing States,
Recognizing also that fishing by vessels without nationality on the high seas undermines relevant objectives of
the Convention and the Agreement to conserve and sustainably manage marine resources, and noting with concern
that fishing vessels without nationality operate on the high seas without governance and oversight,
Recognizing further the role of the Global Record of Fishing Vessels, Refrigerated Transport Vessels and Supply
Vessels in the concerted fight against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
Recognizing the duty provided in the Convention, the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International
Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas (the Compliance Agreement),111 the
Agreement and the Code for flag States to effectively exercise jurisdiction and control over fishing vessels flying their
flag, and vessels flying their flag which provide support to fishing vessels, to ensure that the activities of such fishing
and support vessels do not undermine the effectiveness of conservation and management measures taken in
accordance with international law and adopted at the national, subregional, regional or global levels,
Noting the advisory opinion of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea on the request for an advisory
opinion submitted by the Subregional Fisheries Commission, issued on 2 April 2015,
Recognizing the importance of adequately regulating, monitoring and controlling trans-shipment at sea,
including on the high seas, to contribute to combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities,

_______________
110
111

68

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2019/23.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2221, No. 39486.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the convening of the sixth Global Fisheries Enforcement Training Workshop in Bangkok, from
18 to 22 February 2019, hosted by the International Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Network for Fisheriesrelated Activities, in order to share information, experiences and technologies, foster coordination and improve skills
among enforcement officials,
Noting the obligation of all States, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the relevant provisions
of the Convention, to cooperate in the conservation and management of living marine resources, and recognizing the
importance of coordination and cooperation at the global, regional, subregional and national levels in the areas, inter
alia, of marine scientific research, data collection, information-sharing, capacity-building and training for the
conservation, management and sustainable development of living marine resources,
Acknowledging the importance of ocean data buoy systems moored in areas beyond national jurisdiction to
sustainable development, promoting safety at sea and limiting human vulnerability to natural disasters, due to their
use in weather and marine forecasts, fisheries management, tsunami forecasts and climate prediction, and expressing
concern that most damage to ocean data buoys, such as moored buoys and tsunameters, frequently results from actions
taken by some fishing operations which render the buoys inoperable,
Welcoming in this regard the adoption of measures by States, individually or through regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, to protect ocean data buoy systems from the impacts of fishing activities,
Encouraging States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
cooperate to ensure that interactions between fishing operations and ocean data buoys on the high seas are minimized,
Recognizing the need for States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to continue to develop and implement, consistent with international law, effective port State measures
to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and to contribute to addressing overfishing, the critical need for
cooperation with developing States to build their capacity, and the importance of cooperation between the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Maritime Organization in this regard,
Recalling the entry into force of the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations112 in 2016,
Recognizing the efforts of States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to implement its resolution 46/215 of 20 December 1991, in which the General Assembly called for
a global moratorium on all large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing, including collaborative fisheries enforcement
activities,
Concerned that marine pollution from all sources constitutes a serious threat to human health and safety,
endangers fish stocks, marine biodiversity and marine and coastal habitats and has significant costs to local and
national economies,
Recognizing that marine debris is a global transboundary pollution problem and that, owing to the many different
types and sources of marine debris, different approaches to its prevention and removal are necessary, including the
identification of such sources and environmentally sound techniques for its removal,
Recognizing also that the majority of marine debris, including plastics and microplastics, entering the seas and
oceans is considered to originate from land-based sources,
Recognizing further that abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear, including ghost fishing gear, is an
increasingly pervasive and destructive form of marine debris causing adverse impacts on fish stocks, marine life and
the marine environment and that urgent preventative action is needed, such as the marking of fishing gear as proposed
by the Committee on Fisheries, as well as removal action,
Acknowledging that anthropogenic underwater noise could have impacts on different marine species, which
could also have consequent socioeconomic impacts, including on fishing, and welcoming in this regard the
discussions on the issue at the nineteenth meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process
on Oceans and the Law of the Sea,113

_______________
112
113

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2009/REP and Corr.1–3, appendix E.
See A/73/124.

69

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the continuing gaps in knowledge and lack of data with respect to anthropogenic underwater noise and
its impacts, and welcoming in this respect the encouragement of the Committee on Fisheries of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, at its thirty-third session, to consider conducting a review of the
impact of anthropogenic underwater noise on marine resources and its socioeconomic consequences,
Noting also the convening of the joint General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean/OceanCare
workshop on anthropogenic underwater noise and impacts on fish, invertebrates and fish resources, in Rome
on 21 and 22 February 2019,
Reaffirming the importance of sustainable aquaculture to food security, recognizing that, as indicated in The
State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2018, aquaculture is already making a significant contribution to the global
seafood supply, and that a further increase in that contribution is anticipated,
Noting that the contribution of sustainable aquaculture to global fish supplies continues to respond to
opportunities in developing countries to enhance local food security and nutrition and poverty alleviation and, together
with the efforts of other aquaculture-producing countries, will make a significant contribution to meeting future
demands in fish consumption, bearing in mind article 9 of the Code,
Noting in this regard the concern about the potential effects of genetically engineered aquatic fish species on the
health and sustainability of wild fish stocks,
Recognizing the efforts made by States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in
regulating deep-sea fisheries, while still concerned that some deep-sea fishing activities in certain areas are being
carried out without the full implementation of relevant paragraphs of previous resolutions, representing a threat to
vulnerable marine ecosystems,
Calling attention to the particular vulnerabilities of small island developing States, other developing coastal
States and subsistence fishing communities whose livelihoods, economic development and food security are heavily
dependent on sustainable fisheries and will suffer disproportionately if sustainable fisheries are negatively affected,
Calling attention also to the circumstances affecting fisheries in many developing States, in particular African
States and small island developing States, and recognizing the urgent need for capacity-building, including the transfer
of marine technology and in particular fisheries- and aquaculture-related technology, to enhance the ability of such
States to exercise their rights in order to realize the benefits from fisheries resources and fulfil their obligations under
international instruments,
Noting the need to recognize and address the special role of women and the vulnerability of indigenous and
local communities and minorities in small-scale fisheries,
Recognizing the important contribution of women in the fisheries and aquaculture sectors, as well as challenges
faced by women in these sectors, including lack of access to social protection and unequal employment opportunities,
Noting in this regard the convening of the International Conference of Women in Fisheries, in Santiago de
Compostela, Spain, from 5 to 7 November 2018, at which the Santiago de Compostela Declaration for Equal
Opportunities in the Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectors was adopted,
Noting that the celebration of World Oceans Day in 2019 focused on the theme “Gender and the ocean”,
Recognizing the need to adopt, implement and enforce appropriate measures to minimize waste, by-catch and
discards, including high-grading, loss of fishing gear and other factors that adversely affect the sustainability of fish
stocks and ecosystems and, consequently, can also have harmful effects on the economies and food security of small
island developing States, other developing coastal States and subsistence fishing communities,
Recognizing also the need to adopt and implement appropriate measures, consistent with the best available
scientific information, to minimize by-catch of non‑targeted species and juveniles through the effective management
of fishing methods, including the use and design of fish aggregating devices, in order to mitigate adverse effects on
fish stocks and ecosystems,
Recognizing further the need to further integrate ecosystem approaches into fisheries conservation and
management and, more generally, the importance of applying ecosystem approaches to the management of human
activities in the ocean, and noting in this regard the Reykjavik Declaration on Responsible Fisheries in the Marine
70

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Ecosystem,114 the work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations related to guidelines for the
implementation of the ecosystem approach to fisheries management and the importance of this approach to relevant
provisions of the Agreement and the Code, as well as decision VII/11115 and other relevant decisions of the Conference
of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity,
Recognizing the economic and cultural importance of sharks in many countries, the biological importance of
sharks in the marine ecosystem as key predatory species, the vulnerability of certain shark species to overexploitation,
the fact that some are threatened with extinction, the need for measures to promote the long-term conservation,
management and sustainable use of shark populations and fisheries, and the relevance of the International Plan of
Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations in 1999, in providing guidance on the development of such measures,
Welcoming in this regard the review by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations of the
implementation of the International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks, and its ongoing
work in this regard,
Noting with concern that basic data on shark stocks and harvests continue to be lacking and that not all regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements have adopted conservation and management measures for
directed shark fisheries and for the regulation of by-catch of sharks from other fisheries,
Welcoming science-based measures taken by States to conserve and sustainably manage sharks, and noting in
this respect management measures taken by coastal States, including limits on catch or fishing effort, technical
measures, including by‑catch reduction measures, sanctuaries, closed seasons and areas and monitoring, control and
surveillance,
Recalling the decisions on sharks and rays adopted at the eighteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, held in Geneva from
17 to 28 August 2019, inter alia, the inclusion of additional species of sharks and rays in appendix II to that
Convention,116 and recalling also the ongoing work of the secretariat of that Convention, as well as other
organizations, including the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, on capacity-building to facilitate the implementation of
requirements associated with such listings,
Recalling also that the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species
of Wild Animals, at its twelfth session, held in Manila from 23 to 28 October 2017, added 5 new species of sharks
and rays to those listed in the appendices to that Convention,117 bringing the number to 34 species,
Recalling further that the signatories to the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory
Sharks, at their third meeting, held in Monaco from 10 to 14 December 2018, added eight new species of sharks and
rays to those listed in annex I to that Memorandum of Understanding and adopted a capacity-building strategy aimed
at supporting signatories with the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and its conservation plan,
Noting with concern the continuing practice of the removal of fins from sharks, with the remainder of the carcass
being discarded at sea,
Recognizing the importance of marine species occupying low trophic levels in the ecosystem and for food
security, and the need to ensure their long-term sustainability,
Expressing concern over continued incidental mortality, in fishing operations, of seabirds, particularly
albatrosses and petrels, as well as other marine species, including sharks, fin-fish species, marine mammals and
marine turtles, while recognizing considerable efforts by States and through various regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to reduce incidental mortality as a result of by-catch,

_______________
E/CN.17/2002/PC.2/3, annex.
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex.
116
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
117
Ibid., vol. 1651, No. 28395.
114
115

71

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with concern the significant threat that invasive alien species, such as those carried and transferred by
ballast water and by biofouling on ships, pose to marine ecosystems and resources,
Recognizing the importance of decent work and productive employment in the fishing sector, which is critical
to sustainable livelihoods and food security,
Noting the ongoing work by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to develop guidance
on social sustainability in fisheries and aquaculture value chains, in line with the recommendation of its Committee
on Fisheries, and in cooperation with relevant stakeholders, including industry and fish worker associations,
I
Achieving sustainable fisheries
1. Reaffirms the importance that it attaches to the long-term conservation, management and sustainable use
of the living marine resources of the world’s oceans and seas and the obligations of States to cooperate to this end, in
accordance with international law, as reflected in the relevant provisions of the Convention,104 in particular the
provisions on cooperation set out in Part V and Part VII, section 2, of the Convention, and where applicable, the
Agreement;105
2. Calls upon all States that have not done so, in order to achieve the goal of universal participation, to
become parties to the Convention, which sets out the legal framework within which all activities in the oceans and
seas must be carried out, taking into account the relationship between the Convention and the Agreement;
3. Notes with satisfaction that, in “The future we want”,118 States addressed the sustainable development of
fisheries, recognized the significant contribution of fisheries to the three dimensions of sustainable development and
stressed the crucial role of healthy marine ecosystems, sustainable fisheries and sustainable aquaculture for food
security and nutrition and in providing for the livelihoods of millions of people, and encourages States to implement
the commitments made in “The future we want”;
4. Calls upon States to implement the Sustainable Development Goals outlined in the outcome document of
the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world:
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 70/1, including
Goal 14 to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development, recalling
that some of its targets are to be met by 2020 and that the Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible;
5. Reiterates, in this regard, the call for action to be taken on an urgent basis to conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development made in the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our
future: call for action”;119
6. Encourages States to give due priority to the implementation of the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)120 in relation to achieving sustainable
fisheries, especially restoring depleted stocks to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield on an urgent basis
and, where possible, not later than 2015, and recalls that, in “The future we want”, States committed themselves to
intensify their efforts to meet that target and to urgently take the measures necessary to maintain or restore all stocks
at least to levels that can produce the maximum sustainable yield, with the aim of achieving those goals in the shortest
time feasible, as determined by their biological characteristics, and in order to achieve this, to urgently develop and
implement science-based management plans, including by reducing or suspending fishing catch and fishing effort
commensurate with the status of the stock, consistent with international law, the applicable international instruments
and relevant General Assembly resolutions and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations;
7.

Also encourages States to promote the consumption of fish sourced from sustainably managed fisheries;

_______________
Resolution 66/288, annex.
Resolution 71/312, annex.
120
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
118
119

72

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Further encourages States to consider sustainable aquaculture, consistent with the Code, as a means to
promote diversification of the food supply and of income, while ensuring that aquaculture is conducted responsibly
and adverse impacts on the environment are minimized;
9. Welcomes the convening of the high-level midterm review of the outcome document of the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing States, entitled “SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway”,121 in September 2019, reaffirms its resolution 74/3 of 10 October 2019, by which it adopted
the political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress made in addressing the priorities of small island
developing States through the implementation of the Samoa Pathway, which notes the importance of oceans, seas and
marine resources to small island developing States and acknowledges their efforts to develop and implement strategies
for the conservation and sustainable use of the ocean and its resources, and emphasizes the need for the full
implementation of the Samoa Pathway;
10. Expresses its serious concern regarding the impacts of global climate change and ocean acidification on
coral reefs and other ecosystems relevant to fisheries, and urges States, either directly or through appropriate
subregional, regional or global organizations or arrangements, to intensify efforts to assess and address, as appropriate,
the impacts of global climate change and ocean acidification on the sustainability of fish stocks and the habitats that
support them, in particular the most affected ones;
11. Notes, in this regard, the special report on the ocean and cryosphere in a changing climate of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and notes with concern the findings contained therein;
12. Also notes the concern expressed by the Committee on Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, at its thirty-third session, with regard to the vulnerability of fisheries and aquaculture
communities to climate change and extreme events and, in particular, the impacts on small-scale fisheries and small
island developing States, and urges States to consider appropriate action in this regard;
13. Emphasizes the obligations of flag States to discharge their responsibilities, in accordance with the
Convention, the Agreement and the Compliance Agreement, to ensure compliance by vessels flying their flag with
the conservation and management measures adopted and in force with respect to fisheries resources on the high seas;
14. Calls upon States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, as appropriate, to
assess the risks and potential adverse impacts of climate change with respect to fish stocks, consider them when
establishing conservation and management measures and identifying options to reduce risks and adverse impacts with
respect to fisheries management and the health and resilience of marine ecosystems and enhance efforts to cooperate
to collect, exchange and publish scientific and technical data and best practices related to the development and
implementation of adaptation strategies, and to assist developing States in this regard, especially those that are
particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change;
15. Encourages States and relevant organizations and arrangements to assess and consider the impacts of
climate change on fisheries and aquaculture sectors in their policies and planning, as appropriate, in order to identify
effective adaptation strategies to reduce the vulnerability of these sectors to climate change;
16. Calls upon all States, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to apply widely, in accordance with international law and the Code, the precautionary approach and ecosystem
approaches to the conservation, management and exploitation of fish stocks, and also calls upon States parties to the
Agreement to implement fully the provisions of article 6 of the Agreement as a matter of priority;
17. Urges States to increase their reliance on scientific advice in developing, adopting and implementing
conservation and management measures, and to increase their efforts, including through international cooperation, to
promote science for conservation and management measures that apply, in accordance with international law, the
precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches to fisheries management, enhancing understanding of ecosystem
approaches, in order to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources, and in this
regard encourages the implementation of the Strategy for Improving Information on Status and Trends of Capture
Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as a framework for the improvement and
understanding of fishery status and trends;

_______________
121

Resolution 69/15, annex.

73

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

18. Calls upon all States, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements,
to apply stock-specific target and limit precautionary reference points, which, for target reference points, are intended
to meet management objectives, as described in annex II to the Agreement and in the Code, to ensure that populations
of harvested stocks and, where necessary, associated or dependent species are maintained at or restored to sustainable
levels, and to use these reference points for triggering conservation and management action;
19. Encourages States, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
establish and implement rebuilding and recovery strategies and plans where a stock is identified as being overfished,
which should include time frames and probabilities of recovery aimed at bringing the stock back at least to levels that
can produce the maximum sustainable yield, and guided by scientific assessment and subjected to a periodic
evaluation of progress;
20. Also encourages States to apply the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches in adopting and
implementing conservation and management measures addressing, inter alia, by-catch, pollution and overfishing, and
protecting habitats of specific concern, taking into account existing guidelines developed by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations;
21. Further encourages States to enhance or develop observer programmes, individually or through regional
fisheries management organizations or arrangements, in order to improve data collection on, inter alia, target and
by-catch species, which could also assist monitoring, control and surveillance tools, and to take into account standards,
forms of cooperation and other existing structures for such programmes as described in article 25 of the Agreement
and article 5 of the Code;
22. Calls upon, in this regard, States, individually in line with their national legislation or through regional
fisheries management organizations or arrangements, to take steps as appropriate to ensure the safety of observers;
23. Encourages States to implement, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, accurate, complete, reliable and effective data collection and reporting of required data on catches,
including by‑catch and discards, reviewing and validating the data, and providing catch information in support of
scientific stock assessment and ecosystem approaches to fisheries management, while noting the importance,
particularly for developing countries, of improving the capacity to collect accurate, complete, reliable and effective
data;
24. Calls upon States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to collect and,
where appropriate, report to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations required catch and effort
data, and fishery-related information, in a complete, accurate and timely way, including for straddling fish stocks and
highly migratory fish stocks within and beyond areas under national jurisdiction, discrete high seas fish stocks, and
by-catch and discards; and, where they do not exist, to establish processes to strengthen data collection and reporting
by members of regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, including through regular reviews of
member compliance with such obligations, and, when such obligations are not met, require the member concerned to
rectify the problem, including through the preparation of plans of action with timelines;
25. Invites States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to cooperate with the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in the implementation and further development of the
Fisheries Resources Monitoring System initiative;
26. Reaffirms paragraph 10 of its resolution 61/105 of 8 December 2006, and calls upon States, including
through regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, to urgently adopt and implement measures to
fully implement the International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks for directed and
non-directed shark fisheries, based on the best available scientific information, through, inter alia, limits on catch or
fishing effort, by requiring that vessels flying their flag collect and regularly report data on shark catches, including
species-specific data, discards and landings, undertaking, including through international cooperation, comprehensive
stock assessments of sharks, reducing shark by-catch and by-catch mortality and, where scientific information is
uncertain or inadequate, not increasing fishing effort in directed shark fisheries and urgently establishing sciencebased management measures to ensure the long-term conservation, management and sustainable use of shark stocks
and to prevent further declines of vulnerable or threatened shark stocks, and encourages the full utilization of dead
sharks caught in the context of sustainably managed fisheries;
74

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

27. Calls upon States to take immediate and concerted action to improve the implementation of and
compliance with existing regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements and national measures that
regulate shark fisheries and incidental catch of sharks, in particular those measures which prohibit or restrict fisheries
conducted solely for the purpose of harvesting shark fins and, where necessary, to consider taking other measures, as
appropriate, such as requiring that all sharks be landed with each fin naturally attached;
28. Calls upon regional fisheries management organizations with the competence to regulate highly migratory
species to strengthen or establish precautionary, science-based conservation and management measures, as
appropriate, for sharks taken in fisheries within their convention areas consistent with the International Plan of Action
for the Conservation and Management of Sharks;
29. Encourages range States and regional economic integration organizations that have not yet done so to
become signatories to and implement the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks
under the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals,117 and invites non-range States,
intergovernmental organizations and international and national non‑governmental organizations or other relevant
bodies and entities to consider becoming cooperating partners;
30. Encourages States, as appropriate, to cooperate in establishing non‑detriment findings for shared stocks
of marine species listed in appendices I and II to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora,116 consistent with the concepts and non-binding guiding principles contained in resolution
Conf. 16.7 on non-detriment findings, adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora;
31. Urges States to eliminate barriers to trade in fish and fisheries products which are not consistent with their
rights and obligations under the World Trade Organization agreements, taking into account the importance of the trade
in fish and fisheries products, particularly for developing countries;
32. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States committed themselves to observing the need to ensure access
to fisheries and the importance of access to markets by subsistence, small-scale and artisanal fisherfolk and women
fish workers, as well as indigenous peoples and their communities, particularly in developing countries, especially
small island developing States;
33. Notes that the Committee on Fisheries encouraged the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations to provide capacity development and technical support to small-scale fisheries, including by addressing
socioeconomics, gender dimensions, and post-harvest and data-collection challenges in the sector;
34. Urges States and relevant international and national organizations to provide for the participation of smallscale fishery stakeholders in related policy development and fisheries management strategies in order to achieve longterm sustainability for such fisheries, consistent with the duty to ensure the proper conservation and management of
fisheries resources, and encourages States to consider promoting, as appropriate, participatory management schemes
for small-scale fisheries in accordance with national laws, regulations and practices, as well as the Voluntary
Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-scale Fisheries in the Context of Food Security and Poverty Eradication
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
35. Welcomes action taken by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and a number of
regional organizations to support the implementation of the Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Smallscale Fisheries in the Context of Food Security and Poverty Eradication through regional plans of action, dedicated
working groups and other initiatives;
36. Encourages States, either directly or through competent and appropriate subregional, regional or global
organizations and arrangements, to analyse, as appropriate, the impact of fishing for marine species corresponding to
low trophic levels;
37. Welcomes, in this regard, the initiation of further studies by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations of the impact of industrial fishing activities on species corresponding to low trophic levels;
38. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to assess and consider the potential
risk and effects of genetically engineered fish species on the health and sustainability of wild fish stocks and on the
biodiversity of the aquatic environment and to provide guidance, consistent with the Code, on managing risk and
minimizing harmful impacts in this regard;
75

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

39. Also invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in consultation with other
relevant international organizations, including the International Maritime Organization, to promote awareness and
cooperation to develop and strengthen capacity to prevent, minimize and mitigate the adverse impacts of invasive
alien species on biodiversity, including fish stocks;
40. Calls upon States to consider the potential environmental and socioeconomic impacts of anthropogenic
underwater noise from different activities in the marine environment and to address and mitigate such impacts, taking
into account the best available scientific information, the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches, as
appropriate;
II
Implementation of the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks
41. Welcomes the most recent accession to the Agreement, and calls upon all States, and entities referred to in
the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement, that have not done so to ratify or accede to the
Agreement and in the interim to consider applying it provisionally;
42. Calls upon States parties to the Agreement to effectively implement, as a matter of priority, the provisions
of the Agreement through their national legislation and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements in which they participate;
43. Emphasizes the importance of those provisions of the Agreement relating to bilateral, subregional and
regional cooperation in enforcement, and urges continued efforts in this regard;
44. Urges States parties to the Agreement, in accordance with article 21, paragraph 4, thereof, to inform, either
directly or through the relevant subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement, all States
whose vessels fish on the high seas in the same subregion or region of the form of identification issued by those States
parties to officials duly authorized to carry out boarding and inspection functions in accordance with articles 21 and 22
of the Agreement;
45. Also urges States parties to the Agreement, in accordance with article 21, paragraph 4, thereof, to designate
an appropriate authority to receive notifications pursuant to article 21 and to give due publicity to such designation
through the relevant subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement;
46. Invites regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements which have not yet done so to
adopt procedures for high seas boarding and inspection that are consistent with articles 21 and 22 of the Agreement,
including, inter alia, those to ensure the safety of the crew and the inspectors;
47. Calls upon States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements with competence over discrete high seas fish stocks, to adopt the
measures necessary to ensure the long-term conservation, management and sustainable use of such stocks in
accordance with the Convention and consistent with the Code and the general principles set forth in the
Agreement;
48. Invites States to assist developing States in enhancing their participation in regional fisheries management
organizations or arrangements, including by facilitating access to fisheries for straddling fish stocks and highly
migratory fish stocks, in accordance with article 25, paragraph 1 (b), of the Agreement, taking into account the need
to ensure that such access benefits the developing States concerned and their nationals;
49. Urges States parties to the Agreement, directly or through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, to take into account the special requirements of developing States, including small island
developing States as highlighted in the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, in giving effect
to the duty to cooperate in the establishment of conservation and management measures for straddling fish stocks and
highly migratory fish stocks, including the need to ensure, where appropriate, in accordance with article 24,
paragraph 2 (c), of the Agreement, that such measures do not transfer a disproportionate burden of conservation action
onto developing States, and notes in this regard ongoing efforts to better develop a common understanding of this
concept;
76

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

50. Calls upon States and international financial institutions and organizations of the United Nations system
to provide assistance according to Part VII of the Agreement, including, if appropriate, the development of special
financial mechanisms or instruments to assist developing States, in particular the least developed among them and
small island developing States, to enable them to develop their national capacity to exploit fisheries resources,
including developing their domestically flagged fishing fleet, value-added processing and the expansion of their
economic base in the fishing industry, consistent with the duty to ensure the proper conservation and management of
fisheries resources;
51. Urges States, intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions, national institutions and
non-governmental organizations, as well as natural and juridical persons, to make voluntary financial contributions to
the Assistance Fund established under Part VII of the Agreement;
52. Welcomes the adoption on 3 May 2019 of the revised terms of reference of the Assistance Fund established
under Part VII of the Agreement at the fourteenth round of informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement;
53. Encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat (the Division) to continue their efforts
to publicize the availability of assistance through the Assistance Fund;
54. Encourages accelerated progress by States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, regarding the recommendations of the Review
Conference on the Agreement, held in New York from 22 to 26 May 2006,122 and the identification of emerging
priorities;
55. Encourages States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, to consider implementing, as appropriate, the recommendations of the
resumed Review Conference held in New York from 24 to 28 May 2010123 and from 23 to 27 May 2016;124
56. Acknowledges, in particular, the commitments made at the resumed Review Conference held in 2016 to
the continued implementation of the Agreement through the application of the precautionary approach and ecosystem
approaches to fisheries management, the urgent improvement of the status of straddling fish stocks and highly
migratory fish stocks, strengthened interaction of the science-policy interface and the strong emphasis on
collaboration, at all levels, for improved global fisheries outcomes;
57. Recalls that the resumed Review Conference agreed to keep the Agreement under review through the
resumption of the Review Conference at a date not earlier than 2020, and notes the agreement at the fourteenth round
of informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement that the Review Conference should be resumed in 2021;
58. Requests the Secretary-General to resume the Review Conference, convened pursuant to article 36 of the
Agreement, in New York for one week in the first part of 2021, with a view to assessing the effectiveness of the
Agreement in securing the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks,
and to render the necessary assistance and provide such services as may be required for the resumption of the Review
Conference;
59. Encourages wide participation in the resumed Review Conference, in accordance with article 36 of the
Agreement;
60. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the resumed Review Conference an updated report, prepared
in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and with the assistance of an expert
consultant to be hired by the Division to provide information and analysis on relevant technical and scientific issues
to be covered in the report, to assist the Review Conference in discharging its mandate under article 36, paragraph 2,
of the Agreement, and in this regard also requests the Secretary-General to develop and circulate to States and to
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in a timely manner a voluntary questionnaire

_______________
See A/CONF.210/2006/15, annex.
See A/CONF.210/2010/7, annex.
124
See A/CONF.210/2016/5, annex.
122
123

77

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

regarding the recommendations made by the Review Conference in 2016, taking into account the specific guidance
to be proposed at the fifteenth round of informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement in 2020;
61. Recalls paragraph 6 of resolution 56/13 of 28 November 2001 and the recommendation of the resumed
Review Conference in 2016 that the informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement be dedicated, on an
annual basis, to the consideration of specific issues arising from the implementation of the Agreement, with a view to
improving understanding, sharing experiences and identifying best practices for the consideration of States parties, as
well as the General Assembly and the Review Conference;
62. Takes note of the report of the fourteenth round of informal consultations of States parties to the
Agreement, focusing on the topic “Performance reviews of regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements”;125
63. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the fifteenth round of informal consultations of States parties
to the Agreement for three days in May 2020: two days to focus on the topic “Implementation of an ecosystem
approach to fisheries management” and one day to serve as a preparatory meeting for the resumed Review
Conference;
64. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare a draft provisional agenda and draft organization of work
for the resumed Review Conference, taking into account contributions from States, and to circulate them at the same
time as the provisional agenda for the fifteenth round of informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement,
60 days in advance of those consultations;
65. Encourages greater participation, including by competent international organizations, at the forthcoming
fifteenth round of informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement;
66. Requests the Secretary-General to invite States parties to the Agreement and, as observers, States and
entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement not parties to the Agreement,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other relevant organizations, bodies, funds and
programmes within the United Nations system, the secretariats of relevant organizations and conventions and other
relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies, in particular subregional and regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements and related regional intergovernmental marine science organizations, and relevant
non-governmental organizations, in accordance with past practice, to attend the fifteenth round of informal
consultations of States parties to the Agreement, while relevant scientific institutions may request an invitation to
participate in the consultations as observers;
67. Also requests the Secretary-General to invite States parties to the Agreement, as well as States and entities
referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement not parties to the Agreement and
others invited to participate in the consultations as observers pursuant to paragraph 66 of the present resolution, to
submit their views on the topic “Implementation of an ecosystem approach to fisheries management”, together with
a translation into English, to the Division, and requests the Division to post such views, unedited and in the languages
in which they are received, on its website, in accordance with past practice;
68. Invites the chairperson of the informal consultations of States parties to the Agreement to circulate widely,
through the Secretariat, an informal summary of the discussions at the fifteenth round;
69. Reaffirms its request that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations initiate
arrangements with States for the collection and dissemination of data on fishing on the high seas by vessels flying
their flag at the subregional and regional levels where no such arrangements exist;
70. Also reaffirms its request that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations revise its global
fisheries statistics database to provide information on straddling fish stocks, highly migratory fish stocks and discrete
high seas fish stocks on the basis of where the catch is taken;

_______________
125

78

Available from the web page of the Agreement maintained by the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

71. Notes that the Committee on Fisheries, at its thirty-third session, emphasized, in the context of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the need to ensure comparability and consistency of reporting indicators at
global, regional and national levels, while minimizing the burden on its members;
72. Recognizes that the Review Conference is the competent intergovernmental forum for assessing the
effectiveness of the Agreement by reviewing its implementation;
III
Related fisheries instruments
73. Emphasizes the importance of the effective implementation of the provisions of the Compliance
Agreement,111 and urges continued efforts in this regard;
74. Calls upon all States and other entities referred to in article X, paragraph 1, of the Compliance Agreement
that have not yet become parties to that Agreement to do so as a matter of priority and, in the interim, to consider
applying it provisionally;
75. Urges States and subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
implement and promote the application of the Code within their areas of competence;
76. Urges States to develop and implement, as a matter of priority, national and, as appropriate, regional plans
of action to put into effect the international plans of action of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations;
77. Encourages States, in this regard, to maintain their commitment in reporting on their implementation of
the Code, reiterates the importance of responding to the web-based questionnaire of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for monitoring the implementation of the Code and the international plans of
action and strategies, and notes that the information collected could also be relevant to the implementation of related
targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
78. Also encourages States to consider signing, ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the Cape Town
Agreement of 2012 on the Implementation of the Provisions of the Torremolinos Protocol of 1993 relating to the
Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977;
79. Welcomes, in this regard, the holding of a Ministerial Conference on Fishing Vessel Safety and Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, organized by the International Maritime Organization and the Government of
Spain, in Torremolinos, Spain, from 21 to 23 October 2019, to promote the ratification of the Cape Town Agreement,
whose entry into force would mandate minimum safety measures for fishing vessels of 24 metres in length and over,
and together with the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing
Vessel Personnel, 1995, would create a more robust International Maritime Organization regulatory framework for
the safety of fishing vessels and fishing vessel personnel;
IV
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
80. Emphasizes once again its serious concern that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing remains one
of the greatest threats to fish stocks and marine ecosystems and continues to have serious and major implications for
the conservation and management of ocean resources, as well as the food security and the economies of many States,
particularly developing States, and renews its call upon States to comply fully with all existing obligations and to
combat such fishing and urgently to take all steps necessary to implement the International Plan of Action to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing;
81. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States acknowledged that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
deprive many countries of a crucial natural resource and remain a persistent threat to their sustainable development
and recommitted to eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing as advanced in the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, and to prevent and combat those practices, including by developing and implementing national and
regional action plans in accordance with the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, implementing, in accordance with international law, effective and coordinated
measures by coastal States, flag States, port States, chartering nations and the States of nationality of the beneficial
79

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

owners and others who support or engage in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing by identifying vessels engaged
in such fishing and by depriving offenders of the benefits accruing from it, as well as by cooperating with developing
countries to systematically identify needs and build capacity, including support for monitoring, control, surveillance,
compliance and enforcement systems;
82. Notes with satisfaction the development of an increasing number of national plans of action to prevent,
deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, and calls upon States that have not yet done so to
consider developing such plans;
83. Urges flag States to strengthen effective jurisdiction and control over vessels flying their flag, and to exercise
due diligence, including by developing or amending national rules and regulations, where needed, in order to ensure
that such vessels do not engage in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, while reaffirming the importance, under
international law, including as reflected in the Convention, of the responsibilities of flag States regarding fishing
vessels flying their flag, including with respect to safety at sea and labour conditions on fishing vessels;
84. Urges States to effectively exercise jurisdiction and control over their nationals, including beneficial
owners, and vessels flying their flag, in order to prevent and deter them from engaging in illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing activities or supporting vessels engaging in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities,
including those vessels listed by regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements as engaged in those
activities, and to facilitate mutual assistance to ensure that such actions can be investigated and proper sanctions
imposed;
85. Encourages States that have not yet done so to establish penalties for non‑compliance by vessels involved
in fishing or fishing-related activities and their nationals, as appropriate, in accordance with applicable national law
and consistent with international law, that are adequate in severity for effectively securing compliance, deterring
further violations and depriving offenders of the benefits from their illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
activities;
86. Urges States to take effective measures, at the national, subregional, regional and global levels, to deter
the activities, including illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, of any vessel which undermines conservation and
management measures that have been adopted by subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements in accordance with international law;
87. Calls upon States not to permit vessels flying their flag to engage in fishing on the high seas or in areas
under the national jurisdiction of other States, unless duly authorized by the authorities of the States concerned and in
accordance with the conditions set out in the authorization, and to take specific measures, including deterring the
reflagging of vessels by their nationals, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention, the Agreement
and the Compliance Agreement, to control fishing operations by vessels flying their flag;
88. Urges States, individually and collectively through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to develop appropriate processes to assess the performance of States with respect to implementing the
obligations regarding fishing vessels flying their flag set out in relevant international instruments;
89. Reaffirms the need to strengthen, where necessary, the international legal framework for intergovernmental
cooperation, in particular at the subregional and regional levels, in the management of fish stocks and in combating
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, in a manner consistent with international law, and for States and entities
referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement to collaborate in efforts to address
these types of fishing activities;
90. Urges regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to further coordinate measures for
combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, such as through the development of a common list
of vessels identified as engaged in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing or the mutual recognition of the illegal,
unreported and unregulated vessel lists established by each organization or arrangement;
91. Reaffirms its call upon States to take all necessary measures consistent with international law, without
prejudice to a State’s sovereignty over ports in its territory and to reasons of force majeure or distress, including the
prohibition of vessels from accessing their ports followed by a report to the flag State concerned, when there is clear
evidence that they are or have been engaged in or have supported illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, or when
they refuse to give information either on the origin of the catch or on the authorization under which the catch has been
made;
80

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

92. Reaffirms paragraph 53 of its resolution 64/72 of 4 December 2009 with regard to eliminating illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing by vessels flying “flags of convenience” and requiring that a “genuine link” be
established between States and fishing vessels flying their flags, and urges States operating open registry to effectively
control all fishing vessels flying their flag, as required by international law, or otherwise stop open registry for fishing
vessels;
93. Notes the challenges posed by vessels determined under international law to be without nationality that
are fishing, including conducting fishing-related activities, on the high seas and that such vessels operate without
governance and oversight, undermine relevant legal frameworks and are engaging in illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing activities as defined in the International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and encourages
States to take necessary measures where appropriate, consistent with international law, in order to prevent and deter
vessels without nationality from engaging in or supporting illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, such as
enacting domestic legislation, including on enforcement, sharing information and prohibiting the landing and
preventing trans-shipment, at sea or in port, of fish and fish products by such vessels;
94. Encourages States, either directly or through competent and appropriate subregional, regional or global
organizations and arrangements, to consider adopting rules, consistent with international law, to ensure that chartering
arrangements and practices related to fishing vessels enable compliance with and enforcement of relevant
conservation and management measures, so as not to undermine efforts to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing;
95. Recognizes the need for enhanced port State measures to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, and urges States to cooperate, in particular at the regional level and through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, to adopt all necessary port measures, consistent with international law
taking into account article 23 of the Agreement, and to further promote the development and application of standards
at the regional level;
96. Welcomes the recent ratifications of and accessions to the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent,
Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing,112 and encourages States and regional economic
integration organizations that have not yet done so to consider ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to that
Agreement, noting the importance of major port States becoming parties at their earliest convenience;
97. Acknowledges, in this regard, the convening of the second meeting of the parties to the Agreement on Port
State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, in Santiago from
3 to 6 June 2019, which, inter alia, considered the status of that Agreement and developments in its implementation;
98. Notes that, in accordance with article 24 of the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and
Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, the first review and assessment of the effectiveness of that
Agreement in achieving its objective will take place in the context of the third meeting of the parties, to be hosted by
the European Union in Brussels from 30 November to 4 December 2020, and encourages the parties to support the
review process, including by responding to the questionnaire that will be circulated by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for this purpose in June 2020;
99. Also notes the ongoing capacity development programme of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations aimed at facilitating and supporting the implementation of the Agreement on Port State Measures to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing and related instruments, which contributes
to the development of national capacity of both parties and non-parties, including the strengthening of the institutional,
operational and enforcement capacity of developing States with a view to maximizing the benefits of its
implementation, and further notes the contribution of regional workshops to this end;
100. Recognizes the ongoing collaboration between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the International Maritime Organization, as well as the International Labour Organization, through the
Joint FAO/ILO/IMO Ad Hoc Working Group on Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing and Related Matters
with regard to, inter alia, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, maritime safety and decent labour conditions in
the fisheries sector, as reflected in the outcomes of the fourth session of the Ad Hoc Working Group, held in
Torremolinos from 23 to 25 October 2019, and encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the International Labour Organization and the International Maritime Organization to strengthen this
collaboration and update its terms of reference;
81

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

101. Encourages States, with respect to vessels flying their flag, and port States, to make every effort to share
data on landings and catch quotas, and in this regard encourages regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements to consider developing open databases containing such data for the purpose of enhancing the
effectiveness of fisheries management;
102. Takes note that the Committee on Fisheries, at its thirty-third session, expressed support for the work of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in continuing to develop technical guidelines for the
estimation of the magnitude and geographic extent of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, noting the value of
these guidelines for the production of consistent and reliable estimates, determining national, regional, global trends,
and measuring the impact of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
103. Calls upon States to take all measures necessary to ensure that vessels flying their flag do not engage in
the trans-shipment of fish caught by fishing vessels engaged in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, through
adequate regulation, monitoring and control of trans-shipment of fish at sea, including through additional national
measures applicable to vessels flying their flag to prevent such trans‑shipment;
104. Urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
adopt and implement internationally agreed market-related measures in accordance with international law, including
principles, rights and obligations established in World Trade Organization agreements, as called for in the International
Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing;
105. Encourages work to increase awareness of the Voluntary Guidelines for Catch Documentation
Schemes,126 and encourages States and relevant stakeholders to implement these Guidelines when developing catch
documentation schemes and to use them as a reference in related activities, with special attention to the prevention,
deterrence and elimination of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
106. Also encourages information-sharing regarding emerging market- and trade-related measures by States
and other relevant actors with appropriate international forums, given the potential implications of these measures for
all States, consistent with the established plan of work of the Committee on Fisheries, and taking into account the
Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fish Trade of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
107. Acknowledges the development of participatory surveillance activities at sea involving fishing
communities in West Africa as a cost-effective way of detecting illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
108. Notes the concern expressed by the Committee on Fisheries at the proliferation of private standards and
ecolabelling schemes potentially leading to the creation of trade barriers and restrictions, and also notes the work by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to develop an evaluation framework to assess the
conformity of public and private ecolabelling schemes through the Guidelines for the Ecolabelling of Fish and Fishery
Products from Marine Capture Fisheries;
109. Also notes the concerns about possible connections between transnational organized crime and illegal
fishing in certain regions of the world, and encourages States, including through the appropriate international forums
and organizations, to study the causes and methods of and contributing factors to illegal fishing to increase knowledge
and understanding of those possible connections, and to make the findings publicly available, and in this regard takes
note of the study issued by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on transnational organized crime in the
fishing industry, bearing in mind the distinct legal regimes and remedies under international law applicable to illegal
fishing and transnational organized crime;
V
Monitoring, control and surveillance and compliance and enforcement
110. Calls upon States, in accordance with international law, to strengthen the implementation of or, where they
do not exist, adopt comprehensive monitoring, control and surveillance measures and compliance and enforcement
schemes individually and within those regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements in which they
participate, in order to provide an appropriate framework for promoting compliance with agreed conservation and

_______________
126

82

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C/2017/REP, appendix C.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

management measures, and further urges enhanced coordination among all relevant States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in these efforts;
111. Welcomes the fact that the Committee on Fisheries has urged its members to start implementing the
Voluntary Guidelines for Flag State Performance127 as soon as possible, and urges all flag States to implement those
Guidelines as soon as possible, including, as a first step, by carrying out a voluntary assessment;
112. Encourages further work by competent international organizations, including subregional and regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to develop guidelines on flag State control of fishing vessels;
113. Urges States, individually and through relevant regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to establish mandatory vessel monitoring, control and surveillance systems, in particular to require
that vessel monitoring systems be carried by all vessels fishing on the high seas as soon as practicable, recalling
that, in paragraph 62 of resolution 63/112 of 5 December 2008, it urged that large-scale fishing vessels be required
to carry vessel monitoring systems no later than December 2008, and to share information on fisheries enforcement
matters;
114. Calls upon States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements,
to strengthen or establish, consistent with national and international law, positive or negative lists of vessels fishing
within the areas covered by relevant regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in order to
promote compliance with conservation and management measures and to identify products from illegal, unreported
and unregulated catches, and encourages improved coordination among all States and regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements in sharing and using this information, taking into account the forms of cooperation
with developing States as set out in article 25 of the Agreement;
115. Encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in cooperation with States,
regional economic integration organizations, the International Maritime Organization and, as appropriate, regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to expedite efforts to develop and manage a comprehensive
global record of fishing vessels, refrigerated transport vessels and supply vessels, including with a unique vessel
identifier system, using, as a first step, the International Maritime Organization Ship Identification Number Scheme
for fishing vessels of 100 gross tonnage and above, adopted by the Assembly of the International Maritime
Organization in its resolution A.1078(28) of 4 December 2013;
116. Welcomes the continued development of the Global Record of Fishing Vessels, Refrigerated Transport
Vessels and Supply Vessels by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, including its efforts to
keep it cost-effective, and encourages States, including through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to provide the necessary data and regular updates to the Global Record;
117. Encourages, in this regard, States to use all available vessel data, including from the Global Integrated
Shipping Information System platform, when providing their vessel data to the Global Record;
118. Welcomes the decision by the International Maritime Organization, in resolution A.1117(30) of
6 December 2017, to extend, beyond the first phase of the Global Record, the International Maritime Organization
Ship Identification Number Scheme to fishing vessels of steel and non-steel hull construction and to all motorized
inboard fishing vessels of less than 100 gross tonnage down to a size limit of 12 metres in length overall authorized
to operate outside waters under the national jurisdiction of the flag State, and welcomes the fact that several regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements have made provisions for the International Maritime
Organization number to be compulsory in their convention areas for all eligible vessels, and encourages those regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements which have not yet done so to do the same;
119. Requests States and relevant international bodies to develop, in accordance with international law, more
effective measures to trace fish and fishery products to enable importing States to identify fish or fishery products
caught in a manner that undermines international conservation and management measures agreed in accordance with
international law, taking into account the special requirements of developing States and the forms of cooperation with
developing States as set out in article 25 of the Agreement, and at the same time to recognize the importance of market

_______________
127

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document COFI/2014/4.2/Rev.1, appendix II.

83

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

access, in accordance with provisions 11.2.4, 11.2.5 and 11.2.6 of the Code, for fish and fishery products caught in a
manner that is in conformity with such international measures;
120. Requests States to take the necessary measures, consistent with international law, to help to prevent fish
and fishery products caught in a manner that undermines applicable conservation and management measures adopted
in accordance with international law from entering international trade;
121. Encourages States to establish and undertake cooperative surveillance and enforcement activities in
accordance with international law to strengthen and enhance efforts to ensure compliance with conservation and
management measures, and prevent and deter illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing;
122. Urges States, directly and through regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, to
develop and adopt effective monitoring, control and surveillance measures for trans-shipment, as appropriate, in
particular at-sea trans‑shipment, including on the high seas, in order to, inter alia, monitor compliance, to collect and
verify fisheries data, and to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, in
accordance with international law and, in parallel, to encourage and support the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations in studying the current practices of trans-shipment and produce a set of guidelines for this
purpose;
123. Takes note, in this regard, that the Committee on Fisheries, at its thirty-third session, welcomed the Global
Study on Trans-shipment by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and called for in-depth
studies to support the development of guidelines on best practices for regulating, monitoring and controlling transshipment;
124. Expresses its appreciation for financial contributions from States to improve the capacity of the existing
voluntary International Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Network for Fisheries-related Activities, and
encourages States to join and actively participate in the Network and to consider supporting, when appropriate, its
transformation in accordance with international law into an international unit with dedicated resources to further assist
Network members, taking into account the forms of cooperation with developing States as set out in article 25 of the
Agreement;
VI
Fishing overcapacity
125. Calls upon States to commit themselves to urgently reducing the capacity of the world’s fishing fleets to
levels commensurate with the sustainability of fish stocks, through the establishment of target levels and plans or other
appropriate mechanisms for ongoing capacity assessment, while avoiding the transfer of fishing capacity to other
fisheries or areas in a manner that undermines the sustainable management of fish stocks, including those areas where
fish stocks are overexploited or in a depleted condition, and recognizing in this context the legitimate rights of
developing States to develop their fisheries for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks consistent with
article 25 of the Agreement, article 5 of the Code and paragraph 10 of the International Plan of Action for the
Management of Fishing Capacity of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
126. Calls upon, in this regard, States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to develop and implement a range of measures to adjust fishing intensity, including fishing capacity
where relevant, to levels commensurate with the sustainability of fish stocks, and including capacity assessment and
capacity management plans providing incentives for voluntary reduction, which take into account all aspects that
contribute to fishing capacity, considering, inter alia, engine power, fishing gear technology, fish detection technology
and storage space, and also to improve transparency on fishing capacity, including by identifying, sharing and
publicizing relevant information in this regard, subject to confidentiality requirements;
127. Reiterates its call upon States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to ensure that the urgent actions required in the International Plan of Action for the Management of
Fishing Capacity are undertaken expeditiously and that its implementation is facilitated without delay;
128. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to report on the state of progress in
the implementation of the International Plan of Action for the Management of Fishing Capacity, as provided for in
paragraph 48 of the Plan of Action;

84

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

129. Calls upon States, individually and, as appropriate, through subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements with competence to regulate highly migratory species, urgently to
address global fishing capacity for tunas, inter alia, in a way that recognizes the legitimate rights of developing States,
in particular small island developing States, to participate in and benefit from such fisheries, taking into account the
recommendations of the 2010 Joint Tuna Regional Fisheries Management Organizations International Workshop on
RFMO Management of Tuna Fisheries, held in Brisbane, Australia, and the recommendations of the 2011 third joint
meeting of tuna regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
130. Encourages those States which are cooperating to establish subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, taking into account the best scientific information available as well as
ecosystem approaches and the precautionary approach, to exercise voluntary restraint of fishing effort levels in those
areas that will come under the regulation of the future organizations and arrangements until adequate regional
conservation and management measures are adopted and implemented, taking into account the need to ensure the
long-term conservation, management and sustainable use of the relevant fish stocks and to prevent significant adverse
impacts on vulnerable marine ecosystems;
131. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States reaffirmed their commitment in the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation to eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and overcapacity,
taking into account the importance of that sector to developing countries, reiterated their commitment to conclude
multilateral disciplines on fisheries subsidies that would give effect to the mandates of the World Trade Organization
Doha Development Agenda128 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to strengthen disciplines on subsidies in
the fisheries sector, including through the prohibition of certain forms of fisheries subsidies that contribute to
overcapacity and overfishing, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and differential treatment for
developing and least developed countries should be an integral part of World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies
negotiation, taking into account the importance of the sector to development priorities, poverty reduction and
livelihood and food security concerns, and encouraged one another to further improve the transparency and reporting
of existing fisheries subsidies programmes through the World Trade Organization and, given the state of fisheries
resources, and without prejudicing the Doha and Hong Kong ministerial mandates on fisheries subsidies or the need
to conclude those negotiations, to eliminate subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing and to refrain
from introducing new such subsidies or from extending or enhancing existing ones;
132. Urges States to eliminate fisheries subsidies that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity and to illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, including through accelerating work to complete negotiations on fisheries
subsidies at the World Trade Organization, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and differential treatment
for developing and least developed countries should be an integral part of the World Trade Organization negotiations
on fisheries subsidies;
VII
Large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing
133. Expresses concern that, despite the adoption of General Assembly resolution 46/215, the practice of largescale pelagic drift-net fishing still exists and remains a threat to living marine resources;
134. Urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
adopt effective measures, or strengthen existing measures, to implement and enforce the provisions of resolution
46/215 and subsequent resolutions on large-scale pelagic drift-net fishing in order to eliminate the use of large-scale
pelagic drift nets in all seas and oceans, which means that efforts to implement resolution 46/215 should not result in
the transfer to other parts of the world of drift nets that contravene the resolution;
135. Also urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to adopt effective measures, or strengthen existing measures, to implement and enforce the present
global moratorium on the use of large-scale pelagic drift nets on the high seas, and calls upon States to ensure that
vessels flying their flag that are duly authorized to use large-scale drift nets in waters under their national jurisdiction
do not use such gear for fishing while on the high seas;

_______________
128

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.

85

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

VIII
Fisheries by-catch and discards
136. Urges States, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and other
relevant international organizations that have not done so to take action, including with consideration of the interests
of developing coastal States and, as appropriate, subsistence fishing communities, to minimize by-catch, as well as to
reduce or eliminate catch by lost or abandoned gear, fish discards and post-harvest losses, including of juvenile fish,
consistent with international law and relevant international instruments, including the Code, and in particular to
consider measures including, as appropriate, technical measures related to fish size, mesh size or gear, discards, closed
seasons and areas and zones reserved for selected fisheries, particularly artisanal fisheries, the establishment of
mechanisms for communicating information on areas of high concentration of juvenile fish, taking into account the
importance of ensuring the confidentiality of such information, and support for studies and research that will minimize
by-catch of juvenile fish, and to ensure that these measures are implemented so as to optimize their effectiveness;
137. Encourages, in this regard, States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, as appropriate, to ensure proper implementation and enforcement of the measures that they have
taken with regard to by-catch and discards;
138. Welcomes the commitment of States in “The future we want” to enhance action to manage by-catch,
discards and other adverse ecosystem impacts from fisheries, including by eliminating destructive fishing practices,
consistent with international law, the applicable international instruments and relevant General Assembly resolutions
and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
139. Calls upon States, either individually, collectively or through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, to further study, develop and adopt effective management measures, taking into account the best
available scientific information on fishing methods, including fish aggregating devices, to minimize by-catch;
140. Also calls upon States, either individually, collectively or through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, to collect the necessary data in order to evaluate and closely monitor the use of largescale fish aggregating devices and other devices, as appropriate, and their effects on tuna resources and tuna behaviour
and associated and dependent species, to improve management procedures to monitor the number, type and use of
such devices and to mitigate possible negative effects on the ecosystem, including on juveniles and the incidental
by-catch of non‑target species, particularly sharks and turtles, notes in this regard the measures adopted by different
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, and encourages regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to continue to work on data collection, evaluation and monitoring of such devices;
141. Notes, in this regard, that some regional fisheries management organizations, including the Inter-American
Tropical Tuna Commission, the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, the Indian Ocean
Tuna Commission and the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, have established their own working
groups to assess the use and impact of large-scale fish aggregating devices;
142. Encourages States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to promote, as appropriate, the use of environmentally friendly fish aggregating devices, while ensuring
compliance with measures that they have taken relating to such devices;
143. Urgently calls upon States, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements and, where appropriate, other relevant international organizations to develop and implement effective
management measures to reduce the incidence of catch and discards of non-target species, including the utilization of
selective fishing gear, where appropriate, and to take appropriate measures to minimize waste, and welcomes in this
regard the support of the Committee on Fisheries for the development of a technical guideline of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations addressing the causes of and remedies to food losses and waste;
144. Calls upon States and subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
adopt or improve measures to assess the impact of their fisheries on species caught as by-catch and to improve the
comprehensiveness and accuracy of information and reporting on incidental catch of species caught as by-catch,
including through adequate observer coverage and the use of modern technologies, such as electronic monitoring, and
to provide assistance to developing States to meet data-collection and reporting obligations;

86

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

145. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, as appropriate, to
strengthen or establish data-collection programmes to obtain reliable species-specific estimates of shark, marine turtle,
fin-fish, marine mammal and seabird by-catch, and to promote further research on selective fishing gear and practices
and on the use of appropriate by-catch mitigation measures;
146. Encourages States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to coordinate in
the development and implementation of clear and standardized by-catch data-collection and reporting protocols for
non-target species, in particular endangered, threatened and protected species, taking into account best-practice advice
from appropriate international organizations and arrangements, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels;129
147. Encourages States and entities referred to in the Convention and in article 1, paragraph 2 (b), of the
Agreement to give due consideration to participation, as appropriate, in subregional and regional instruments and
organizations with mandates to conserve non-target species taken incidentally in fishing operations;
148. Encourages States to strengthen, if necessary, the capacity of those subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in which they participate to ensure the adequate conservation of
non-target species taken incidentally in fishing operations, taking into consideration best practices for non‑target
species management, and to expedite their ongoing efforts in this regard;
149. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements urgently to
implement, as appropriate, the measures recommended in the 2004 Guidelines to Reduce Sea Turtle Mortality in
Fishing Operations and the International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline
Fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in order to prevent the decline of sea turtles
and seabird populations by minimizing by-catch and increasing post-release survival in their fisheries, including
through research and development of gear and bait alternatives, promoting the use of available by-catch mitigation
technology, and establishing and strengthening data-collection programmes to obtain standardized information to
develop reliable estimates of the by-catch of these species;
150. Urges States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
implement the International Guidelines on Bycatch Management and Reduction of Discards of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;130
151. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to continue to take
urgent action to reduce the by-catch of seabirds, including albatrosses and petrels, in fisheries by adopting and
implementing conservation measures consistent with the 2009 best practices technical guidelines of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to support the implementation of the International Plan of Action for
Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries and taking into account the work of the Agreement on
the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels and of organizations such as the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources;
IX
Subregional and regional cooperation
152. Urges coastal States and States fishing on the high seas, in accordance with the Convention, the Agreement
and other relevant instruments, to pursue cooperation in relation to straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish
stocks, either directly or through appropriate subregional or regional fisheries management organizations or
arrangements, to ensure the effective conservation and management of such stocks;
153. Urges States fishing for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks on the high seas, and
relevant coastal States, where a subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement has the
competence to establish conservation and management measures for such stocks, to give effect to their duty to
cooperate by becoming members of such an organization or participants in such an arrangement, or by agreeing to
apply the conservation and management measures established by such an organization or arrangement, or to otherwise

_______________
129
130

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2258, No. 40228.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document FIRO/R957 (En), appendix E.

87

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

ensure that no vessel flying their flag is authorized to access the fisheries resources to which regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements or conservation and management measures established by such
organizations or arrangements apply;
154. Invites, in this regard, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to
ensure that all States having a real interest in the fisheries concerned may become members of such organizations or
participants in such arrangements, in accordance with the Convention, the Agreement and the Code, provided they
have shown their interest in and capacity to comply with the measures adopted by the regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements concerned, including their willingness to effectively exercise flag State control, while
recognizing the need to enhance the capacity of developing States in this regard;
155. Encourages relevant coastal States and States fishing on the high seas for a straddling fish stock or a highly
migratory fish stock, where there is no subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement to
establish conservation and management measures for such stocks, to cooperate to establish such an organization or
enter into another appropriate arrangement to ensure the conservation and management of such stocks, and to
participate in the work of the organization or arrangement;
156. Welcomes the recent ratifications, acceptances and approval of the Agreement to Prevent Unregulated
High Seas Fisheries in the Central Arctic Ocean, and encourages further ratifications, acceptances and approvals of
that Agreement by States listed in article 9, paragraph 1, thereof, with a view to its early entry into force;
157. Urges signatory States and other States whose vessels fish within the area of the Convention on the
Conservation and Management of Fishery Resources in the South-East Atlantic Ocean131 for fishery resources
covered by that Convention to become parties to that Convention as a matter of priority and, in the interim, to ensure
that vessels flying their flags fully comply with the measures adopted;
158. Encourages further ratifications of, accessions to, acceptances and approvals of the Southern Indian Ocean
Fisheries Agreement;132
159. Also encourages further ratifications of, accessions to, acceptances and approvals of the Convention on
the Conservation and Management of High Seas Fishery Resources in the South Pacific Ocean;133
160. Further encourages further accessions to the Convention on the Conservation and Management of High
Seas Fisheries Resources in the North Pacific Ocean, and notes the ongoing efforts by the North Pacific Fisheries
Commission to develop and implement conservation and management measures and to strengthen cooperation to
eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing within the area of that Convention;
161. Welcomes the endorsement of the Agreement for the Establishment of the General Fisheries Commission
for the Mediterranean, as amended, by the Commission at its thirty-eighth session, held in Rome from 19 to 24 May
2014, and urges those Contracting Parties to the Commission that need to accept the amended Agreement to do so
with a view to its early entry into force;
162. Notes the ongoing efforts of the members of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission to strengthen the
functioning of the Commission so that it can more effectively discharge its mandate, and invites the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to provide members of the Commission with the necessary assistance
to this end;
163. Encourages signatory States and States having a real interest to become parties to the Convention for the
Strengthening of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission Established by the 1949 Convention between the
United States of America and the Republic of Costa Rica;
164. Urges further efforts by regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, as a matter of
priority, in accordance with international law, to strengthen and modernize their mandates and the measures adopted
by such organizations or arrangements, and to implement modern approaches to fisheries management, as reflected

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2221, No. 39489.
Ibid., vol. 2835, No. 49647.
133
Ibid., vol. 2899, No. 50553.
131
132

88

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

in the Agreement and other relevant international instruments, relying on the best scientific information available and
application of the precautionary approach and incorporating an ecosystem approach to fisheries management and
biodiversity considerations, including the conservation and management of ecologically related and dependent
species and protection of their habitats, where these aspects are lacking, to ensure that they effectively contribute to
the long-term conservation and management and sustainable use of living marine resources, and welcomes those
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements that have taken steps in this direction;
165. Calls upon regional fisheries management organizations with the competence to conserve and manage
highly migratory fish stocks that have not yet adopted effective conservation and management measures in line with
the best scientific information available to conserve and manage stocks falling under their mandate to do so urgently;
166. Urges States to strengthen and enhance cooperation among existing and developing regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in which they participate, including increased communication and
further coordination of measures, such as through the holding of joint consultations, and to strengthen integration,
coordination and cooperation by such regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with other
relevant fisheries organizations, regional seas arrangements and other relevant international organizations;
167. Notes, in this regard, the enhanced cooperation between the OSPAR Commission established by the
Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic134 and the North-East Atlantic
Fisheries Commission;
168. Urges the five regional fisheries management organizations with competence to manage highly migratory
species to continue to take measures to implement the Course of Actions adopted at the second joint meeting of tuna
regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and to consider the recommendations of the third joint
meeting of tuna regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
169. Invites States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with competence to
manage straddling fish stocks to share experiences and good practices, for example by considering organizing joint
meetings, where appropriate;
170. Invites States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with competence to
manage deep-sea fisheries to share experiences and good practices, for example by considering organizing joint
meetings, where appropriate;
171. Urges regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to improve transparency and to
ensure that their decision-making processes are fair and transparent and facilitate the adoption of conservation and
management measures in a timely and effective manner, including considering provisions for effective voting and
objection procedures, where appropriate, to rely on the best scientific information available, incorporate the
precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches, and address participatory rights, including through, inter alia, the
development of transparent criteria for allocating fishing opportunities which reflects, where appropriate, the relevant
provisions of the Agreement, taking due account, inter alia, of the status of the relevant stocks and the respective
interests in the fishery;
172. Recognizes that performance reviews of regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements
have proven to be an effective tool for strengthening the performance of such organizations and arrangements, and
are critical to improve the sustainability of fish stocks covered by such organizations and arrangements;
173. Welcomes the fact that a number of regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements have
completed performance reviews, and encourages the implementation, as appropriate, of the recommendations of their
respective reviews as a matter of priority;
174. Urges States, through their participation in regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements
that have not done so, to undertake, on an urgent basis, performance reviews of those regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, initiated either by the organization or arrangement itself or with external partners,
including in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, using transparent criteria
based on the provisions of the Agreement and other relevant instruments, and taking into account the best practices of

_______________
134

Ibid., vol. 2354, No. 42279.

89

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements and, as appropriate, any set of criteria developed by
States or other regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, and encourages that such performance
reviews include some element of independent evaluation and propose means for improving the functioning of the
regional fisheries management organization or arrangement, as appropriate;
175. Calls upon States, through their participation in regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to undertake performance reviews of those regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements on a regular basis, to make the results publicly available, to implement the recommendations of such
reviews and to strengthen the comprehensiveness of those reviews over time, as necessary;
176. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States recognized the need for transparency and accountability in
fisheries management by regional fisheries management organizations and the efforts already made by those regional
fisheries management organizations that had undertaken independent performance reviews, called upon all regional
fisheries management organizations to regularly undertake such reviews and make the results publicly available,
encouraged implementation of the recommendations of such reviews and recommended that the comprehensiveness
of those reviews be strengthened over time, as necessary;
177. Urges States to cooperate, taking into account those performance reviews, to develop best-practice
guidelines for regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and to apply, to the extent possible,
those guidelines to organizations and arrangements in which they participate;
178. Encourages States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, as appropriate, to recognize the importance and role of small-scale, artisanal and subsistence fisheries
and to support their long-term environmental, economic and social sustainability;
179. Encourages the development of regional guidelines for States to use in establishing sanctions for
non-compliance by vessels flying their flag and by their nationals, to be applied in accordance with national law, that
are adequate in severity for effectively securing compliance, deterring further violations and depriving offenders of
the benefits deriving from their illegal activities, as well as in evaluating their systems of sanctions to ensure that they
are effective in securing compliance and deterring violations;
180. Recognizes the importance of ensuring transparency of reporting of fishing activities within regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements in order to facilitate efforts to combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, as well as the importance of respecting the reporting obligations within those organizations and
arrangements, notes in this regard the measures adopted by the International Commission for the Conservation of
Atlantic Tunas135 and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission,136 and encourages other regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to consider establishing similar measures;
X
Responsible fisheries in the marine ecosystem
181. Encourages States, individually and through relevant international bodies, to improve the understanding
of the causes and impacts of forced labour and human trafficking in the fishing and aquaculture industries, including
processing and related industries, and to further consider actions to combat these practices, including raising
awareness of the issue;
182. Highlights the importance of safety at sea and working conditions in the fisheries sector, welcomes in this
regard the close cooperation between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International
Labour Organization and the International Maritime Organization, including with regard to their joint work on codes
and guidelines in relation to fishing vessel safety,137 and reiterates the request by the Committee on Fisheries of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, at its thirty-third session, that the Food and Agriculture

_______________
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, recommendation 11–16.
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, resolutions 12/07 and 13/07.
137
Including the Code of Safety for Fishermen and Fishing Vessels, 2005, and the Voluntary Guidelines for the Design, Construction and
Equipment of Small Fishing Vessels, 2005.
135
136

90

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Organization of the United Nations further strengthen international cooperation on occupational health and safety
issues in the fisheries and aquaculture sectors and promote decent work for fish workers;
183. Recalls that the Work in Fishing Convention, 2007 (No. 188) and the Protocol of 2014 to the Forced
Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) are relevant instruments that ensure decent working conditions in fisheries and
other maritime sectors, calls upon flag States to effectively implement their duty under the Convention with respect
to labour conditions, taking into account applicable international instruments and national laws, and in this regard
encourages States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Protocol of 2014 to the Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No. 29) and the Work in Fishing Convention, 2007 (No. 188), and to implement the Guidelines
for port State control officers carrying out inspections under the Work in Fishing Convention, 2007 (No. 188) and the
Guidelines on flag State inspection of working and living conditions on board fishing vessels;
184. Urges States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
enhance their efforts to apply an ecosystem approach to fisheries, taking into account paragraph 30 (d) of the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
185. Acknowledges the importance of adequate training for fishers to improve safety at sea and the importance,
in this regard, of the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing
Vessel Personnel, 1995, and encourages States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to that
Convention;
186. Encourages States, individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements
and other relevant international organizations, to work to ensure that fisheries and other ecosystem data collection is
performed in a coordinated and integrated manner, facilitating incorporation into global observation initiatives, where
appropriate;
187. Calls upon States and regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, working in
cooperation with other relevant organizations, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the World Meteorological Organization, to adopt, as
appropriate, measures to protect ocean data buoy systems moored in areas beyond national jurisdiction from actions
that impair their operation;
188. Encourages States to increase scientific research on marine ecosystems in accordance with international law;
189. Recognizes that the science-policy interface is vital to the effective implementation of the provisions of
the Convention and the Agreement by providing the best available scientific information for the conservation and
management of living marine resources;
190. Urges States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
strengthen the science-policy interface in order to further improve the application of the ecosystem approach to
fisheries management and to address uncertainties and changes such as those related to the impacts of climate change
in support of the development of adaptive fisheries management strategies;
191. Calls upon States, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other specialized
agencies, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, where appropriate, and
other appropriate intergovernmental bodies to cooperate in achieving sustainable aquaculture, including through
information exchange, developing equivalent standards on such issues as aquatic animal health and human health and
safety concerns, assessing the potential positive and negative impacts of aquaculture, including socioeconomics, on
the marine and coastal environment, including biodiversity, and adopting relevant methods and techniques to
minimize and mitigate adverse effects, and in this regard encourages the implementation of the 2007 Strategy and
Outline Plan for Improving Information on Status and Trends of Aquaculture of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations as a framework for the improvement and understanding of aquaculture status and
trends;
192. Calls upon States to take action immediately, individually and through regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements, and consistent with the precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches, to
continue to implement the 2008 International Guidelines for the Management of Deep-Sea Fisheries in the High Seas
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (the Guidelines) in order to sustainably manage fish
stocks and protect vulnerable marine ecosystems, including seamounts, hydrothermal vents and cold water corals,
91

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

from fishing practices with significant adverse impacts on vulnerable marine ecosystems, recognizing the immense
importance and value of deep-sea ecosystems and the biodiversity they contain, as documented in the first World
Ocean Assessment;
193. Recalls, in this regard, that, in “The future we want”, States committed to enhance actions to protect
vulnerable marine ecosystems from significant adverse impacts, including through the effective use of impact
assessments, consistent with international law, the applicable international instruments and relevant General Assembly
resolutions and guidelines of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
194. Reaffirms the importance of paragraphs 80 to 90 of resolution 61/105, paragraphs 113 to 127 of resolution
64/72, paragraphs 121 to 136 of resolution 66/68 of 6 December 2011 and paragraphs 156, 171 to 188 and 219 of
resolution 71/123 of 7 December 2016 addressing the impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems
and the long-term sustainability of deep-sea fish stocks and the actions called for in those resolutions, and emphasizes
the need for full implementation by all States and relevant regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements of their commitments under those paragraphs on an urgent basis;
195. Urges States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to ensure that their
actions in sustainably managing deep-sea fisheries and implementing paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of resolution 61/105,
paragraphs 113 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72, paragraphs 121, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of resolution 66/68 and
paragraphs 156, 171 to 188 and 219 of resolution 71/123 are consistent with the Guidelines;
196. Recalls that nothing in the paragraphs of resolutions 61/105, 64/72, 66/68 and 71/123 addressing the
impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems prejudices the sovereign rights of coastal States over their
continental shelf or the exercise of the jurisdiction of coastal States with respect to their continental shelf under
international law as reflected in the Convention, in particular article 77 thereof;
197. Notes, in this regard, the adoption by coastal States of conservation measures regarding their continental
shelf to address the impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems, as well as their efforts to ensure
compliance with those measures;
198. Reiterates the importance of marine scientific research for the sustainable management of deep-sea fishery
resources, including target fish stocks and non-target species, and to protect marine ecosystems, including the
prevention of significant adverse impacts on vulnerable marine ecosystems;
199. Welcomes the important progress made by States, regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements and those States participating in negotiations to establish a regional fisheries management organization or
arrangement competent to regulate bottom fisheries to implement paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of resolution 61/105,
paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72 and paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of resolution
66/68 and address the impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine ecosystems, but notes with concern the uneven
implementation of those paragraphs and that, in particular, bottom fishing continues to occur in certain areas beyond
national jurisdiction without an impact assessment having been completed in the 12 years since the adoption of resolution
61/105, in which the General Assembly called for such assessments to be undertaken by 31 December 2008;
200. Calls upon, in this regard, States, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with the
competence to regulate deep-sea fisheries, and States participating in negotiations to establish such organizations or
arrangements to take, in particular, the following urgent actions regarding bottom fishing in areas beyond national
jurisdiction:
(a) To use, as applicable, the full set of criteria in the Guidelines to identify where vulnerable marine
ecosystems occur or are likely to occur as well as for assessing significant adverse impacts;
(b) To ensure that impact assessments, including for cumulative impacts of activities covered by the
assessment, are conducted consistent with the Guidelines, particularly paragraph 47 thereof, are reviewed periodically
and are revised thereafter whenever a substantial change in the fishery has occurred or there is relevant new
information, and that, where such impact assessments have not been undertaken, they are carried out as a priority
before authorizing bottom fishing activities;
(c) To ensure that conservation and management measures adopted by States and regional fisheries
organizations and arrangements are based on and updated on the basis of the best available scientific information,
noting in particular the need to improve the effective implementation of thresholds and move-on rules;
92

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

201. Recognizes that different types of marine scientific research, such as seabed mapping, mapping of
vulnerable marine ecosystems based on information from the fishing fleet, on-site camera observations from remote
vehicles, benthic ecosystem modelling, comparative benthic studies and predictive modelling have resulted in the
identification of areas where vulnerable marine ecosystems are known or are likely to occur and in the adoption of
conservation and management measures to prevent significant adverse impacts on such ecosystems, including the
closure of areas to bottom fishing in accordance with paragraph 119 (b) of resolution 64/72;
202. Encourages, in this regard, States, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with
the competence to manage bottom fisheries, and States participating in negotiations to establish such organizations or
arrangements, to consider the results available from different types of marine scientific research, including, as
appropriate, those listed in paragraph 201 above, concerning the identification of areas containing vulnerable marine
ecosystems, and to adopt conservation and management measures to prevent significant adverse impacts from bottom
fishing on such ecosystems, consistent with the Guidelines, or to close such areas to bottom fishing until such
conservation and management measures are adopted, as well as to continue to undertake further marine scientific
research, for the above-mentioned purposes, in accordance with international law, as reflected in Part XIII of the
Convention;
203. Encourages, in this regard, States, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements with
the competence to manage deep-sea fisheries, and States participating in negotiations to establish such organizations
or arrangements to carry out further marine scientific research to address the remaining knowledge gaps, in particular
with regard to fish stock assessments, and to base and update conservation and management measures on the best
available scientific information, in accordance with international law, as reflected in Part XIII of the Convention;
204. Notes with concern that vulnerable marine ecosystems may also be impacted by human activities other
than bottom fishing, and encourages in this regard States and competent international organizations to consider taking
action to address such impacts;
205. Calls upon States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to take into account the potential impacts of climate change and ocean acidification in taking measures
to manage deep-sea fisheries and protect vulnerable marine ecosystems;
206. Calls upon States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements with the competence to regulate deep-sea fisheries, to adopt conservation and management measures,
including monitoring, control and surveillance measures, on the basis of the best available scientific information,
including stock assessments, to ensure the long-term sustainability of deep-sea fish stocks and non-target species and
the rebuilding of depleted stocks, consistent with the Guidelines and, where scientific information is uncertain,
unreliable or inadequate, to ensure that conservation and management measures are established consistent with the
precautionary approach, in particular with regard to vulnerable, threatened or endangered species;
207. Recognizes, in particular, the special circumstances and requirements of developing States and the
specific challenges that they may face in giving full effect to certain technical aspects of the Guidelines, and that
implementation by such States of paragraphs 83 to 87 of resolution 61/105, paragraph 119 of resolution 64/72,
paragraph 129 of resolution 66/68 and paragraph 180 of resolution 71/123 and the Guidelines should proceed in a
manner that gives full consideration to section 6 of the Guidelines on the special requirements of developing
countries;
208. Also recognizes the need to enhance the capacity of developing States, including with regard to stock
assessments, impact assessments, scientific and technical knowledge and training, and encourages States to provide
technical and financial support to developing countries to address their special requirements and challenges in
implementing the Guidelines;
209. Welcomes the substantial ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
related to the management of deep-sea fisheries in the high seas and the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems,
including the publication of the technical paper entitled “Vulnerable marine ecosystems: processes and practices in
the high seas”, affirms the importance of the work undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 135 and 136 of resolution 66/68,
and notes in particular the support provided by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to States
in implementing the Guidelines;
210. Recalls the decision to conduct in 2020 a further review of the actions taken by States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in response to paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72,
93

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of resolution 66/68 and paragraphs 156, 171, 175, 177 to 188 and 219
of resolution 71/123, with a view to ensuring the effective implementation of the measures therein and to make further
recommendations, where necessary, and also recalls the decision to precede that review with a two-day workshop;
211. Recalls its request in resolution 73/125 to the Secretary-General to convene, with full conference services,
without prejudice to future arrangements, a two-day workshop in the second half of 2020 in order to discuss
implementation of paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72, paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to
134 of resolution 66/68 and paragraphs 156, 171, 175, 177 to 188 and 219 of resolution 71/123, and to invite States,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes, subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, other fisheries bodies,
other relevant intergovernmental bodies and relevant non‑governmental organizations and relevant stakeholders, in
accordance with United Nations practice, to attend the workshop;
212. Also recalls its request in resolution 73/125 to the Secretary-General to prepare a report similar in scope,
length and detail to his report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session,138 in cooperation with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and with the assistance of an expert consultant to be hired by the
Division to provide information and analysis on relevant technical and scientific issues to be covered in the report, for
consideration by the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, on the actions taken by States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in response to paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72,
paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of resolution 66/68 and paragraphs 156, 171, 175, 177 to 188 and 219
of resolution 71/123, and invites States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to consider
making such information publicly available;
213. Requests the Secretary-General, in connection with the report requested in paragraph 212 of the present
resolution, to invite States and regional economic integration organizations and regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to submit detailed information to the Secretary-General in a timely manner on actions
taken pursuant to paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72, paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to
134 of resolution 66/68 and paragraphs 156, 171, 175, 177 to 188 and 219 of resolution 71/123, to facilitate a further
review of such actions;
214. Encourages accelerated progress to establish criteria on the objectives, establishment and effective
management of marine protected areas for fisheries purposes, and in this regard also encourages the application of the
technical guidelines on marine protected areas and fisheries of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, and urges involvement, coordination and cooperation among all relevant international organizations and bodies;
215. Also encourages efforts to establish guidance on the objectives, establishment and management of other
effective area-based conservation measures for fisheries purposes, and encourages coordination and cooperation for
this purpose among all relevant international organizations and bodies;
216. Urges all States to implement the 1995 Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine
Environment from Land-based Activities139 and to accelerate activity to safeguard marine ecosystems, including fish
stocks, against sources of land-based pollution, including plastics and excess nutrients, and physical degradation,
taking into account the increase in oceanic dead zones;
217. Calls upon States, either individually, collectively or through regional fisheries management organizations
and arrangements, to further study, develop and adopt effective management measures, and disseminate information
in that regard, taking into account the best available scientific information, on fishing methods, gear types and uses to
minimize mortality and other harms caused by abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear;
218. Acknowledges the serious environmental, as well as economic and social, impacts on the marine
environment caused by abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear, and encourages States, and regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements, as appropriate, to take action to reduce such gear, noting the
recommendations of the 2009 report by the United Nations Environment Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations;

_______________
138
139

94

A/71/351.
A/51/116, annex II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

219. Reaffirms the importance that it attaches to paragraphs 77 to 81 of resolution 60/31 of 29 November 2005
concerning the issue of lost, abandoned or otherwise discarded fishing gear and related marine debris and the adverse
impacts that such debris and derelict fishing gear have on, inter alia, fish stocks, habitats and other marine species,
and urges accelerated progress by States and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in
implementing those paragraphs of the resolution;
220. Recalls, in this regard, the endorsement by the Committee on Fisheries, at its thirty-third session, of the
Voluntary Guidelines on the Marking of Fishing Gear, and also recalls that the Committee welcomed the
recommendations of the Technical Consultation on the Marking of Fishing Gear and supported the development of a
comprehensive global strategy to tackle issues relating to abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear and to
support the implementation of the Guidelines;
221. Also recalls annex V to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as
modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, in which it is stated, inter alia, that the accidental loss or discharge
of fishing gear which poses a significant threat to the marine environment or navigation, shall be reported to the State
whose flag the ship is entitled to fly, and, where the loss or discharge occurs within waters subject to the jurisdiction
of a coastal State, also to that coastal State;140
222. Encourages further studies, including by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
on the impacts of underwater noise on fish stocks and fishing catch rates, as well as associated socioeconomic effects;
223. Calls upon States, including through regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements, to
play an active role in global efforts to conserve and sustainably use living marine resources, so as to contribute to
marine biological diversity;
224. Encourages States, either individually or through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, as appropriate, to identify any spawning and nursery areas for fish stocks under their jurisdiction or
competence and, where required, to adopt science-based measures to conserve such stocks during these critical life
stages;
225. Expresses concern about the continuing influx of sargassum seaweed into the waters of the Caribbean and
its impact on aquatic resources, fisheries, shorelines, waterways and tourism and the general well-being of coastal
communities, and encourages States and relevant regional organizations to coordinate efforts to better understand the
causes and impacts of the influx, and to eliminate extraordinary amounts of sargassum washed up along the coastline
using environmentally sound techniques, as well as to work on joint solutions to maintain and protect the livelihoods
of fishers and fishing communities and find ways of beneficially utilizing the seaweed and environmentally friendly
ways of disposing of sargassum washed up on shore;
226. Recognizes the wide range of impacts of ocean acidification on marine ecosystems, and calls upon States
to tackle the causes of ocean acidification and to further study its impacts;
227. Emphasizes the importance of developing adaptive marine resource management strategies and enhancing
capacity-building to implement such strategies in order to enhance the resilience of marine ecosystems to minimize
the wide range of impacts on marine organisms and threats to food security caused by ocean acidification, in particular
the impacts on the ability of calciferous plankton, coral reefs, shellfish and crustaceans to build shells and skeletal
structures and the threats that this could pose to protein supply;
XI
Capacity-building
228. Reiterates the crucial importance of cooperation by States directly or, as appropriate, through the relevant
subregional and regional organizations, and by other international organizations, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations through its FishCode programme, including through financial and/or technical
assistance, in accordance with the Agreement, the Compliance Agreement, the Code and its associated international
plans of action, to increase the capacity of developing States to achieve the goals and implement the actions called for
in the present resolution;

_______________
140

International Maritime Organization, resolution MEPC.201(62).

95

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

229. Welcomes the ongoing work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in developing
guidance on, and assisting in the implementation of, the strategies and measures required for the creation of an
enabling environment for sustainable small-scale fisheries, and encourages studies for creating possible alternative
livelihoods for coastal communities;
230. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States recognized the importance of building the capacity of
developing countries to be able to benefit from the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and seas and their
resources, and in this regard emphasized the need for cooperation in marine scientific research to implement the
provisions of the Convention and the outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development, as well as for the
transfer of technology, taking into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines
on the Transfer of Marine Technology;
231. Also recalls that, in “The future we want”, States urged the identification and mainstreaming by 2014 of
strategies that further assist developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, in developing their national capacity to conserve, sustainably manage and realize the benefits of
sustainable fisheries, including through improved market access for fish products from developing countries;
232. Encourages increased capacity-building and technical assistance by States, international financial
institutions and relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies for fishers, in particular small-scale fishers, in
developing countries, and in particular small island developing States, consistent with environmental sustainability,
in recognition of the fact that food security and livelihoods may depend on fisheries;
233. Encourages States to cooperate closely, directly or through the United Nations system, including the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, with a view to enhancing the capacity-building of developing
States, including coastal States, in particular small island developing States, in the field of fisheries and aquaculture
through education and training;
234. Recognizes, in this regard, the work of the United Nations University Fisheries Training Programme in
Iceland and its contribution to training for developing States, in particular small island developing States, and
emphasizes the need for the continuation and strengthening of this training for developing States;
235. Encourages the international community to enhance the opportunities for sustainable development in
developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, small island developing States and coastal African
States, by encouraging greater participation of those States in authorized fisheries activities being undertaken within
areas under their national jurisdiction, in accordance with the Convention, by distant-water fishing nations in order to
achieve better economic returns for developing countries from their fisheries resources within areas under their
national jurisdiction and an enhanced role in regional fisheries management, as well as by enhancing the ability of
developing countries to develop their own fisheries, as well as to participate in high seas fisheries, including access to
such fisheries, in conformity with international law, in particular the Convention and the Agreement, and taking into
account article 5 of the Code;
236. Recalls the progress made at the first meeting of the parties to the Agreement on Port State Measures to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing towards the future establishment of an
assistance fund under article 21 of that Agreement to be administered by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations for the purpose of assisting developing States parties, in particular the least developed among them
and small island developing States, in the implementation of that Agreement and the acknowledgement by the ad hoc
working group established by the parties to that Agreement that access to the assistance fund by developing States
parties should be transparent, equitable, simple and well coordinated, and notes the adoption of the terms of reference
for the funding mechanisms under part 6 of the Agreement at the second meeting of the parties to the Agreement on
Port State Measures;
237. Requests distant-water fishing nations, when negotiating access agreements and arrangements with
developing coastal States, to do so on an equitable and sustainable basis and to take into account their legitimate
expectation to fully benefit from the sustainable use of the natural resources of their exclusive economic zones, to ensure
that vessels flying their flag comply with the laws and regulations of the developing coastal States adopted in accordance
with international law and to give greater attention to fish processing and fish-processing facilities within the national
jurisdiction of the developing coastal State to assist in the realization of the benefits from the development of fisheries
resources and also to the transfer of technology and assistance for monitoring, control and surveillance and compliance
96

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and enforcement within areas under the national jurisdiction of the developing coastal State providing fisheries access,
taking into account the forms of cooperation set out in article 25 of the Agreement and article 5 of the Code;
238. Encourages, in this regard, greater transparency regarding fisheries access agreements, including by
making them publicly available, subject to confidentiality requirements;
239. Encourages States, individually and through regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements, to provide greater assistance and to promote coherence in such assistance for developing States in
designing, establishing and implementing relevant agreements, instruments and tools for the conservation and
sustainable management of fish stocks, including in designing and strengthening their domestic regulatory fisheries
policies and those of regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements in their regions, and the
enhancement of research and scientific capabilities through existing funds, such as the Assistance Fund under Part
VII of the Agreement, bilateral assistance, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements assistance
funds, the FishCode programme, the World Bank’s global programme on fisheries and the Global Environment
Facility;
240. Calls upon States to promote, through continuing dialogue and the assistance and cooperation provided
in accordance with articles 24 to 26 of the Agreement, further ratifications of or accessions to the Agreement by
seeking to address, inter alia, the issue of lack of capacity and resources that might stand in the way of developing
States becoming parties;
241. Encourages States, regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements and other relevant
bodies to assist developing States in the implementation of the actions called for in paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of
resolution 61/105, paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution 64/72, paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to
134 of resolution 66/68 and paragraphs 156, 171, 175 and 177 to 188 of resolution 71/123;
242. Urges States and regional economic integration organizations, individually and through regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, to mainstream efforts to assist developing States, in particular the least
developed countries and small island developing States, with other relevant international development strategies with
a view to enhancing international coordination to enable them to develop their national capacity to exploit fishery
resources, consistent with the duty to ensure the conservation and management of those resources, and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General to fully mobilize and coordinate the agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system, including at the level of the regional economic commissions, within their respective mandates;
243. Requests States and regional fisheries management organizations to develop strategies to further assist
developing States, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing States, in fully realizing the
benefits from the catch of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks and in strengthening regional efforts
to sustainably conserve and manage such stocks and, in this regard, to make available such information;
XII
Cooperation within the United Nations system
244. Requests the relevant parts of the United Nations system, international financial institutions and donor
agencies to support increased enforcement and compliance capabilities for regional fisheries management
organizations and their member States;
245. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to continue its cooperative
arrangements with United Nations agencies on the implementation of the international plans of action;
XIII
Activities of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
246. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the activities of the Division, which reflect the high
standard of assistance provided to Member States by the Division;
247. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to carry out the responsibilities and functions entrusted to him
by the Convention, the Agreement and the related resolutions of the General Assembly and to ensure the allocation of
appropriate resources to the Division for the performance of its activities under the approved budget for the
Organization;
97

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

XIV
Seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly
248. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all States, relevant
intergovernmental organizations, the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, subregional and regional
fisheries management organizations and relevant non-governmental organizations;
249. Notes the desire to further improve the efficiency of and the effective participation of delegations in the
informal consultations concerning the annual General Assembly resolution on sustainable fisheries, decides that the
informal consultations on this resolution will be held in a single round of consultations in November for a period of
seven days, requests the Secretary-General to provide support to the consultations through the Division, and invites
States to submit proposals for inclusion in the text of the resolution to the Coordinator of the informal consultations
no later than five weeks before the start of the consultations;
250. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”, the sub-item entitled “Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments”, and to consider the possibility of including this sub-item in future provisional agendas on a biennial
basis.
RESOLUTION 74/19
Adopted at the 43rd plenary meeting, on 10 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 135 to 1, with 3 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/74/L.22 and A/74/L.22/Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by: Albania, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Greece, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Togo, Tonga, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam
* In favour: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Zambia
Against: Turkey
Abstaining: Colombia, El Salvador, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

74/19.

Oceans and the law of the sea

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its annual resolutions on the law of the sea and on oceans and the law of the sea, including resolution
73/124 of 11 December 2018, as well as other relevant resolutions concerning the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (the Convention),141

_______________
141

98

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling, in this regard, resolution 72/249 of 24 December 2017 on an international legally binding instrument
under the Convention on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction,
Underscoring the importance of the work undertaken by the intergovernmental conference to elaborate the text
of an international legally binding instrument under the Convention on the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General,142 the reports on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine
Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects (the Regular Process)143 and of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea (the Informal Consultative Process) at its twentieth
meeting144 and the report of the twenty-ninth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention,145
Noting with satisfaction that 16 November 2019 marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of the entry into force of
the Convention, and recognizing the pre-eminent contribution provided by the Convention to the strengthening of
peace, security, cooperation and friendly relations among all nations in conformity with the principles of justice and
equal rights and to the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples of the world, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as to
the sustainable development of the oceans and seas,
Emphasizing the universal and unified character of the Convention, and reaffirming that the Convention sets out
the legal framework within which all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out and is of strategic importance
as the basis for national, regional and global action and cooperation in the marine sector, and that its integrity needs
to be maintained, as recognized also by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in
chapter 17 of Agenda 21,146
Noting with satisfaction that, in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,147 as endorsed
by the General Assembly in resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, States recognized that oceans, seas and coastal areas
form an integrated and essential component of the Earth’s ecosystem and are critical to sustaining it, and that
international law, as reflected in the Convention, provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable
use of the oceans and their resources, and stressed the importance of the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans
and seas and of their resources for sustainable development, including through their contributions to poverty
eradication, sustained economic growth, food security and creation of sustainable livelihoods and decent work, while
at the same time protecting biodiversity and the marine environment and addressing the impacts of climate change,
Recalling that, in “The future we want”, States underscored that broad public participation and access to
information and judicial and administrative proceedings were essential to the promotion of sustainable development
and that sustainable development required the meaningful involvement and active participation of regional, national
and subnational legislatures and judiciaries, and all major groups, and, in this regard, that they agreed to work more
closely with major groups and other stakeholders and encouraged their active participation, as appropriate, in
processes that contribute to decision-making, planning and implementation of policies and programmes for
sustainable development at all levels,
Recalling also the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,148 and in this regard reaffirming the
commitment to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development,

_______________
A/74/70 and A/74/350.
A/74/315.
144
A/74/119.
145
SPLOS/29/9.
146
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
147
Resolution 66/288, annex.
148
Resolution 70/1.
142
143

99

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

as reflected in Goal 14 of the 2030 Agenda, which is important to the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals contained in the 2030 Agenda,
Recalling further its resolution 71/312 of 6 July 2017 in which it endorsed the declaration entitled “Our ocean,
our future: call for action” adopted by the high-level United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development, held from 5 to 9 June 2017, coinciding with World Oceans Day on 8 June, and in this regard
affirming the important role of the declaration in demonstrating the collective will to take action to conserve and
sustainably use our oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development,
Recognizing the important contributions of the partnership dialogues and voluntary commitments made in the
context of the high-level 2017 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14 to the effective and timely implementation of Goal 14,
Recalling its decision to convene the high-level 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development in Lisbon, from 2 to 6 June 2020, to support the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14,149
Recognizing paragraphs 64 and 65 of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development, adopted by the Conference, which was held from 13 to 16 July 2015,150
Welcoming the ocean-related outcomes of the fourth session of the United Nations Environment Assembly of
the United Nations Environment Programme, especially the resolutions on marine plastic litter and microplastics,151
on protection of the marine environment from land-based activities,152 on sustainable management for global health
of mangroves,153 on sustainable coral reefs management154 and on sustainable nitrogen management,155
Welcoming also the adoption by the International Maritime Organization of the Action Plan to Address Marine
Plastic Litter from Ships,156 and noting that the fortieth Consultative Meeting of Contracting Parties to the Convention
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (the London Convention) and
the thirteenth Meeting of Contracting Parties to the 1996 Protocol to that Convention, held from 5 to 9 November
2018, identified a number of actions relevant to the London Convention and the Protocol thereto and reiterated the
commitment of the governing bodies to combat marine litter and microplastics,
Conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole through
an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral approach, and reaffirming the need to improve cooperation and
coordination at the national, regional and global levels, in accordance with the Convention, to support and supplement
the efforts of each State in promoting the implementation and observance of the Convention and the integrated
management and sustainable development of the oceans and seas,
Reiterating the essential need for cooperation, including through capacity-building and transfer of marine
technology, to ensure that all States, especially developing countries, in particular the least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, are able both to
implement the Convention and to benefit from the sustainable development of the oceans and seas, as well as to
participate fully in global and regional forums and processes dealing with oceans and law of the sea issues, while
recognizing the need to also address the particular challenges faced by developing middle-income countries,
Emphasizing the need to strengthen the ability of competent international organizations to contribute, at the
global, regional, subregional and bilateral levels, through cooperation programmes with Governments, to the
development of national capacity in marine science and the sustainable management of the oceans and their resources,

_______________
See resolution 73/292.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
151
UNEP/EA.4/Res.6.
152
UNEP/EA.4/Res.11.
153
UNEP/EA.4/Res.12.
154
UNEP/EA.4/Res.13.
155
UNEP/EA.4/Res.14.
156
Marine Environment Protection Committee, document MEPC 73/19/Add.1, annex 10, resolution MEPC.310(73).
149
150

100

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling that marine science is important for eradicating poverty, contributing to food security, conserving the
world’s marine environment and resources, helping to understand, predict and respond to natural events and
promoting the sustainable development of the oceans and seas, by improving knowledge, through sustained research
efforts and the evaluation of monitoring results, and applying such knowledge to management and decision-making,
Reiterating its deep concern at the serious adverse impacts on the marine environment and biodiversity, in
particular on vulnerable marine ecosystems and their physical and biogenic structure, including coral reefs, cold water
habitats, hydrothermal vents and seamounts, of certain human activities,
Emphasizing the need for the safe and environmentally sound recycling of ships,
Expressing deep concern at the adverse economic, social and environmental impacts of the physical alteration
and destruction of marine habitats that may result from land-based and coastal development activities, in particular
those land reclamation activities that are carried out in a manner that has a detrimental impact on the marine
environment,
Reiterating its serious concern at the current and projected adverse effects of climate change and ocean
acidification on the marine environment and marine biodiversity, and emphasizing the urgency of addressing these
issues,
Noting with concern, in this regard, the findings by the World Meteorological Organization, in its annual
Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, that, in 2017, carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere surpassed 405 parts per million,
which represents an increase of 2.2 parts per million, a relative increase of 0.55 per cent, over the period 2016–2017,
and the findings in its Statement on the State of the Global Climate in 2018 that global mean temperatures in 2018
were about 1°C above the 1850 to 1900 average,
Noting with concern also that the World Meteorological Organization, in its Statement on the State of the Global
Climate in 2018, highlighted that the world also continued to see increasing ocean heat content, rising sea levels, with
some acceleration, and increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases, while the cryosphere continued its contraction,
with global sea ice shrinking,
Expressing concern that climate change continues to increase the severity and incidence of coral bleaching
throughout tropical seas and weakens the ability of reefs to withstand ocean acidification, which could have serious
and irreversible negative effects on marine organisms, particularly corals, as well as to withstand other pressures,
including overfishing and pollution,
Reiterating its deep concern at the vulnerability of the environment and the fragile ecosystems of the polar
regions, including the Arctic Ocean and the Arctic ice cap, particularly affected by the observed and projected adverse
effects of climate change and ocean acidification,
Recognizing the need for a more integrated and ecosystem-based approach to, further study of and the promotion
of measures for enhanced cooperation, coordination and collaboration relating to the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction,
Recognizing also that the realization of the benefits of the Convention could be enhanced by international
cooperation, technical assistance and advanced scientific knowledge, as well as by funding and capacity-building,
Recognizing further that hydrographic surveys and nautical charting are critical to the safety of navigation
and life at sea, environmental protection, including the protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems, and the
economics of the global shipping industry, and encouraging further efforts towards electronic charting, which not
only provides significantly increased benefits for safe navigation and management of ship movement, but also
provides data and information that can be used for sustainable fisheries activities and other sectoral uses of the
marine environment, the delimitation of maritime boundaries and environmental protection, and noting that, under
the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974,157 ships on international voyages are required to
carry an electronic chart display and information system, in accordance with the implementation schedule as set
out in that Convention,

_______________
157

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1184, No. 18961.

101

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that ocean data buoys deployed and operated in accordance with international law are critical for
improving understanding of weather, climate and ecosystems, and that certain types of ocean data buoys contribute
to saving lives by detecting tsunamis, and reiterating its serious concern at intentional and unintentional damage to
such buoys,
Emphasizing that underwater archaeological, cultural and historical heritage, including shipwrecks and
watercraft, holds essential information on the history of humankind and that such heritage is a resource that needs to
be protected and preserved,
Recognizing the duty of States under article 303, paragraph 1, of the Convention to protect objects of an
archaeological and historical nature found at sea and to cooperate for this purpose,
Expressing concern, in this regard, at various threats posed to such objects, including their destruction as well
as the illicit trafficking in such objects,
Recognizing that illicit trafficking in wildlife is, in some cases, committed by transnational organized criminal
groups using maritime routes, contributes to biodiversity loss and damage to ecosystems and livelihoods and requires
enhanced regional and global cooperation and coordination in response, in accordance with international law,
Noting with concern the continuing problem of transnational organized crime committed at sea, including illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons and illicit
trafficking in firearms, and threats to maritime safety and security, including piracy, armed robbery at sea, smuggling
and terrorist acts against shipping, offshore installations and other maritime interests, and noting the deplorable loss
of life and adverse impact on international trade, energy security and the global economy resulting from such
activities,
Reiterating the importance of the fair treatment of crew members and its influence on maritime safety,
Recognizing that fibre-optic submarine cables transmit most of the world’s data and communications and hence
are vitally important to the global economy and the national security of all States, conscious that these cables are
susceptible to intentional and accidental damage from shipping and other activities and that the maintenance,
including the repair, of these cables is important, noting that these matters have been brought to the attention of States
at various workshops and seminars, and conscious of the need for States to adopt national laws and regulations to
protect submarine cables and render their wilful damage or damage by culpable negligence punishable offences,
Noting the importance of the delineation of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles
and that it is in the broader interest of the international community that coastal States with a continental shelf beyond
200 nautical miles submit information on the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles to the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf (the Commission), and welcoming the submissions to the
Commission by a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention on the outer limits of their continental shelf
beyond 200 nautical miles, that the Commission has continued to fulfil its role, including of making recommendations
to coastal States, and that the summaries of recommendations are being made publicly available,158
Noting also that some coastal States may continue to face particular challenges in relation to preparing and
presenting submissions to the Commission,
Noting further that financial and technical assistance may be sought by developing countries for activities in
relation to preparing and presenting submissions to the Commission, including additional information with respect to
submissions and revised or new submissions, including through the voluntary trust fund established by the General
Assembly in its resolution 55/7 of 30 October 2000159 for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of submissions
to the Commission for developing States, in particular the least developed countries and small island developing
States, and compliance with article 76 of the Convention, as well as other accessible international assistance,
Reaffirming the importance of the work of the Commission for coastal States and for the international community,

_______________
Available from the web page of the Commission maintained by the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea.
The terms of reference, guidelines and rules of the trust fund were amended by the General Assembly in its resolutions 58/240, 70/235
and 73/124.
158
159

102

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that practical difficulties can arise when there is a considerable delay between the preparation of
submissions and their consideration by the Commission, including in retaining expertise up to and during the
consideration of the submissions by the Commission,
Recognizing also the significant workload of the Commission in view of the large number of submissions
already received and a number of submissions yet to be received, which places significant demands and challenges
on its members and the secretariat as provided by the Secretary-General of the United Nations through the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat (the Division),
Noting with concern the projected timetable of the work of the Commission on the submissions already received
by it and those yet to be received, and in this regard noting the decisions of the Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention to request the Commission to consider, in coordination with the secretariat, within the existing resources
made available to the Secretariat, that the Commission, and its subcommissions meeting simultaneously as far as
possible, meet at United Nations Headquarters for up to 26 weeks but not less than an intended minimum of 21 weeks
a year, distributed in such a way that the Commission determines to be the most effective, and that no two sessions be
sequential,160
Recognizing the need to ensure that the Commission can perform its functions under the Convention
expeditiously, efficiently and effectively and maintain its high level of quality and expertise,
Expressing concern about the implications of the workload of the Commission for the conditions of service of
its members,
Recalling, in this regard, the decisions of the twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth and twenty-ninth Meetings of States
Parties to the Convention regarding the conditions of service of the members of the Commission,161
Recalling also its decision, in resolutions 57/141 of 12 December 2002 and 58/240 of 23 December 2003, to
establish a regular process under the United Nations for global reporting and assessment of the state of the marine
environment, including socioeconomic aspects, both current and foreseeable, building on existing regional
assessments, as recommended by the World Summit on Sustainable Development,162 and noting the need for
cooperation among all States to this end,
Recalling further its decisions, in resolution 65/37 A of 7 December 2010, resolution 66/231 of 24 December
2011, resolution 70/235 of 23 December 2015, resolution 71/257 of 23 December 2016, resolution 72/73
of 5 December 2017 and resolution 73/124, regarding the Regular Process, as established under the United Nations
and accountable to the General Assembly,
Recalling that the Division was designated to provide secretariat support to the Regular Process, including its
established institutions,
Reaffirming the cross-cutting role of ocean science in Sustainable Development Goal 14 of the 2030 Agenda,
Reaffirming also its decision, in resolution 72/73, to proclaim the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development for the 10-year period beginning on 1 January 2021, within existing structures and available
resources,
Recognizing the importance and the contribution of the work of the Informal Consultative Process established
by the General Assembly in its resolution 54/33 of 24 November 1999 to facilitate the annual review of developments
in ocean affairs by the Assembly,
Noting the continuously growing responsibilities of the Secretary-General under the Convention and related
resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular resolutions 49/28 of 6 December 1994, 52/26 of 26 November
1997, 54/33, 65/37 A, 65/37 B of 4 April 2011, 66/231, 67/78 of 11 December 2012, 68/70 of 9 December 2013,
69/245 of 29 December 2014, 70/235, 71/257, 72/73, 72/249 and 73/124, and in this context the unprecedented

_______________
See SPLOS/229 and SPLOS/303.
See SPLOS/286, SPLOS/303 and SPLOS/29/9.
162
See Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
160
161

103

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

substantial increase in activities of the Division, in particular in view of the growing number of requests to the Division
for additional outputs and servicing of meetings, the provision of technical assistance and capacity-building, the need
for enhanced support and assistance to the Commission and the role of the Division in carrying out its functions as
the secretariat of the Regular Process, in relation to the functions as focal point for UN-Oceans and in relation to
support for the implementation by Member States of the oceans-related Sustainable Development Goals in the 2030
Agenda,
Reaffirming the importance of the work of the International Seabed Authority (the Authority) in accordance with
the Convention and the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 (the Part XI Agreement),163
Reaffirming also the importance of the work of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (the Tribunal)
in accordance with the Convention,
I
Implementation of the Convention and related agreements and instruments
1.

Reaffirms the unified character of the Convention141 and the vital importance of preserving its integrity;

2. Calls upon all States that have not done so, in order to fully achieve the goal of universal participation, to
become parties to the Convention and the Part XI Agreement;163
3. Calls upon States that have not done so, in order to achieve the goal of universal participation, to become
parties to the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks (the Fish Stocks Agreement);164
4. Calls upon States to harmonize their national legislation with the provisions of the Convention and, where
applicable, relevant agreements and instruments, to ensure the consistent application of those provisions and to ensure
also that any declarations or statements that they have made or make when signing, ratifying or acceding to the
Convention do not purport to exclude or to modify the legal effect of the provisions of the Convention in their
application to the State concerned and to withdraw any such declarations or statements;
5. Calls upon States Parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to deposit with the Secretary-General
charts or lists of geographical coordinates, as provided for in the Convention, preferably using the generally accepted
and most recent geodetic datums;
6. Notes, in this regard, the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to improve the existing geographic
information system for the deposit by States of charts and geographical coordinates concerning maritime zones,
including lines of delimitation, submitted pursuant to the Convention, and to give due publicity thereto, also notes the
ongoing cooperation and progress achieved in the development by the International Hydrographic Organization, in
cooperation with the Division, of the technical standards for the collection, storage and dissemination of the
information deposited, which are not legally binding, in order to ensure compatibility among geographic information
systems, electronic nautical charts and other systems, and re‑emphasizes the importance of the completion of these
efforts through wide participation and reviews by Member States;
7. Also notes that the twenty-ninth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention requested the Secretariat to
prepare a note on the practice of the Secretary-General in respect of the deposit of charts and geographical coordinates
under the Convention for submission to the thirtieth Meeting, in 2020;145
8. Urges all States to cooperate, directly or through competent international bodies, in taking measures to
protect and preserve objects of an archaeological and historical nature found at sea, in conformity with the Convention,
and calls upon States to work together on such diverse challenges and opportunities as the appropriate relationship
between salvage law and scientific management and conservation of underwater cultural heritage, increasing
technological abilities to discover and reach underwater sites, looting and growing underwater tourism;

_______________
163
164

104

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1836, No. 31364.
Ibid., vol. 2167, No. 37924.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Acknowledges the recent deposit of instruments of ratification of the 2001 Convention on the Protection
of the Underwater Cultural Heritage,165 calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to
that Convention, and notes in particular the rules annexed to that Convention, which address the relationship between
salvage law and scientific principles of management, conservation and protection of underwater cultural heritage
among Parties, their nationals and vessels flying their flag;
II
Capacity-building
10. Recognizes the importance of assisting developing States, in particular the least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, in implementing
the Convention, urges States, international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make voluntary financial or other contributions
to the trust funds, as referred to in resolutions 55/7, 57/141, and 64/71 of 4 December 2009, established for this
purpose, and expresses its appreciation to those that have contributed;166
11. Emphasizes that capacity-building is essential to ensure that States, especially developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well
as coastal African States, are able to fully implement the Convention, benefit from the sustainable development of the
oceans and seas and participate fully in global and regional forums on ocean affairs and the law of the sea;
12. Also emphasizes the need to address the particular challenges faced by developing middle-income
countries through capacity-building;
13. Calls for capacity-building initiatives to take into account the needs of developing countries, and calls upon
States, international organizations and donor agencies to make efforts to ensure the sustainability of such initiatives;
14. Recalls, in this regard, that, in “The future we want”,147 States recognized the importance of building the
capacity of developing countries to be able to benefit from the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and seas
and their resources, and in this regard emphasized the need for cooperation in marine scientific research to implement
the provisions of the Convention and the outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development, as well as for
the transfer of technology, taking into account the Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology
adopted by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its twenty-second session, in 2003;
15. Emphasizes the need for international cooperation for capacity-building, including cross-sectoral
cooperation, at national, regional and global levels, to address, in particular, gaps in capacity-building in ocean affairs
and the law of the sea, including marine science;
16. Calls upon donor agencies and international financial institutions to keep their programmes systematically
under review to ensure the availability in all States, particularly in developing States, of the economic, legal,
navigational, scientific and technical skills necessary for the full implementation of the Convention and the objectives
of the present resolution, as well as the sustainable development of the oceans and seas nationally, regionally and
globally, and in so doing to bear in mind the interests and needs of landlocked developing States;
17. Encourages intensified efforts to build capacity for developing countries, in particular for the least
developed countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, to improve aids to navigation
and search and rescue services, hydrographic services and the production of nautical charts, including electronic
charts, as well as the mobilization of resources and building of capacity with support from international financial
institutions and the donor community;
18. Calls upon States and international organizations, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes, technical partnerships and fellowships, to continue in a sustainable and comprehensive way
to support, promote and strengthen capacity-building activities, in particular in developing countries, in the field of
marine scientific research by, inter alia, training personnel to develop and enhance relevant expertise, providing the

_______________
165
166

Ibid., vol. 2562, No. 45694.
See www.un.org/Depts/los/general_assembly/TrustFunds.pdf.

105

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

necessary equipment, facilities and vessels and transferring environmentally sound technologies, and taking into
account the need to improve capacities in the field of taxonomy;
19. Also calls upon States and international institutions, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes, technical partnerships and fellowships, to support and strengthen capacity-building
activities in developing countries, in particular least developed countries and small island developing States, to
develop their maritime administration and appropriate legal frameworks to establish or enhance the necessary
infrastructure, legislative and enforcement capabilities to promote effective compliance with and implementation and
enforcement of their responsibilities under international law;
20. Invites States, in particular those States with advanced technology and marine capabilities, to explore
prospects for improving cooperation with and assistance to developing States, in particular least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, with a view to
better integrating into national policies and programmes sustainable and effective development in the marine sector;
21. Recognizes that promoting the voluntary transfer of technology is an essential aspect of building capacity
in marine science, encourages States to use the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and
Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology, and recalls the important role of the secretariat of that Commission
in the implementation and promotion of the Criteria and Guidelines;
22. Calls upon States and international institutions, including through bilateral, regional and global
cooperation programmes, technical partnerships and fellowships, to develop and strengthen capacity-building
activities in and to transfer to developing countries, in particular least developed countries and small island developing
States, on mutually agreed terms, and taking into account the Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine
Technology, environmentally sound technologies to study and minimize the impacts of ocean acidification;
23. Notes the international scientific cooperation through the Ocean Acidification International Coordination
Centre of the International Atomic Energy Agency and within the Global Ocean Acidification Observing Network,
and their respective efforts in building scientific capacity for ocean acidification monitoring, research and
experimentation, including through the Pier2Peer scientific mentorship programme;
24. Recognizes the ongoing activities of the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity in
coordinating capacity-building efforts to support developing States in achieving the Aichi Biodiversity Targets in
marine and coastal areas;167
25. Emphasizes the need to focus on strengthening South-South cooperation as an additional way to build
capacity and as a cooperative mechanism to further enable countries to set their own priorities and needs and to foster
actions to implement such cooperation;
26. Recognizes with appreciation the important contribution to capacity-building in the field of the law of the
sea by the Rhodes Academy of Oceans Law and Policy, a cooperative undertaking by the Center for Oceans Law and
Policy of the University of Virginia School of Law, the Aegean Institute of the Law of the Sea and Maritime Law, the
Law of the Sea Institute of Iceland, the Max Planck Institute for Comparative Public Law and International Law, the
Netherlands Institute for the Law of the Sea of Utrecht University and the Centre for International Law of the National
University of Singapore, which enjoys associate sponsorship of the Korea Maritime Institute and the Ankara
University Research Center of the Sea and Maritime Law and offers a prominent three-week summer course annually
in Rhodes, Greece, and has graduated 998 students from more than 120 countries;
27. Also recognizes with appreciation the important contribution to capacity-building in the field of the law
of the sea by the Summer Academy of the International Foundation for the Law of the Sea at the Tribunal;
28. Further recognizes with appreciation the important contribution of the Korea Maritime Institute to the
trust fund to support the internship programmes at the Tribunal since 2011 and its continued efforts, in cooperation
with the Expo 2012 Yeosu Korea Foundation, to provide education and training for capacity-building of developing
countries through the Yeosu Academy of the Law of the Sea programme;

_______________
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/29, sect. I, and Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity decision XII/23, paras. 19–22.
167

106

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

29. Recognizes the holding of the regional courses on the continental shelf in Arusha, United Republic of
Tanzania, jointly organized by the African Institute of International Law and the University of the Faroe Islands, and
their continuing important contribution to capacity-building, particularly in developing countries;
30. Also recognizes the importance of the work of the Malta-based International Maritime Law Institute of
the International Maritime Organization, as a centre of education and training of specialists in maritime law, including
government legal advisers and other high-level officials, mainly from developing States, confirms its effective
capacity-building role in the field of international maritime law, shipping law and marine environmental law, and
urges States, intergovernmental organizations and financial institutions to make voluntary financial contributions to
the budget of the Institute which runs annually;
31. Further recognizes the importance of the World Maritime University of the International Maritime
Organization, as a centre of excellence for maritime education and research, confirms its effective capacity-building
role in the field of maritime transportation, policy, administration, management, safety, security and environmental
protection, as well as its role in the international exchange and transfer of knowledge, notes the role of the World
Maritime University-Sasakawa Global Ocean Institute, and urges States, intergovernmental organizations and other
bodies to make voluntary financial contributions to the University’s Endowment Fund;
32. Welcomes the efforts of the Tribunal in holding regional workshops, including the latest workshop on the
role of the Tribunal in the settlement of disputes relating to the law of the sea for the Latin American region, held in
Montevideo on 13 and 14 November 2019, in cooperation with the Government of Uruguay and the Korea Maritime
Institute;
33. Also welcomes ongoing activities for capacity-building so as to address maritime security and protection
of the marine environment of developing States, and encourages States and international financial institutions to
provide additional funding for capacity-building programmes, including for transfer of technology, including through
the International Maritime Organization and other competent international organizations;
34. Recognizes the considerable need to provide sustained capacity-building assistance, including on financial
and technical aspects, by relevant international organizations and donors to developing States, with a view to further
strengthening their capacity to take effective measures against the multiple facets of international criminal activities
at sea, in line with the relevant international instruments, including the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto;168
35. Also recognizes the need to build the capacity of developing States to raise awareness of and support the
implementation of improved waste management practices, noting the particular vulnerability of small island
developing States to the impact of marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities and marine
debris and nutrient pollution;169
36. Acknowledges the importance of capacity-building for developing States, in particular the least developed
countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, for
the protection of the marine environment and the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources;
37. Encourages States to consider additional opportunities for capacity-building at the regional level;
38. Takes note of the first edition of the Global Ocean Science Report of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission, which assesses for the first time the status of and trends in ocean science capacity around the world;
39. Also takes note of the Capacity Development Strategy (2015–2021) of the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission, which takes into account that capacity development is a fundamental tenet of the
mission of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission;
40. Expresses its appreciation for the contribution of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission to
capacity-building through its Ocean Teacher Academy training system, which has provided training in ocean data and

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
See 2012 Guidelines for the Development of a Regional Reception Facilities Plan, International Maritime Organization, resolution
MEPC.221(63).
168
169

107

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

information management, and notes the setting up of the Ocean Teacher Global Academy, operating through a
network of regional training centres, which builds capacity and promotes expertise available in developing countries;
41. Welcomes the establishment by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission at its
twenty-ninth session of the Group of Experts on Capacity Development and, in particular, its invitation to the Group
of Experts in its decision IOC-XXX/11.1 to continue the assessment of the capacity development needs of the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission member States and to prepare a proposal for the development of an
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Clearing House Mechanism for the Transfer of Marine Technology,
including analysis of the possibility of expanding the clearing house mechanism to respond to other requirements;
42. Calls upon States to continue to assist developing States, and especially the least developed countries and
small island developing States, as well as coastal African States, at the bilateral and, where appropriate, multilateral
levels, in the preparation of submissions to the Commission regarding the establishment of the outer limits of the
continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles, including the assessment of the nature and extent of the continental shelf
of a coastal State, and recalls that coastal States can make requests to the Commission for scientific and technical
advice in the preparation of data for their submissions, in accordance with article 3 of annex II to the Convention;
43. Recognizes the importance of the trust fund established pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose of
facilitating the preparation of submissions to the Commission for developing States, in particular the least developed
countries and small island developing States, and compliance with article 76 of the Convention, and for the purpose
of providing assistance to developing States to meet the travel and daily subsistence allowance costs associated with
meeting with the Commission when their submissions are being examined and upon the invitation of the
Commission,170 in accordance with paragraph 31 of the terms of reference, guidelines and rules of the trust fund, and
also recognizes the need for assistance in the preparation of additional information with respect to submissions and
revised or new submissions and in maintaining critical capacity during the period from the submission by a coastal
developing State of the particulars of the outer limits of its continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles to the
Commission up to the final stages of its examination by the Commission;
44. Calls upon the Division to continue to disseminate information on relevant procedures related to the trust
fund established for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of submissions to the Commission and to continue its
dialogue with potential beneficiaries with a view to providing financial support to developing countries for activities
to facilitate their submissions in accordance with the requirements of article 76 of the Convention and with the Rules
of Procedure171 and the Scientific and Technical Guidelines of the Commission;172
45. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with States and relevant international organizations and
institutions, to continue to support training and other activities to assist developing States in the preparation and
presentation of their submissions to the Commission;
46. Recognizes with appreciation the contribution of the Division to capacity-building activities at the national
and regional levels, in particular the work of the Division in promoting wider appreciation of the Convention and in
assisting with its implementation, through the provision of information, advice and assistance to States and
intergovernmental organizations, as well as the support of the Division for Member State implementation of the
relevant parts of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;148
47. Notes with appreciation the joint implementation by the Division and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development of a project funded through the United Nations Development Account to assist participating
developing States in developing evidence-based and policy-coherent oceans economy and trade strategies and aimed
at supporting participating developing States in realizing economic benefits from the sustainable use of marine
resources;
48. Notes the partnership between the Division and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission on a
training programme on marine scientific research under the Convention, and encourages States, relevant international
organizations and other donors to consider supporting the initiative;

_______________
See resolution 70/235, para. 37.
CLCS/40/Rev.1.
172
CLCS/11, CLCS/11/Corr.1, CLCS/11/Add.1 and CLCS/11/Add.1/Corr.1.
170
171

108

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

49. Invites the Secretary-General, in cooperation with Member States, international financial institutions,
donor agencies and intergovernmental organizations, to endeavour to expand the capacity-building activities of the
Division in order to meet the increased need for assistance to developing States;
50. Invites States, international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to support the capacity-building activities of the
Division, including by making earmarked voluntary contributions to the trust fund established by the SecretaryGeneral for the Office of Legal Affairs to support the promotion of international law, and expresses its appreciation to
those that have contributed;
51. Recognizes with appreciation the important contribution to the capacity-building of developing
countries and the promotion of the law of the sea made by the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship
on the Law of the Sea, which was established by the General Assembly in 1981 in honour of the first President of
the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, and recalls in this regard the provisions of its
resolutions on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law;173
52. Expresses its appreciation to States that have made contributions to the voluntary trust fund for the
Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea, notes that the financial state of the
Fellowship remains critical and that contributions are urgently needed to ensure that at least one fellowship can be
awarded annually, expresses its commitment to further promote the importance of the Fellowship, and urges States,
international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations
and natural and juridical persons to make voluntary financial contributions in support of the Fellowship;
53. Recognizes with appreciation the important contribution of the United Nations-Nippon Foundation of
Japan Fellowship Programme and the newer United Nations-Nippon Foundation Sustainable Ocean Programme,
which includes the Critical Needs Fellowship, Thematic Fellowship and training programme to reinforce capacity in
the context of the intergovernmental conference on an international legally binding instrument under the Convention
on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, to human
resources development for Member States, particularly developing Member States, in the field of ocean affairs and
the law of the sea and related disciplines, as well as the fostering of global interlinkages and continuing capacity
development through the alumni programme;
54. Encourages competent international organizations, the United Nations Development Programme and
international financial institutions and funds to consider expanding their programmes within their respective fields of
competence for assistance to developing countries and to coordinate their efforts, and recognizes the funding available
from the Global Environment Facility, as well as other funds allocated for projects relating to oceans;
III
Meeting of States Parties
55. Notes with satisfaction that the twenty-ninth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention commemorated
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention, and welcomes the report of that Meeting;145
56. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the thirtieth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention from
15 to 19 June 2020, with full conference services, including documentation, as required;
IV
Peaceful settlement of disputes
57. Notes with satisfaction the continued and significant contribution of the Tribunal to the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means in accordance with Part XV of the Convention, and underlines the important role and
authority of the Tribunal concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention and the Part XI Agreement;

_______________
173

Resolutions 69/117, para. 8, 70/116, para. 4, 71/139, para. 7, 72/115, paras. 7–8, and 73/201, para. 7.

109

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

58. Pays tribute to the important and long-standing role of the International Court of Justice with regard to the
peaceful settlement of disputes concerning the law of the sea;
59. Notes that States parties to an international agreement relating to the purposes of the Convention may
submit to, inter alia, the Tribunal or the International Court of Justice any dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of that agreement submitted in accordance with that agreement, and also notes the possibility, provided
for in the Statutes of the Tribunal and the Court, to submit disputes to a chamber;
60. Encourages States Parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to consider making a written
declaration, choosing from the means set out in article 287 of the Convention for the settlement of disputes concerning
the interpretation or application of the Convention and the Part XI Agreement, bearing in mind the comprehensive
character of the dispute settlement mechanism provided for in Part XV of the Convention;
61. Recalls the successful completion of the first compulsory conciliation under annex V to the Convention,
pursuant to section 3 of Part XV, which assisted the parties in reaching agreement on a treaty establishing their
maritime boundaries,174 and encourages States to consider all means to peacefully settle disputes in accordance with
international law;
V
The Area
62. Notes with satisfaction that the Authority commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the entry into
force of the Convention and its establishment at a special commemorative session of the Assembly;
63. Reiterates the importance of the ongoing elaboration and standardization by the Authority, pursuant
to article 145 of the Convention, of rules, regulations and procedures to ensure the effective protection of the
marine environment, for, inter alia, the protection and conservation of the natural resources of the Area and for
the prevention of damage to the flora and fauna of the marine environment from harmful effects that may arise
from activities in the Area;
64. Notes that, as at 31 July 2019, the Authority had entered into 15-year contracts with 17 contractors for
exploration for polymetallic nodules, 7 contractors for exploration for polymetallic sulphides and 5 contractors
for exploration for cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts,175 and had approved the thirtieth plan of work, for exploration
for polymetallic nodules, during the twenty-fifth session of the Authority;176
65. Welcomes the progress of the work of the Authority on draft regulations for exploitation of mineral
resources in the Area, takes note of the invitation to submit additional written comments on the draft regulations,
including specific drafting suggestions, and encourages the Authority to continue its work on the draft regulations as
a matter of priority and to provide sufficient opportunities and time for substantive consideration and discussion of
the draft regulations, and emphasizes the ongoing need for openness and transparency;
66. Recalls the relevance of the advisory opinion on the responsibilities and obligations of States sponsoring
persons and entities with respect to activities in the Area, issued by the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the Tribunal on
1 February 2011;177
67. Takes note of the public consultations organized in 2018 by two sponsoring States with regard to the
environmental impact assessments submitted to the Authority, ahead of technical tests to be held in 2019 in
the respective contract areas of their sponsored contractors in the Clarion-Clipperton Zone;
68. Recognizes the importance of the responsibilities entrusted to the Authority by articles 143 and 145 of the
Convention, which refer to marine scientific research and protection of the marine environment in the Area,
respectively;

_______________
See A/73/368, para. 19.
See ISBA/25/C/9.
176
See ISBA/25/C/33.
177
See ISBA/17/A/9.
174
175

110

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

69. Welcomes the adoption by the Assembly, at the twenty-fifth session of the Authority, of the high-level
action plan and performance indicators developed for each priority against each of the strategic directions in the
strategic plan of the Authority for the period 2019–2023, which provides a uniform basis for the strengthening of
existing working practices of the Authority;178
70. Also welcomes the public launch of the Authority database (DeepData), which aims to serve as the
principal repository of all data and information relating to activities in the Area;
71. Notes the endorsement by the Assembly, at the twenty-fifth session of the Authority, of the memorandum
of understanding between the Authority and the Ministry of Natural Resources of China on the establishment of a
joint training and research centre,179 which aims to promote and encourage the conduct of marine scientific research
in the Area, as well as international cooperation for the development of technological knowledge and research,
including by creating training and capacity-building opportunities, in particular for developing countries;180
72. Encourages the Authority to continue its work towards the standardization of marine bathymetric
information collected in the Area, in cooperation with relevant international organizations, including the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the International Hydrographic Organization, particularly under
the Seabed 2030 project;181
73. Welcomes the efforts of the Authority to make progress on the development of regional environmental
management plans in other priority areas in the Area, in particular where there are currently exploration contracts;182
VI
Effective functioning of the Authority and the Tribunal
74. Commends the progress in the work of the Authority;
75. Also commends the work of the Tribunal since its establishment;
76. Appeals to all States Parties to the Convention to pay their assessed contributions to the Tribunal in full
and on time, and also appeals to States Parties in arrears with their contributions to fulfil their obligations without
delay;
77. Expresses serious concern about the number of States Parties to the Convention in arrears with their
assessed contributions to the Authority, appeals to all States Parties to the Convention to pay their assessed
contributions to the Authority in full and on time, and urges them to fulfil their obligations without delay, in particular
those States whose exercise of voting rights has been suspended by virtue of article 184 of the Convention, and invites
the Secretary-General of the Authority to continue his efforts to recover arrears, including bilateral efforts;
78. Notes that there remains room for improvement in the level of attendance at the Assembly, and urges all
members of the Authority to participate in the meetings of the Assembly;
79. Welcomes the adoption by the Assembly of the terms of reference for the voluntary trust fund for
extrabudgetary support for the Authority and the adoption by the Assembly of the terms of reference for the voluntary
trust fund for the purpose of providing the requisite funds related to the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the Authority for the Enterprise, expresses its appreciation to the donors that have made
contributions to the voluntary trust funds, and encourages Member States, observers, contractors and other
stakeholders to contribute financially to those and other voluntary trust funds maintained by the Authority;183
80. Notes with serious concern the negative balance of the voluntary trust fund established pursuant to the
decision of the Authority at its eighth session184 for the purpose of defraying the cost of participation of members of

_______________
See ISBA/25/A/15 and ISBA/25/A/15/Corr.1.
See ISBA/25/A/17.
180
ISBA/25/A/4.
181
See ISBA/23/A/2.
182
See ISBA/25/C/12/Add.1, ISBA/25/C/13, ISBA/25/C/19/Add.1 and ISBA/25/C/37.
183
See ISBA/25/A/10-ISBA/25/C/31 and ISBA/25/A/14.
184
See ISBA/8/A/11.
178
179

111

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the Legal and Technical Commission from developing countries and members of the Finance Committee from
developing countries in the meetings of the Commission and of the Committee, notes the appeals to members and
other possible donors to make contributions to that fund, and to contractors to consider making a payment of 6,000
United States dollars on a voluntary basis, and expresses its appreciation to those that have made contributions to the
voluntary trust fund;
81. Expresses its appreciation to States that have made contributions to the endowment fund for marine
scientific research in the Area established by the Authority at its twelfth session,185 for the purpose of promoting and
encouraging the conduct of collaborative marine scientific research in the Area, and encourages States, observers,
contractors and other stakeholders to make additional contributions to this fund;
82. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Agreement on the
Privileges and Immunities of the Tribunal186 and to the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the Authority;187
83. Emphasizes the importance of the rules and staff regulations of the Tribunal in promoting the recruitment
of a geographically representative staff in the Professional and higher categories, and welcomes the actions taken by
the Tribunal in observance of those rules and regulations;
84. Calls upon coastal States that have not yet done so to deposit a copy of charts or lists of geographical
coordinates showing the outer limit lines of the continental shelf with the Secretary-General of the Authority, as
provided for in article 84, paragraph 2, of the Convention;
VII
The continental shelf and the work of the Commission
85. Recalls that, in accordance with article 76, paragraph 8, of the Convention, information on the limits of
the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is
measured shall be submitted by the coastal State to the Commission set up under annex II to the Convention on the
basis of equitable geographical representation, that the Commission shall make recommendations to coastal States on
matters related to the establishment of the outer limits of their continental shelf, and that the limits of the shelf
established by a coastal State on the basis of these recommendations shall be final and binding;
86. Also recalls that, in accordance with article 77, paragraph 3, of the Convention, the rights of the coastal
State over the continental shelf do not depend on occupation, effective or notional, or on any express proclamation;
87. Notes with satisfaction that a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention have submitted
information to the Commission regarding the establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200
nautical miles, in conformity with article 76 of the Convention and article 4 of annex II to the Convention, taking into
account the decision of the eleventh Meeting of States Parties to the Convention contained in SPLOS/72, paragraph (a);
88. Also notes with satisfaction that a considerable number of States Parties to the Convention have submitted
to the Secretary-General, pursuant to the decision of the eighteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention,188
preliminary information indicative of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles and a
description of the status of preparation and intended date of submission in accordance with the requirements of
article 76 of the Convention and with the Rules of Procedure and the Scientific and Technical Guidelines of the
Commission, and notes with satisfaction that additional submissions referred to in preliminary information have been
filed with the Commission;
89. Further notes with satisfaction the progress in the work of the Commission189 and that it is giving current
consideration to a number of submissions that have been made regarding the establishment of the outer limits of the
continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles;

_______________
See ISBA/12/A/11.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2167, No. 37925.
187
Ibid., vol. 2214, No. 39357.
188
See SPLOS/183.
189
See CLCS/106, CLCS/106/Corr.1, CLCS/108, CLCS/50/2 and CLCS/50/2/Corr.1.
185
186

112

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

90. Takes note of the 33 recommendations made by the Commission on the submissions of a number of
coastal States, and welcomes the fact that summaries of recommendations are being made publicly available in
accordance with paragraph 11.3 of annex III to the Rules of Procedure of the Commission;
91. Notes that the consideration by the Commission of submissions by coastal States in accordance with
article 76 of and annex II to the Convention is without prejudice to the application of other parts of the Convention by
States Parties;
92. Also notes the considerable number of submissions yet to be considered by the Commission and the
demands that this places on its members and the secretariat as provided by the Division, and emphasizes the need to
ensure that the Commission can perform its functions expeditiously, efficiently and effectively and maintain its high
level of quality and expertise;
93. Takes note with appreciation of the decision of the Commission at its forty-fourth session to continue,
during its five-year term of office, to meet for a total of 21 weeks per year by holding three sessions of seven weeks
each, and that no two sessions would be sequential,190 and further notes that more than nine subcommissions are
actively considering submissions;
94. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take appropriate measures, within overall existing resource
levels, to further strengthen the capacity of the Division, serving as the secretariat of the Commission, in order to
ensure enhanced support and assistance to the Commission and its subcommissions in their consideration of
submissions, as required by paragraph 9 of annex III to the Rules of Procedure of the Commission, in particular its
human resources, taking into account the need for simultaneous work on several submissions;
95. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to provide all necessary secretariat services to the Commission
in accordance with article 2, paragraph 5, of annex II to the Convention;
96. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate and timely measures to ensure secretariat services for
the Commission and its subcommissions for the extended duration of time requested in the decisions of the twentyfirst and twenty-sixth Meetings of States Parties to the Convention;160
97. Also requests the Secretary-General, consequently, to continue to allocate appropriate and sufficient
resources to the Division to provide adequate services and assistance to the Commission in view of the number of its
working weeks;
98. Expresses its appreciation to States that have made contributions to the voluntary trust fund established
pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose of facilitating the preparation of submissions to the Commission, and
encourages States, international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make additional contributions to this fund;
99. Notes that the Meeting of States Parties to the Convention, in its decisions regarding the conditions of
service of the members of the Commission,191 reaffirmed the obligation of States under the Convention whose experts
were serving on the Commission to defray the expenses of the experts they had nominated while the experts are in
performance of Commission duties, including the provision of medical coverage, and urged those States to do their
utmost to ensure the full participation of those experts in the work of the Commission, including the meetings of
subcommissions, in accordance with the Convention;
100. Also notes the decision of the twenty-ninth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention to continue the
consideration of the conditions of service of the members of the Commission within the open-ended working group
established by the twenty-third Meeting of States Parties to the Convention, as well as the request of the twenty-ninth
Meeting that the Secretariat prepare a comprehensive study that sets out possible options to address the working
conditions of the Commission, including its funding, to be discussed by the thirtieth Meeting of States Parties,
in 2020;145

_______________
190
191

See CLCS/100.
SPLOS/276 and SPLOS/286.

113

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

101. Emphasizes the importance of the voluntary trust fund established pursuant to resolution 55/7 in
facilitating the participation of members of the Commission from developing States in the meetings of the
Commission, and expresses its appreciation to States that have made contributions to this trust fund;
102. Reiterates its serious concern that the chronic underfunding of the trust fund referred to in paragraph 101
above may preclude the Commission from advancing its work as a result of the potential lack of a quorum at future
sessions, and may prevent it from further implementing the decision of the twenty-sixth Meeting of States Parties that
requested the Commission to meet for up to 26 weeks, and urges States, international financial institutions, donor
agencies, intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make
additional contributions to this fund;
103. Authorizes the use, as appropriate, of the trust fund referred to in paragraph 101 above, and in accordance
with the purpose of its terms of reference, to defray the cost of the participation of the Chair of the Commission, when
nominated by a developing country, in the Meetings of States Parties to the Convention;
104. Takes note of the written information, provided by the Secretary-General in response to the request in
paragraph 81 of resolution 69/245, on options for mechanisms to provide medical insurance coverage to members of
the Commission, including costs, and the information provided by the Secretariat during the twenty-seventh, twentyeighth and twenty-ninth Meetings of States Parties to the Convention;
105. Recalls its decision that, on an exceptional basis and without setting a precedent for other agenda items,
the members of the Commission have the option to join the Headquarters medical insurance scheme upon payment
of the full cost of the premium, and hereby authorizes the use of the trust fund referred to in paragraph 101 above by
the Secretary-General to reimburse the full costs of the premium paid by the members of the Commission from
developing States, subject to the availability of funds following the allocation of the required funds to cover the costs
of travel and daily subsistence allowance of the members of the Commission from developing States for the sessions
of the Commission during the annual insurance coverage period (1 July–30 June);
106. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in case the full costs of the Headquarters medical insurance scheme
have not been reimbursed, as an interim measure and subject to the availability of funds following the allocation of
the required funds to cover the costs of travel and daily subsistence allowance of the members of the Commission
from developing States for the sessions of the Commission in 2020, to reimburse those members for the costs of
medical travel insurance and short-term medical insurance from that trust fund on a session-by-session basis and
subject to a reasonable limit that the Secretary-General shall determine, based on the information regarding medical
travel insurance available;
107. Expresses its intention to continue to consider options for mechanisms to provide medical insurance
coverage to members of the Commission and, if necessary, to further review the terms of reference for the trust fund
referred to in paragraph 101 above;
108. Emphasizes the continued need for members of the Commission to have suitable working space for their
work at the sessions of the Commission and its subcommissions, recognizes, with regard to the long-term
accommodation discussions, that, owing to its exceptional character, the Commission has special requirements for its
working space, including the need for fit-for-purpose working space, adequate technical equipment and climate
control, and needs to remain located within the same premises as the Division, and emphasizes that, in the context of
any relocation of the Division or any change in its working space, full regard will be paid to these special requirements
of the Commission;
109. Approves the convening by the Secretary-General of the fifty-second, fifty-third and fifty-fourth sessions
of the Commission, in New York, from 27 January to 13 March 2020, from 6 July to 21 August 2020 and
from 7 October to 24 November 2020, respectively, with full conference services, including documentation, for the
plenary parts of these sessions,192 as well as any resumed sessions as may be required by the Commission, and requests
the Secretary-General to make every effort to meet these requirements within overall existing resources;

_______________
From 3 to 7 February and from 2 to 6 March 2020 during the fifty-second session, and from 27 to 30 July and from 10 to 14 August 2020
during the fifty-third session.
192

114

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

110. Expresses its firm conviction about the importance of the work of the Commission, carried out in
accordance with the Convention as well as in accordance with its Rules of Procedure, including with respect to the
participation of coastal States in relevant proceedings concerning their submissions, and recognizes the continued
need for active interaction between coastal States and the Commission;
111. Expresses its appreciation to States that have exchanged views in order to increase understanding of
issues, including expenditures involved, arising from the application of article 76 of the Convention, thus facilitating
the preparation of submissions by States, in particular developing States, to the Commission, and encourages States
to continue to exchange views;
112. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with Member States, to continue to support workshops or
symposiums on scientific and technical aspects of the establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond
200 nautical miles, taking into account the need to strengthen capacity-building for developing countries in preparing
their submissions;
VIII
Maritime safety and security and flag State implementation
113. Encourages States to ratify or accede to international agreements addressing the safety and security of
navigation, as well as maritime labour, and to adopt the necessary measures consistent with the Convention and other
relevant international instruments aimed at implementing and enforcing the rules contained in those agreements, and
emphasizes the need for capacity-building for and assistance to developing States;
114. Recognizes that the legal regimes governing maritime safety and maritime security may have common
and mutually reinforcing objectives that may be interrelated and could benefit from synergies, and encourages States
to take this into account in their implementation;
115. Emphasizes the need for further efforts to promote a culture of safety and security in the shipping industry
and to address the shortage of adequately trained personnel, and urges the development and strengthening of capacitybuilding activities and the provision of knowledge and skills through the required education and training, promoted
in particular by the International Maritime Organization in collaboration with other relevant international
organizations and agencies, as appropriate;
116. Also emphasizes that safety and security measures should be implemented in support of and with
minimal negative effects on seafarers and fishers, especially in relation to their working conditions, and welcomes
the ongoing cooperation between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
International Labour Organization in relation to decent work and employment in fisheries and aquaculture and on
child labour in fisheries and aquaculture, as well as the work that has been conducted by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the International Labour Organization on the issue of trafficking in persons and forced
labour on fishing vessels;
117. Welcomes the consideration by the International Maritime Organization of the fair treatment of seafarers,
recalls the adoption by the Organization on 4 December 2013 of resolution A.1090(28) on the fair treatment of crew
members in respect of shore leave and access to shore-side facilities, and welcomes the provision on shore leave,
which entered into force on 1 January 2018, in the Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic;193
118. Notes the themes for the 2019 and 2020 World Maritime Day, “Empowering women in the maritime
community” and “Sustainable shipping for a sustainable planet”, respectively;
119. Invites States that have not yet done so to become parties to the International Convention on Standards of
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978,194 as amended, and the International Convention on
Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995;
120. Encourages States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Work in Fishing
Convention, 2007 (No. 188), the Seafarers’ Identity Documents Convention (Revised), 2003 (No. 185)195 and the

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 591, No. 8564.
Ibid., vol. 1361, No. 23001.
195
Ibid., vol. 2304, No. 41069.
193
194

115

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Protocol to the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) of the International Labour Organization, as well as to the
Maritime Labour Convention, 2006,196 as amended, calls upon States to effectively implement their obligations under
those instruments, and emphasizes the need to provide to States, at their request, technical cooperation and assistance
in this regard;
121. Invites States to ratify or accede to the Cape Town Agreement of 2012 on the Implementation of the
Provisions of the Torremolinos Protocol of 1993 relating to the Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety
of Fishing Vessels, 1977;
122. Welcomes in this regard the holding of a Ministerial Conference on Fishing Vessel Safety and Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, organized by the International Maritime Organization and the Government of
Spain in Torremolinos, Spain, from 21 to 23 October 2019, to promote the ratification of the Cape Town Agreement,
whose entry into force would create a more robust International Maritime Organization regulatory framework for the
safety of fishing vessels and fishing vessel personnel;
123. Welcomes ongoing cooperation between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
International Maritime Organization and the International Labour Organization relating to the safety of fishers and
fishing vessels, and underlines the urgent need for continued work in that area;
124. Notes that, in its resolution A.1117(30) of 6 December 2017, the Assembly of the International Maritime
Organization revised the International Maritime Organization ship identification number scheme to expand its
voluntary application to a wider scope of vessels with a view to enhancing maritime safety and pollution prevention
and to facilitate the prevention of maritime fraud;
125. Recalls that all actions taken to combat threats to maritime security must be in accordance with
international law, including the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention;
126. Recognizes the crucial role of international cooperation at the global, regional, subregional and bilateral
levels in combating, in accordance with international law, threats to maritime security, including piracy, armed robbery
against ships at sea and terrorist acts against shipping, offshore installations and other maritime interests, through
bilateral and multilateral instruments and mechanisms aimed at monitoring, preventing and responding to such threats,
the enhanced sharing of information among States relevant to the detection, prevention and suppression of such
threats, and the prosecution of offenders with due regard to national legislation, and the need for sustained capacitybuilding to support such objectives, and in this regard welcomes initiatives under the twenty-sixth Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum, held in Bangkok on 2 August 2019, and the Work Plan for Maritime
Security 2018–2020;
127. Welcomes the adoption, in Lomé on 15 October 2016, by the African Union Extraordinary Summit of
Heads of State and Government on Maritime Security and Safety and Development in Africa of the Charter on
Maritime Security and Safety and Development in Africa (Lomé Charter), and encourages African Member States of
the United Nations that have not yet done so to consider ratifying this Charter to facilitate its entry into force;
128. Notes with satisfaction the organization in Mauritius in June 2019 of the second Ministerial Conference
on Maritime Security in the Western Indian Ocean;
129. Acknowledges the work of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in promoting
international cooperation and strengthening capacity to combat the problem of transnational organized crime
committed at sea;
130. Notes with concern that piracy and armed robbery at sea affect a wide range of vessels engaged in maritime
activities, and expresses grave concern at the threats posed by piracy and armed robbery at sea to the safety and welfare
of seafarers and other persons;
131. Emphasizes the importance of promptly reporting incidents to enable accurate information on the scope
of the problem of piracy and armed robbery against ships at sea and, in the case of armed robbery against ships at sea,
by affected vessels to the coastal State, underlines the importance of effective information-sharing with States
potentially affected by incidents of piracy and armed robbery against ships at sea, notes with appreciation the

_______________
196

116

Ibid., vol. 2952, No. 51299.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

important role of the International Maritime Organization and the important contribution of the Information Sharing
Centre of the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia,
based in Singapore, which aspires to be recognized as a centre of excellence within its purpose and mandate, and
notes the Maritime Domain Awareness for Trade – Gulf of Guinea mechanism, the United Kingdom Maritime Trade
Operations covering the high-risk area, the Regional Maritime Information Fusion Centre, based in Madagascar, and
the Regional Maritime Centre for Operational Coordination in Seychelles;
132. Urges all States, in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization, to actively combat piracy
and armed robbery at sea by adopting measures, including those relating to assistance with capacity-building through
training of seafarers, port staff and enforcement personnel in the prevention, reporting and investigation of incidents,
by bringing the alleged perpetrators to justice, in accordance with international law, and by adopting national
legislation, as well as by providing enforcement vessels and equipment and guarding against fraudulent ship
registration;
133. Encourages States to ensure effective implementation of international law applicable to combating piracy,
as reflected in the Convention, calls upon States to take appropriate steps under their national law to facilitate, in
accordance with international law, the apprehension and prosecution of those who are alleged to have committed acts
of piracy, including the financing or facilitation of such acts, also taking into account other relevant instruments that
are consistent with the Convention, and encourages States to cooperate, as appropriate, with a view to developing
their national legislation in this regard;
134. Invites all States, the International Maritime Organization, the International Labour Organization and other
relevant international organizations and agencies to adopt or recommend, as appropriate, measures to protect the
interest and welfare of seafarers, fishers and passengers who are victims of pirates, after their release from captivity,
including their post-incident care and reintegration into society;
135. Notes the compilation of national legislation on piracy on the website of the Division, and encourages the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Division to continue to cooperate with the International Maritime
Organization with a view to assisting Member States, upon request, in developing their national laws on piracy;
136. Recognizes continued national, bilateral and trilateral initiatives, as well as regional cooperative
mechanisms, in accordance with international law, to address piracy, including the financing or facilitation of acts of
piracy, and armed robbery at sea, and calls upon States to give immediate attention to adopting, concluding and
implementing cooperation agreements at the regional level on combating piracy and armed robbery against ships;
137. Expresses serious concern at the inhuman conditions hostages taken at sea face in captivity and also the
adverse impact on their families, calls for the immediate release of all hostages taken at sea, and stresses the
importance of cooperation among Member States on the issue of hostage-taking at sea;
138. Welcomes, in this regard, the ongoing work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Hostage
Support Programme, funded by the Board of the trust fund to support initiatives of States countering piracy off the
coast of Somalia, in securing the release of seafarers held hostage off the coast of Somalia;197
139. Also welcomes the recent achievements against piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia
resulting from efforts at the global and regional levels, which have resulted in a steady decline in pirate attacks as well
as hijackings since 2011, in that regard continues to be gravely concerned by the ongoing threat that piracy and armed
robbery at sea continue to pose in the region off the coast of Somalia, notes the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2500 (2019) of 4 December 2019, as well as the statements by the President of the Council of 25 August
2010198 and of 19 November 2012,199 also notes that the authorization in resolution 2500 (2019) and relevant
resolutions apply only with respect to the situation in Somalia and shall not affect the rights, obligations or
responsibilities of Member States under international law, including any rights or obligations under the Convention,
with respect to any other situation, and underscores, in particular, that they shall not be considered as establishing
customary international law;

_______________
See S/2013/623, paras. 11–13, and S/2014/740, para. 10.
S/PRST/2010/16; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2010–31 July 2011 (S/INF/66).
199
S/PRST/2012/24; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2012–31 July 2013 (S/INF/68).
197
198

117

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

140. Notes the continued efforts within the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia following the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1851 (2008) of 16 December 2008, including at its twenty-second plenary
session, chaired by Mauritius in Balaclava, Mauritius, in June 2019, and commends the contributions of all States in
the efforts to fight piracy off the coast of Somalia;
141. Recognizes the primary responsibility of the Federal Government of Somalia in combating piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, acknowledges the importance of a comprehensive and sustainable
settlement of the situation in Somalia, and emphasizes the need to address the underlying causes of piracy and to assist
Somalia and States in the region, at their request, in strengthening institutional capacity to fight piracy and tackle its
underlying causes, including the financing or facilitation of acts of piracy, and armed robbery against ships off the
coast of Somalia and to bring to justice those involved in such acts;
142. Notes the International Maritime Organization guidelines to assist in the investigation of the crimes of
piracy and armed robbery against ships, revised interim guidance to shipowners, ship operators and shipmasters on
the use of privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships in the high-risk area, revised interim
recommendations for flag States regarding the use of privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships in
the high-risk area, revised interim recommendations for port and coastal States regarding the use of privately
contracted armed security personnel on board ships in the high-risk area, interim guidance to private maritime security
companies providing privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships in the high-risk area, and interim
guidance for flag States on measures to prevent and mitigate Somalia-based piracy;
143. Notes with concern that the continuing limited capacity and domestic legislation to facilitate the custody
and prosecution of suspected pirates after their capture has hindered more robust international action against pirates
off the coast of Somalia;
144. Encourages States to ensure that ships flying their flag apply ship security measures approved in
accordance with national and international law;
145. Notes the efforts made by the shipping industry to cooperate with the efforts by States regarding piracy
off the coast of Somalia, in particular in assisting ships that navigate in that area, and recalls the adoption on
30 November 2011 by the Assembly of the International Maritime Organization of resolution A.1044(27) on piracy
and armed robbery against ships in waters off the coast of Somalia;
146. Also notes the continued implementation of the Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden (Djibouti Code of Conduct), adopted
on 29 January 2009 under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization, in the four thematic areas of
information-sharing, training, national legislation and capacity-building, and notes the adoption in January 2017 of
the Jeddah Amendment to the Djibouti Code of Conduct;
147. Expresses its deep concern at the continuing incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea, in particular violence against innocent crew members of vessels, notes the adoption by the Security Council
of resolutions 2018 (2011) of 31 October 2011 and 2039 (2012) of 29 February 2012 and the statement by the
President of the Council of 25 April 2016,200 supports the recent efforts to address this problem at the global and
regional levels, recalls the primary role of States in the region to counter the threat and address the underlying causes
of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, welcomes the adoption in Yaoundé on 25 June 2013 of the
Code of Conduct concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illegal Maritime Activity
in West and Central Africa, and calls upon States in the region to implement the Code of Conduct as soon as possible
and consistent with international law, in particular the Convention;
148. Urges States to ensure the full implementation of resolution A.1069(28) of 29 November 2013 of the
Assembly of the International Maritime Organization on prevention and suppression of piracy, armed robbery against
ships and illicit maritime activity in the Gulf of Guinea;
149. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation201 and the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts

_______________
200
201

118

S/PRST/2016/4; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2015–31 December 2016 (S/INF/71).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1678, No. 29004.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf,201 invites States that have not yet done so to
consider becoming parties to the 2005 Protocol to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Maritime Navigation202 and the 2005 Protocol to the 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf,203 and urges States parties to take appropriate
measures to ensure the effective implementation of those instruments through the adoption of legislation, where
appropriate;
150. Calls upon States to effectively implement the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code and the
amendments to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea,204 and to work with the International
Maritime Organization to promote safe and secure shipping while ensuring freedom of navigation;
151. Urges all States, in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization, to improve the protection
of offshore installations by adopting measures related to the prevention, reporting and investigation of acts of violence
against installations, in accordance with international law, and by implementing such measures through national
legislation to ensure proper and adequate enforcement;
152. Emphasizes the progress in regional cooperation, including the efforts of littoral States, on the
enhancement of safety, security and environmental protection in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, and the
effective functioning of the Cooperative Mechanism on Safety of Navigation and Environmental Protection in the
Straits of Malacca and Singapore (the Cooperative Mechanism) to promote dialogue and facilitate close cooperation
between the littoral States, user States, shipping industries and other stakeholders in line with article 43 of the
Convention, notes with appreciation the convening of the twelfth Cooperation Forum, in Indonesia on 30 September
and 1 October 2019, the twelfth Project Coordination Committee Meeting, in Indonesia on 4 October 2019, the fortyfourth Tripartite Technical Experts Group Meeting in Indonesia on 2 and 3 October 2019 and the twenty-second and
twenty-third Aids to Navigation Fund Committee Meetings, in Malaysia on 25 and 26 April 2019 and on 26 and
27 September 2019, notes with appreciation the important role of the Information Sharing Centre of the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, based in Singapore, and
calls upon States to give immediate attention to adopting, concluding and implementing cooperation agreements at
the regional level;
153. Recognizes that some transnational organized criminal activities threaten legitimate uses of the oceans and
endanger the lives of people at sea, as well as the livelihoods and security of coastal communities;
154. Notes that transnational organized criminal activities are diverse and may be interrelated in some cases
and that criminal organizations are adaptive and take advantage of the vulnerabilities of States, in particular coastal
and small island developing States in transit areas, and calls upon States and relevant intergovernmental organizations
to increase cooperation and coordination at all levels to detect and suppress the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in
persons and illicit trafficking in firearms, in accordance with international law;
155. Recognizes the importance of enhancing international cooperation at all levels to fight transnational
organized criminal activities, including illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, within the scope
of the United Nations instruments against illicit drug trafficking, as well as the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in
persons and illicit trafficking in firearms and criminal activities at sea falling within the scope of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto;
156. Encourages States to cooperate at the bilateral, regional and global levels to prevent, combat and eradicate
illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora where such trafficking occurs via maritime routes,
through, inter alia, the use of applicable international legal instruments as appropriate, such as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,205 the United Nations Convention against Corruption206 and the

_______________
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.15/21.
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.15/22.
204
International Maritime Organization, documents SOLAS/CONF.5/32 and SOLAS/CONF.5/34, and document MSC 81/25/Add.1,
annex 2, resolution MSC.202(81), introducing the long-range identification and tracking of ships system.
205
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
206
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
202
203

119

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora,207 and reiterates its call upon
Member States expressed in its resolution 71/326 of 11 September 2017 to make illicit trafficking in protected species
of wild fauna and flora a serious crime, in accordance with their national legislation and as defined in article 2 (b) and
article 3, paragraph 1 (b), of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, in order to ensure
that, where the offence is transnational in nature and involves an organized criminal group, effective international
cooperation can be afforded under the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime to prevent
and combat transnational organized crime;
157. Notes with grave concern the recent proliferation of, and endangerment of lives through, the smuggling
of migrants by sea, underscores the necessity to address such situations in accordance with applicable international
law, and encourages States, acting nationally or through relevant global or regional organizations, as appropriate, to
provide technical assistance and capacity-building to flag, port and coastal States, upon request, to enhance their
capabilities to prevent smuggling of migrants and human trafficking by sea;
158. Calls upon States, in that context, to take measures in accordance with relevant international obligations
to prevent and combat all forms of trafficking in persons, to identify victims of human trafficking, including among
migrant flows, and to provide trafficking victims with appropriate protection and assistance, according to their national
law and policy;
159. Calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime,208 the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime,209 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,210 and to take appropriate
measures to ensure their effective implementation;
160. Calls upon States to ensure freedom of navigation, the safety of navigation and the rights of transit passage,
archipelagic sea lanes passage and innocent passage in accordance with international law, in particular the Convention;
161. Welcomes the work of the International Maritime Organization relating to the protection of shipping lanes
of strategic importance and significance, and in particular in enhancing safety, security and environmental protection
in straits used for international navigation, and calls upon that Organization, States bordering straits and user States to
continue their cooperation to keep such straits safe, secure and environmentally protected and open to international
navigation at all times, consistent with international law, in particular the Convention;
162. Calls upon user States and States bordering straits used for international navigation to continue to
cooperate by agreement on matters relating to navigational safety, including safety aids for navigation, and the
prevention, reduction and control of pollution from ships, and welcomes developments in this regard;
163. Calls upon States that have accepted the amendments to regulation XI‑1/6 of the International Convention
for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974,211 to implement the Code of International Standards and Recommended Practices
for a Safety Investigation into a Marine Casualty or Marine Incident,212 which took effect on 1 January 2010, and, in
particular, to comply with the mandatory conduct of a marine safety investigation into very serious marine casualties
and submission of a marine safety investigation report to the International Maritime Organization to identify trends
and develop knowledge and risk-based recommendations;
164. Takes note of International Maritime Organization resolution A.1091(28) of 4 December 2013 on guidelines
on the preservation and collection of evidence following an allegation of a serious crime having taken place on board
a ship or following a report of a missing person from a ship, and pastoral and medical care of persons affected;

_______________
Ibid., vol. 993, No. 14537.
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
209
Ibid., vol. 2326, No. 39574.
210
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
211
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 84/24/Add.1, annex 3, resolution MSC.257(84).
212
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 84/24/Add.1, annex 1, resolution MSC.255(84).
207
208

120

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

165. Recognizes the important work of the International Hydrographic Organization, calls upon States that have
not yet done so to consider becoming members of that Organization, encourages all its members to actively consider,
in accordance with applicable rules and procedures, applications of States that wish to become members of that
Organization, and urges all States to work with that Organization to increase the coverage of hydrographic information
on a global basis to enhance capacity-building and technical assistance and to promote safe navigation, particularly
through the production and use of accurate electronic navigational charts, especially in areas used for international
navigation, in ports and where there are vulnerable or protected marine areas;
166. Also recognizes the importance of navigational warning services based on marine meteorological data for
the safety of ships and lives at sea and the optimization of navigation routes, and notes the collaboration between the
World Meteorological Organization and the International Maritime Organization for the enhancement of these
services and their extension to the Arctic region;
167. Encourages States to continue their efforts in the implementation of all areas of the Action Plan for the
Safety of Transport of Radioactive Material, approved by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency in March 2004;
168. Also encourages States to ensure effective implementation of the International Maritime Dangerous
Goods Code, the International Maritime Solid Bulk Cargoes Code, the International Code for the Construction and
Equipment of Ships carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk and the International Code for the Construction and Equipment
of Ships carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk;
169. Notes that cessation of the transport of radioactive materials through the regions of small island developing
States is an ultimate desired goal of small island developing States and some other countries, and recognizes the right
of freedom of navigation in accordance with international law; that States should maintain dialogue and consultation,
in particular under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the International Maritime
Organization, with the aim of improved mutual understanding, confidence-building and enhanced communication in
relation to the safe maritime transport of radioactive materials; that States involved in the transport of such materials
are urged to continue to engage in dialogue with small island developing States and other States to address their
concerns; and that these concerns include the further development and strengthening, within the appropriate forums,
of international regulatory regimes to enhance safety, disclosure, liability, security and compensation in relation to
such transport;
170. Acknowledges, in the context of paragraph 169 above, the potential environmental and economic impacts
of maritime incidents and accidents on coastal States, in particular those related to the transport of radioactive
materials, and emphasizes the importance of effective liability regimes in that regard;
171. Invites States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Nairobi International
Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007;213
172. Requests States to take appropriate measures with regard to ships flying their flag or of their registry to
address hazards that may be caused by wrecks and drifting or sunken cargo to navigation or the marine
environment;
173. Calls upon States to ensure that masters on ships flying their flag take the steps required by relevant
instruments214 to provide assistance to persons in distress at sea, and urges States to cooperate and to take all measures
necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the amendments to the International Convention on Maritime
Search and Rescue215 and to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea216 relating to the delivery of
persons rescued at sea to a place of safety, as well as of the associated Guidelines on the Treatment of Persons Rescued
at Sea;217

_______________
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.16/19.
Convention on International Civil Aviation, 1944, annex 12, International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, International
Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979, as amended, United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982, and International
Convention on Salvage, 1989.
215
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.1, annex 5, resolution MSC.155(78).
216
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.1, annex 3, resolution MSC.153(78).
217
International Maritime Organization, document MSC 78/26/Add.2, annex 34, resolution MSC.167(78).
213
214

121

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

174. Recognizes that all States must fulfil their search and rescue responsibilities in accordance with
international law, including the Convention, reaffirms the ongoing need for the International Maritime
Organization and other relevant organizations to assist, in particular, developing States both to increase and
improve their search and rescue capabilities, including, as appropriate, through the establishment of additional
rescue coordination centres and regional sub-centres, and to take effective action to address, to the extent feasible,
the issue of unseaworthy ships and small craft within their national jurisdiction, and emphasizes in this regard the
importance of cooperation for these purposes, including within the framework of the International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979;218
175. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant actors in relation to disembarkation of persons rescued at sea,
underscores in this regard the need to implement all relevant and applicable international instruments and the
importance of cooperation among States as provided for in those instruments, and emphasizes in particular the
importance of full respect for the principle of non‑refoulement in accordance with applicable international law;
176. Invites States to implement the Revised Guidelines on the Prevention of Access by Stowaways and the
Allocation of Responsibilities to Seek the Successful Resolution of Stowaway Cases, adopted by the Maritime Safety
Committee of the International Maritime Organization in its resolution MSC.448(99) of 24 May 2018 and by the
Facilitation Committee of that Organization in its resolution FAL.13(42) of 8 June 2018;
177. Calls upon States to continue to cooperate in developing comprehensive approaches to international
migration and development, including through dialogue on all their aspects;
178. Also calls upon States to take measures to protect fibre-optic submarine cables and to fully address issues
relating to these cables, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
179. Encourages greater dialogue and cooperation among States and the relevant regional and global
organizations through workshops and seminars on the protection and maintenance of fibre-optic submarine cables to
promote the security of such critical communications infrastructure;
180. Also encourages the adoption by States of laws and regulations addressing the breaking or injury of
submarine cables or pipelines beneath the high seas done wilfully or through culpable negligence by a ship flying its
flag or by a person subject to its jurisdiction, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
181. Affirms the importance of maintenance, including the repair, of submarine cables, undertaken in
conformity with international law, as reflected in the Convention;
182. Reaffirms that flag, port and coastal States all bear responsibility for ensuring the effective
implementation and enforcement of international instruments relating to maritime security and safety, in
accordance with international law, in particular the Convention, and that flag States have primary responsibility
that requires further strengthening, including through increased transparency of ownership of vessels and the
monitoring of organizations authorized to carry out surveys and issue certificates on their behalf, taking into
account the Code for Recognized Organizations;219
183. Urges flag States without an effective maritime administration and appropriate legal frameworks to
establish or enhance the necessary infrastructure, legislative and enforcement capabilities to ensure effective
compliance with and implementation and enforcement of their responsibilities under international law, in particular
the Convention, and, until such action is taken, to consider declining the granting of the right to fly their flag to new
vessels, suspending their registry or not opening a registry, and calls upon flag and port States to take all measures
consistent with international law necessary to prevent the operation of substandard vessels;
184. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization on measures to prevent the fraudulent
registration and fraudulent registries of ships;

_______________
218
219

122

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1405, No. 23489.
International Maritime Organization, resolutions MSC.349(92) and MEPC.237(65).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

185. Recognizes that international shipping rules and standards adopted by the International Maritime
Organization in respect of maritime safety, efficiency of navigation and the prevention and control of marine pollution,
complemented by best practices of the shipping industry, have led to a significant reduction in maritime accidents and
pollution incidents;
186. Notes that audits of Member States under the International Maritime Organization Member State Audit
Scheme became mandatory in January 2016 under nine mandatory International Maritime Organization instruments
and are being carried out in accordance with the Framework and the Procedures for the International Maritime
Organization Member State Audit Scheme and using the International Maritime Organization Instruments
Implementation Code (III Code) as the audit standard;220
187. Encourages States and competent international organizations and bodies to support the effective
implementation of the requirements of the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code),
adopted by the International Maritime Organization under the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
and the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of
1978 relating thereto, as amended,221 including relevant requirements of the International Convention on Standards
of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978, as amended;222
188. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization on matters related to passenger ship
safety, and encourages States and competent international organizations and bodies to support continued efforts,
including technical cooperation activities, to improve passenger ship safety;
189. Recognizes that maritime safety can also be improved through effective port State control, the
strengthening of regional arrangements and increased coordination and cooperation among them and increased
transparency and information-sharing, making ample use of information systems, such as the International Maritime
Organization Global Integrated Shipping Information System,223 including among safety and security sectors;
190. Encourages flag States to take appropriate measures sufficient to achieve or maintain recognition by
intergovernmental arrangements that recognize satisfactory flag State performance, including, as appropriate,
satisfactory port State control examination results on a sustained basis, with a view to improving quality shipping and
furthering flag State implementation of relevant instruments under the International Maritime Organization as well as
relevant goals and objectives of the present resolution;
191. Notes with appreciation the important contribution of the International Association of Marine Aids to
Navigation and Lighthouse Authorities to the improvement and harmonization of marine aids to navigation for the
reduction of marine accidents, increased safety of life and property at sea and the protection of the marine
environment, and in this regard notes with interest the convening of the International Association of Marine Aids to
Navigation and Lighthouse Authorities diplomatic conference, to be held in Kuala Lumpur from 25 to 28 February
2020, to consider the adoption of a convention on the international organization for marine aids to navigation;
IX
Marine environment and marine resources
192. Emphasizes once again the importance of the implementation of Part XII of the Convention in order to
protect and preserve the marine environment and its living marine resources against pollution and physical
degradation, and calls upon all States to cooperate and take measures consistent with the Convention, directly or
through competent international organizations, for the protection and preservation of the marine environment;

_______________
See International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolutions A.1018(26), A.1067(28), A.1068(28) and A.1070(28).
International Maritime Organization, document MEPC 62/24/Add.1, annex 19, resolution MEPC.203(62).
222
International Maritime Organization, resolutions MSC.385(94) and MEPC.264(68) and related amendments to the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (resolution MSC.386(94)) and the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from
Ships (resolution MEPC.265(68)).
223
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolutions A.1029(26) and A.1074(28).
220
221

123

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

193. Calls upon States to implement the 2030 Agenda, including Goal 14 to conserve and sustainably use the
oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development, and recalls that the Goals and targets are integrated
and indivisible;
194. Reiterates, in this regard, the call made in the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action”
for action to be taken on an urgent basis to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development;224
195. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States committed themselves to protect and restore the health,
productivity and resilience of oceans and marine ecosystems, to maintain their biodiversity, enabling their
conservation and sustainable use for present and future generations, and to effectively apply an ecosystem approach
and the precautionary approach in the management, in accordance with international law, of activities having an
impact on the marine environment, to deliver on all three dimensions of sustainable development;
196. Reaffirms paragraph 119 of resolution 61/222 of 20 December 2006 regarding ecosystem approaches and
oceans, including the proposed elements of an ecosystem approach, means to achieve implementation of an ecosystem
approach and requirements for improved application of an ecosystem approach, and in this regard:
(a) Notes that continued environmental degradation in many parts of the world and increasing competing
demands require an urgent response and the setting of priorities for management actions aimed at conserving
ecosystem integrity;
(b) Also notes that ecosystem approaches to ocean management should be focused on managing human
activities in order to maintain and, where needed, restore ecosystem health to sustain goods and environmental
services, provide social and economic benefits for food security, sustain livelihoods in support of international
development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,225 and conserve
marine biodiversity;
(c) Recalls that States should be guided in the application of ecosystem approaches by a number of existing
instruments, in particular the Convention, which sets out the legal framework for all activities in the oceans and seas, and
its implementing Agreements, as well as other commitments, such as those contained in the Convention on Biological
Diversity226 and the World Summit on Sustainable Development call for the application of an ecosystem approach by
2010,162 and in this context encourages States to enhance their efforts towards applying such an approach;
(d) Encourages States to cooperate and coordinate their efforts and take, individually or jointly, as appropriate,
all measures, in conformity with international law, including the Convention and other applicable instruments, to
address impacts on marine ecosystems within and beyond areas of national jurisdiction, taking into account the
integrity of the ecosystems concerned;
197. Encourages competent organizations and bodies that have not yet done so to incorporate an ecosystem
approach into their mandates, as appropriate, in order to address impacts on marine ecosystems;
198. Acknowledges the request by the United Nations Environment Assembly at its second session, in
paragraph 6 of its resolution 2/10 of 27 May 2016, to the United Nations Environment Programme to step up its work,
including through its Regional Seas Programme, on assisting countries and regions in the application of the ecosystem
approach to managing the marine and coastal environment, including through enabling intersectoral cooperation in
integrated coastal zone management and marine spatial planning;227
199. Encourages States, directly or through competent international organizations, to consider the further
development and application, as appropriate and consistent with international law, including the Convention, of
environmental impact assessment processes covering planned activities under their jurisdiction or control that may
cause substantial pollution of or significant and harmful changes to the marine environment, and also encourages the
communication of the reports of the results of such assessments to the competent international organizations in
accordance with the Convention;

_______________
Resolution 71/312, annex.
Resolution 55/2.
226
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
227
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/71/25), annex.
224
225

124

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

200. Notes with concern the impacts of climate change on the oceans and the cryosphere, to which lowlying islands, in particular small island developing States, coasts and coastal communities are particularly
exposed;
201. Also notes with concern the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in its special
report entitled The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, as well as the summary for policymakers, which
was accepted by the Intergovernmental Panel at its fifty-first session on 23 September 2019;
202. Recognizes the importance of improving understanding of the impact of climate change on oceans and
seas, and recalls that, in “The future we want”, States noted that sea level rise and coastal erosion are serious threats
for many coastal regions and islands, particularly in developing countries, and in this regard called upon the
international community to enhance its efforts to address these challenges;
203. Takes note of the findings of reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, including its
Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, that increasing warming amplifies the exposure of small islands,
low-lying coastal areas and deltas to the risks associated with sea level rise;
204. Also takes note of the decision by the International Law Commission at its seventy-first session to include
the topic “Sea-level rise in relation to international law” in its programme of work;228
205. Notes the eighteenth meeting of the Informal Consultative Process in 2017, which focused on the theme
“The effects of climate change on oceans”, during which delegations discussed, inter alia, the environmental, social
and economic impacts on all States, in particular developing States, of the effects of climate change on the oceans, as
well as the urgent need to address such effects and impacts, the need for international cooperation and coordination,
including concerted and immediate action to combat the effects of climate change on the oceans, as well as the need
for continued coordinated international focus in recognition that, owing to the interconnected nature of the oceans,
ensuing impacts cannot be overcome by any single State and, in particular, in view of the grave implications for
countries with low-lying coasts, some of whose very existence is under threat;229
206. Welcomes the Paris Agreement230 and its early entry into force on 4 November 2016, encourages all its
parties to fully implement the Agreement and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change231 that have not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, as
appropriate, as soon as possible, and recognizes the importance of raising awareness of the adverse impact of climate
change on the marine environment, marine biodiversity and sea level;
207. Also welcomes, in this regard, the convening of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the fifteenth session of the Conference of the
Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the second session of the Conference of the
Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement in Madrid, from 2 to 13 December 2019;
208. Notes with concern the severe impacts on coastal communities of extreme weather events, such as tropical
cyclones and associated storm surges, and encourages cooperative actions by relevant United Nations bodies and
organizations, including the World Meteorological Organization and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission with the advice of the Joint WMO-IOC Collaborative Board,232 to assist States in improving forecasting,
including impact-based forecasting, of such events and its application in multi-hazard early warning systems and risk
management under a more integrated approach to addressing the impacts of flooding types from multiple sources and
severe weather;233

_______________
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/74/10).
See A/72/95.
230
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
231
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
232
Established through World Meteorological Organization resolution 9 (Cg-18) and Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
resolution XXX-2, which also disbanded the Joint WMO-IOC Technical Commission for Oceanography and Marine Meteorology.
233
See World Meteorological Organization resolution 15 (Cg-18).
228
229

125

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

209. Also notes with concern the approximately 30 per cent increase in the acidity of ocean surface waters since
the beginning of the industrial era234 and the wide range of impacts associated with the continuing and alarming
acidification of the world’s oceans, and urges States to make significant efforts to tackle the causes of ocean
acidification, recognizing countries’ national circumstances and respective capabilities, and to further study and
minimize its impacts, to enhance local, national, regional and global cooperation in this regard, including the sharing
of relevant information and the development of worldwide capacity, including in developing countries, to measure
ocean acidification, and to take steps to make marine ecosystems healthier and, as a result, more resilient, to the extent
possible, to the impacts of ocean acidification;
210. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States called for support for initiatives that address ocean
acidification and the impacts of climate change on marine and coastal ecosystems and resources and in this regard
reiterated the need to work collectively to prevent further ocean acidification, as well as to enhance the resilience of
marine ecosystems and of the communities whose livelihoods depend on them, and to support marine scientific
research, monitoring and observation of ocean acidification and particularly vulnerable ecosystems, including through
enhanced international cooperation in this regard;
211. Recognizes the attention paid to ocean acidification at the fourteenth, eighteenth and nineteenth meetings
of the Informal Consultative Process, in 2013, 2017 and 2018, respectively, and commits itself to continue to pay
attention to this important issue, including by taking into account the First Global Integrated Marine Assessment (the
first World Ocean Assessment), the ongoing work of the Ocean Acidification International Coordination Centre of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the scientific cooperation fostered by the Global Ocean Acidification
Observing Network;
212. Notes the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, notes with concern its findings on the
acidification of the oceans and the substantial risks to marine ecosystems, especially polar ecosystems, coral reefs,
plankton and other organisms which have a calcareous exoskeleton, or a shell, like crustaceans, and the potentially
detrimental consequences for fisheries and livelihoods, as well as the findings of the World Meteorological
Organization contained in its annual Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, and notes its decision to foster collaboration with
organizations and institutions that address the carbon budget of the ocean,235 and in this regard encourages States and
competent international organizations and other relevant institutions, individually and in cooperation, to urgently
pursue further research on ocean acidification, especially programmes of observation and measurement, noting in
particular the continued work under the Convention on Biological Diversity, and to increase national, regional and
global efforts to address levels of ocean acidity and the negative impact of such acidity on vulnerable marine
ecosystems, particularly coral reefs;
213. Encourages States, individually or in collaboration with relevant international organizations and bodies,
to enhance their scientific activity to better understand the effects of climate change on the marine environment and
marine biodiversity, support continued coordination of scientific work to study and minimize the impacts of ocean
acidification and develop ways and means of adaptation, taking into account, as appropriate, the precautionary
approach and ecosystem approaches;
214. Notes the vital role that coastal blue carbon ecosystems, including mangroves, tidal marshes and
seagrasses, play in climate adaptation and mitigation through carbon sequestration, and in increasing the resilience of
coastal ecosystems to ocean acidification, and the range of other benefits that these ecosystems provide, including
sustainable livelihoods, food security and biodiversity conservation, and coastal protection, and encourages States and
relevant international institutions and organizations to work collaboratively to protect and restore coastal blue carbon
ecosystems;
215. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States noted with concern that the health of oceans and marine
biodiversity are negatively affected by marine pollution, including marine debris, especially plastic, persistent organic
pollutants, heavy metals and nitrogen-based compounds, from a number of marine and land-based sources, including
shipping and land run-off, and that States committed to take action to reduce the incidence and impacts of such

_______________
As stated in the 2013 report of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on the physical science basis of
climate change.
235
See World Meteorological Organization resolution 46 (Cg 17).
234

126

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

pollution on marine ecosystems, including through the effective implementation of relevant conventions adopted in
the framework of the International Maritime Organization, and the follow-up of relevant initiatives such as the Global
Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities,236 as well as the
adoption of coordinated strategies to this end, and that they further committed to take action, by 2025, based on
collected scientific data, to achieve significant reductions in marine debris to prevent harm to the coastal and marine
environment;
216. Encourages States, in accordance with the commitment expressed in “The future we want” and based on
collected scientific data, to take action by 2025 to achieve significant reductions in marine debris to prevent harm to
the coastal and marine environment;
217. Notes the discussions at the seventeenth meeting of the Informal Consultative Process, in 2016, which
focused on the theme “Marine debris, plastics and microplastics” and which, inter alia, highlighted that the size of the
problem had increased exponentially since the topic of marine debris was addressed at the sixth meeting of the
Informal Consultative Process, in 2005, noted that marine debris in general, and plastics in particular, were some of
the greatest environmental concerns of our time, along with climate change, ocean acidification and loss of
biodiversity, discussed prevention and emphasized the need to address the issue, both downstream, through improved
mechanisms for waste management, disposal and recycling, and upstream, by addressing consumption and
production patterns, including through awareness-raising campaigns;237
218. Recognizes the need for better understanding of the sources, amounts, pathways, distribution, trends,
nature and impacts of marine debris, especially plastics and microplastics, and to examine possible measures and best
available techniques and environmental practices to prevent its accumulation and minimize its levels in the marine
environment, and welcomes in this regard the work conducted under the Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific
Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection, led by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, and its
report entitled Sources, Fate and Effects of Microplastics in the Marine Environment: A Global Assessment, its report
entitled Guidelines for the Monitoring and Assessment of Plastic Litter in the Ocean, and the report of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment Programme on marine plastic debris and microplastics, which reviews
best-available knowledge and experiences in this regard and gives recommendations for further steps to reduce plastic
litter and microplastic in the oceans;238
219. Notes that the UNEP Frontiers 2016 Report identifies microplastics as one of six key emerging
environmental issues, further notes that the sixth Global Environment Outlook stresses, inter alia, the urgency of
addressing ocean plastic pollution and the proven adverse impacts of microplastics to marine ecosystems, and calls
upon States to implement resolution 4/6 on marine plastic litter and microplastics, adopted by the United Nations
Environment Assembly of the United Nations Environment Programme at its fourth session, held in Nairobi
from 11 to 15 March 2019;151
220. Welcomes the request by the United Nations Environment Assembly, in paragraph 2 of its resolution 4/6,
to the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, subject to the availability of resources and
benefiting from the work of existing mechanisms, to immediately strengthen scientific and technological knowledge
with regard to marine litter, including marine plastic litter and microplastics;
221. Acknowledges the decision of the United Nations Environment Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its
resolution 4/6, to extend the mandate of the ad hoc open-ended expert group on marine litter and microplastics, and
its request to the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to report to the United Nations
Environment Assembly at its fifth session on the progress achieved in the implementation of that resolution;
222. Welcomes the activities of relevant United Nations bodies and organizations, in particular the United
Nations Environment Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International
Maritime Organization and other intergovernmental organizations, to address the sources and impacts of marine
debris, including through the Global Partnership on Marine Litter, as well as actions relating to marine debris taken
under the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild

_______________
A/51/116, annex II.
See A/71/204.
238
UNEP/EA.2/5.
236
237

127

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Animals,239 in particular the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to that Convention at its twelfth meeting of
resolution 12.20 on the management of marine debris, and notes the work of the International Whaling Commission
on assessing the impacts of marine debris on cetaceans;
223. Encourages States to further develop partnerships with industry and civil society to raise awareness of the
extent of the impact of marine debris on the biological diversity, health and productivity of the marine environment
and consequent economic loss and to cooperate with other States, industry and civil society, as appropriate, on
environmentally sound and cost-effective measures to prevent and reduce, as appropriate, marine debris and
microplastics in the marine environment, including through strengthened cooperation under the Global Partnership
on Marine Litter;
224. Urges States to integrate the issue of marine debris into national and, as appropriate, regional strategies
dealing with waste management, especially in the coastal zone, ports and maritime industries, including recycling,
reuse, reduction and disposal, to consider developing an integrated waste management infrastructure and to encourage
the development of appropriate economic incentives with the aim of reducing marine debris to address this issue,
including the development of cost-recovery systems that provide an incentive to use port reception facilities and
discourage ships from discharging marine debris at sea, and support for measures to prevent, reduce and control
pollution from any source, including land-based sources, such as community-based coastal and waterway clean-up
and monitoring activities, and encourages States to cooperate regionally and subregionally to identify potential sources
and coastal and oceanic locations where marine debris aggregates and to develop and implement joint prevention
programmes for marine debris and to develop and implement environmentally sound options for recovery
programmes, as well as to raise awareness of the issue of marine debris and the need to consider environmentally
sound options for its removal;
225. Notes the activities carried out by organizations at the regional level to develop and implement regional
action plans and other joint prevention and recovery programmes for marine debris, and further notes in this regard,
the revised Regional Action Plan on Marine Litter adopted at the twenty-fourth Intergovernmental Meeting of the
Coordinating Body on the Seas of East Asia, held in Bali, Indonesia, on 19 and 20 June 2019, which comprises actions
to prevent and reduce marine litter from land‑based sources as well as sea-based sources, monitoring and assessment
of marine litter, and activities supporting implementation, the twenty-third Intergovernmental Meeting of the
Northwest Pacific Action Plan, held in Moscow from 9 to 11 October 2018, and the Bangkok Declaration on
Combating Marine Debris in the ASEAN Region, adopted at the thirty-fourth Summit of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, held in Bangkok on 22 June 2019, to enhance efforts in addressing the issue of marine debris;
226. Also notes the work done under the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation framework to share best practices,
enable innovative waste management financing and encourage public-private partnerships in order to prevent and
reduce marine debris, including the outcomes of the 2018 workshop hosted by the Republic of Korea, which informed
the APEC Road Map on Marine Debris endorsed in 2019 at the Senior Officials’ Meeting in Chile;
227. Welcomes the ongoing work of the members of the Group of 20 on the “Osaka Blue Ocean Vision”, which
aims to reduce additional pollution by marine plastic litter to zero by 2050, and calls upon other members of the
international community to also share the vision;
228. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to international agreements addressing the
protection and preservation of the marine environment and its living marine resources against the introduction of
harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens and marine pollution from all sources, including the dumping of wastes and
other matter, and other forms of physical degradation, as well as agreements that provide for preparedness for,
response to and cooperation on pollution incidents and that include provisions on liability and compensation for
damage resulting from marine pollution, and to adopt the necessary measures consistent with international law,
including the Convention, aimed at implementing and enforcing the rules contained in those agreements;
229. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States noted the significant threat that alien invasive species pose
to marine ecosystems and resources and committed to implement measures to prevent the introduction and manage
the adverse environmental impacts of alien invasive species, including, as appropriate, those adopted in the framework
of the International Maritime Organization;

_______________
239

128

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1651, No. 28395.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

230. Encourages States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004,240 and also encourages
States to consider implementing the Guidelines for the control and management of ships’ biofouling to minimize the
transfer of invasive aquatic species, adopted by the International Maritime Organization in resolution MEPC.207(62)
of 15 July 2011;
231. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization to prevent pollution from ships,
including through the designation of Special Areas under the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution
from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, as amended,241 welcomes the adoption by the
Marine Environment Protection Committee of an action plan to address marine plastic litter from ships,242 and
encourages the International Maritime Organization to continue working on the prevention of pollution from ships;
232. Also notes that the global limit of 0.50 per cent on sulphur in fuel oil under annex VI to the International
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships will enter into force on 1 January 2020, encourages States that
have not yet done so to become parties to the Protocol of 1997 (annex VI – Regulations for the Prevention of Air
Pollution from Ships) to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified
by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, as amended, and encourages the effective implementation of that Protocol;243
233. Further notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization and the resolution on
International Maritime Organization policies and practices related to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from
ships,244 and in this regard also notes its adoption of an initial strategy on the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions
from ships;245
234. Urges States to cooperate in correcting the shortfall in port waste reception facilities in accordance with
the action plan to address the inadequacy of port waste reception facilities developed by the International Maritime
Organization;
235. Encourages States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Hong Kong International
Convention for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships, 2009246 to facilitate its entry into force;
236. Encourages continued cooperation between the parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal247 and the International Maritime Organization
on regulations on the prevention of pollution from ships;
237. Notes the role of the Basel Convention in ensuring that the management of hazardous wastes and other
wastes, under the scope of that Convention, including their transboundary movement and disposal, is consistent with
the protection of the marine environment, and in this regard also notes the recent amendments of annexes II, VIII and
IX to the Basel Convention in relation to plastic waste, as well as decision BC-14/13 of the Conference of the Parties
to the Basel Convention, which includes, in particular, the establishment of the Basel Convention Partnership on
Plastic Waste;
238. Notes with concern the potential for serious environmental consequences resulting from oil spill incidents
or pollution incidents involving hazardous or noxious substances, urges States, consistent with international law, to
cooperate, directly or through competent international organizations, and share best practices, in the fields of
protection of the marine environment, human health and safety, prevention, emergency response and mitigation, and
in this regard encourages the undertaking of and collaboration on scientific research, including marine scientific
research, to better understand the consequences of marine oil spills or marine spills involving hazardous or noxious
substances;

_______________
International Maritime Organization, document BWM/CONF/36, annex.
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, annex IV (Regulations for the prevention of pollution by sewage
from ships) and annex V (Regulations for the prevention of pollution by garbage from ships).
242
International Maritime Organization, resolution MEPC.310(73).
243
International Maritime Organization, document MEPC 62/24/Add.1, annex 19, resolution MEPC.203(62).
244
International Maritime Organization, Assembly resolution A.963(23).
245
International Maritime Organization, document MEPC 72/17/Add.1, annex 11, resolution MEPC.304(72).
246
International Maritime Organization, document SR/CONF/45.
247
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1673, No. 28911.
240
241

129

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

239. Encourages States, in accordance with international law, including the Convention and other relevant
instruments, either bilaterally or regionally, to jointly develop and promote contingency plans for responding to
pollution incidents, as well as other incidents that are likely to have significant adverse effects on the marine
environment and biodiversity;
240. Encourages States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Cooperation, 1990,248 and the Protocol on Preparedness,
Response and Cooperation to Pollution Incidents by Hazardous and Noxious Substances, 2000, of the International
Maritime Organization, and in this regard to consider developing and joining regional arrangements to enhance
international cooperation for combating major oil and hazardous substances pollution incidents;
241. Encourages States to consider becoming parties to the 2010 Protocol to the 1996 International Convention
on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious Substances
by Sea;249
242. Recognizes that most of the pollution load of the oceans emanates from land-based activities and affects
the most productive areas of the marine environment, and calls upon States, as a matter of priority, to implement the
Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities and to take
all appropriate measures to fulfil the commitments of the international community embodied in the Bali Declaration
on the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities, adopted at the fourth Intergovernmental
Review Meeting on the Implementation of the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine
Environment from Land-based Activities, held in Bali, Indonesia, on 31 October and 1 November 2018;250
243. Welcomes the continued work of States, the United Nations Environment Programme and regional
organizations in the implementation of the Global Programme of Action, and encourages increased emphasis on the
link between fresh water, the coastal zone and marine resources in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and its
Sustainable Development Goals, as well as of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development;150
244. Expresses its concern regarding the spreading of hypoxic dead zones and harmful algal blooms in oceans
as a result of eutrophication fuelled by riverine run-off of fertilizers, sewage outfall and reactive nitrogen resulting
from the burning of fossil fuels and resulting in serious consequences for ecosystem functioning, and calls upon States
to enhance their efforts to reduce eutrophication, particularly by reducing total nutrient pollution from land-based
sources and, to this effect, to continue to cooperate within the framework of relevant international organizations, in
particular the Global Programme of Action and the Global Partnership on Nutrient Management and Global
Wastewater Initiative, including through capacity-building initiatives and efforts to monitor, via the Global Ocean
Observing System, stressors such as harmful algal blooms, areas of hypoxia, sargassum seaweed invasions and
jellyfish blooms, to assess their possible linkage to eutrophication and their potential adverse impacts on the marine
environment as well as on human health;
245. Encourages States that have not yet done so to take, as soon as possible, the domestic measures necessary
to enable them to meet their obligations upon ratification and, thereafter, to ratify, accept, approve or accede to the
Minamata Convention on Mercury;251
246. Calls upon all States to ensure that urban and coastal development projects and related land-reclamation
activities are carried out in a responsible manner that protects the marine habitat and environment and mitigates the
negative consequences of such activities;
247. Encourages States that have not yet done so to become parties to the 1996 Protocol to the Convention on
the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (the London Protocol);

_______________
Ibid., vol. 1891, No. 32194.
International Maritime Organization, document LEG/CONF.17/10.
250
UNEP/GPA/IGR.4/5, annex.
251
UNEP(DTIE)/Hg/CONF/4, annex II.
248
249

130

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

248. Recalls the resolution of the thirtieth Consultative Meeting of Contracting Parties to the Convention on
the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (the London Convention) and the
third Meeting of Contracting Parties to the London Protocol, held from 27 to 31 October 2008, on the regulation of
ocean fertilization,252 in which the Contracting Parties agreed, inter alia, that the scope of the London Convention and
Protocol includes ocean fertilization activities and that, given the present state of knowledge, ocean fertilization
activities other than for legitimate scientific research should not be allowed, and that scientific research proposals
should be assessed on a case-by-case basis using an assessment framework that was subsequently developed and
adopted in 2010 by the Contracting Parties to the London Convention and Protocol, namely, the Assessment
Framework for Scientific Research Involving Ocean Fertilization,253 and also agreed that, to this end, such other
activities should be considered as contrary to the aims of the London Convention and Protocol and should not
currently qualify for any exemption from the definition of dumping in article III, paragraph 1 (b), of the London
Convention and article 1, paragraph 4.2, of the London Protocol;25353
249. Notes the continued work of the Contracting Parties to the London Convention and Protocol towards a
global, transparent and effective control and regulatory mechanism for ocean fertilization activities and other activities
that fall within the scope of the London Convention and Protocol and have the potential to cause harm to the marine
environment, and notes the resolution adopted by the eighth Meeting of Contracting Parties to the London Protocol,
held from 14 to 18 October 2013, on the amendment to the London Protocol to regulate the placement of matter for
ocean fertilization and other marine geoengineering activities;254
250. Recalls decision IX/16 C, adopted at the ninth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, held in Bonn, Germany, from 19 to 30 May 2008,255 in which the Conference
of the Parties, inter alia, bearing in mind the ongoing scientific and legal analysis occurring under the auspices of
the London Convention and Protocol, requested parties and urged other Governments, in accordance with the
precautionary approach, to ensure that ocean fertilization activities were not carried out until there was an adequate
scientific basis on which to justify such activities, including an assessment of associated risks, and that a global,
transparent and effective control and regulatory mechanism was in place for those activities, with the exception of
small-scale scientific research studies within coastal waters, and stated that such studies should be authorized only
if justified by the need to gather specific scientific data, should be subject to a thorough prior assessment of the
potential impacts of the research studies on the marine environment, should be strictly controlled and should not
be used for generating and selling carbon offsets or for any other commercial purposes, and takes note of decision
X/29, adopted at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, held
in Nagoya, Japan, from 18 to 29 October 2010,256 in which the Conference of the Parties requested parties to
implement decision IX/16 C;
251. Also recalls that, in “The future we want”, States stressed their concern about the potential environmental
impacts of ocean fertilization, recalled in this regard the decisions related to ocean fertilization adopted by the relevant
intergovernmental bodies, and resolved to continue addressing ocean fertilization with utmost caution, consistent with
the precautionary approach;
252. Encourages States that have not done so to become parties to regional seas conventions and the protocols
thereto addressing the protection and preservation of the marine environment, while noting the role of the United
Nations Environment Programme Regional Seas Programme;
X
Marine biodiversity
253. Reaffirms its central role relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction;

_______________
International Maritime Organization, document LC 30/16, annex 6, resolution LC-LP.1 (2008).
International Maritime Organization, document LC 32/15 and Corr.1, annex 5, resolution LC LP.2 (2010).
254
International Maritime Organization, document LC 35/15, annex 4, resolution LP.4(8).
255
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I.
256
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
252
253

131

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

254. Notes the work and contributions of States and relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies in the
context of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, and the extensive and complex
discussions and exchange of views at the four sessions of the Preparatory Committee established by resolution 69/292:
Development of an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, which
concluded on 21 July 2017, as well as the report of the Preparatory Committee and the recommendations contained
therein;257
255. Welcomes the holding of the second and third sessions of the intergovernmental conference convened
under resolution 72/249, from 25 March to 5 April 2019 and 19 to 30 August 2019, respectively, and takes note of the
substantive discussions that addressed the topics identified in the package agreed in 2011, namely, the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, in particular, together and as
a whole, marine genetic resources, including questions on the sharing of benefits, measures such as area-based
management tools, including marine protected areas, environmental impact assessments, and capacity-building and
the transfer of marine technology, and further takes note that the President of the conference will prepare, as part of
the preparation for the fourth session of the conference, a revised draft text of an agreement;
256. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the fourth session of the intergovernmental conference from
23 March to 3 April 2020;
257. Recognizes the abundance and diversity of marine genetic resources and their value in terms of the
benefits, goods and services they can provide;
258. Also recognizes the importance of research on marine genetic resources for the purpose of enhancing the
scientific understanding, potential use and application, and enhanced management of marine ecosystems;
259. Notes the work under the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal Biological Diversity258 and the
Convention on Biological Diversity elaborated programme of work on marine and coastal biological diversity,259 and,
while reiterating the central role of the General Assembly relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, notes with appreciation the complementary technical and
scientific work done by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity;
260. Reaffirms the need for States, individually or through competent international organizations, to urgently
consider ways to integrate and improve, based on the best available scientific information and the precautionary
approach and in accordance with the Convention and related agreements and instruments, the management of risks
to the marine biodiversity of seamounts, cold water corals, hydrothermal vents and certain other underwater features;
261. Invites parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity to implement the voluntary specific workplan on
biodiversity in cold water areas within the jurisdictional scope of that Convention, adopted in 2016 by the thirteenth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to that Convention;260
262. Calls upon States and international organizations to urgently take further action to address, in accordance
with international law, destructive practices that have adverse impacts on marine biodiversity and ecosystems,
including seamounts, hydrothermal vents and cold water corals;
263. Calls upon States to strengthen, in a manner consistent with international law, in particular the Convention,
the conservation and management of marine biodiversity and ecosystems, and national policies in relation to areabased management tools, including marine protected areas;
264. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States reaffirmed the importance of area-based conservation
measures, including marine protected areas, consistent with international law and based on best available scientific
information, as a tool for conservation of biological diversity and sustainable use of its components, and noted

_______________
A/AC.287/2017/PC.4/2.
See A/51/312, annex II, decision II/10.
259
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex, decision VII/5, annex I.
260
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/13/25, sect. I, decision XIII/11, annex II.
257
258

132

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

decision X/2 of the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, that
by 2020, 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of particular importance for biodiversity and
ecosystem services, are to be conserved through effectively and equitably managed, ecologically representative
and well-connected systems of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures;256
265. Encourages States, in this regard, to further progress towards the establishment of marine protected areas,
including representative networks, and calls upon States to further consider options to identify and protect ecologically
or biologically significant areas, consistent with international law and on the basis of the best available scientific
information;
266. Invites States to identify measures to achieve Aichi Biodiversity Target 11, enshrined in decision X/2 of
the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, and takes note of the
announcements made by some States in this regard;
267. Reaffirms the need for States to continue and intensify their efforts, directly and through competent
international organizations, to develop and facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools for conserving and
managing vulnerable marine ecosystems, including the possible establishment of marine protected areas, consistent
with international law, as reflected in the Convention, and based on the best scientific information available;
268. Notes the work of States, relevant intergovernmental organizations and bodies, including the Convention
on Biological Diversity, in the assessment of scientific information on and compilation of ecological criteria for the
identification of marine areas that may require protection, in the light of the objective of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development to develop and facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools, such as ecosystem
approaches and the establishment of marine protected areas consistent with international law, as reflected in the
Convention, and based on scientific information, including representative networks;162
269. Recalls that the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, at its ninth meeting,
adopted scientific criteria for identifying ecologically or biologically significant marine areas in need of protection in
open-ocean waters and deep-sea habitats and scientific guidance for selecting areas to establish a representative
network of marine protected areas, including in open-ocean waters and deep-sea habitats,261 and notes the ongoing
work under the Convention on Biological Diversity on the application of the scientific criteria for ecologically or
biologically significant marine areas through the organization of a series of regional workshops;
270. Also recalls that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has developed guidance for
the identification of vulnerable marine ecosystems through the International Guidelines for the Management of
Deep-Sea Fisheries in the High Seas, and notes its ongoing work to support application of the Guidelines by States
and to maintain a database of vulnerable marine ecosystems;
271. Notes with appreciation the work of the Sustainable Ocean Initiative under the Convention on Biological
Diversity;
272. Notes the ongoing work of the International Maritime Organization to identify and designate as
Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas marine areas which are recognized for their significance in terms of ecological,
socioeconomic or scientific criteria and are vulnerable to damage by international shipping activities;262
273. Acknowledges the Micronesia Challenge, the Eastern Tropical Pacific Seascape project, the Caribbean
Challenge and the Coral Triangle Initiative, which seek to create and link domestic marine protected areas to better
facilitate ecosystem approaches, notes the Phoenix Islands Protected Area as a multinational partnership, and reaffirms
the need for further international cooperation, coordination and collaboration in support of such initiatives;
274. Recalls that, in “The future we want”, States recognized the significant economic, social and
environmental contributions of coral reefs, in particular to islands and other coastal States, as well as the significant
vulnerability of coral reefs and mangroves to impacts, including from climate change, ocean acidification, overfishing,
destructive fishing practices and pollution, and supported international cooperation with a view to conserving coral

_______________
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I, decision IX/20, annexes I and II.
International Maritime Organization, Revised Guidelines for the Identification and Designation of Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas,
Assembly resolution A.982(24).
261
262

133

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

reef and mangrove ecosystems and realizing their social, economic and environmental benefits, as well as facilitating
technical collaboration and voluntary information-sharing;
275. Emphasizes the need to mainstream sustainable coral reef management and integrated watershed
management into national development strategies, as well as into the activities of relevant United Nations agencies
and programmes, international financial institutions and the donor community;
276. Reiterates its support for the International Coral Reef Initiative, notes that the thirty-fourth International
Coral Reef Initiative General Meeting was held in Townsville, Australia, from 2 to 7 December 2019, and supports
the elaborated programme of work of the Convention on Biological Diversity on marine and coastal biological
diversity related to coral reefs under the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal Biological Diversity;
277. Encourages States and relevant international institutions to improve efforts to address coral bleaching by,
inter alia, improving monitoring to predict and identify bleaching events, supporting and strengthening action taken
during such events and improving strategies to manage reefs to support their natural resilience and enhance their ability
to withstand other pressures, including ocean acidification, and in this regard also encourages States to implement the
priority actions to achieve Aichi Biodiversity Target 10 for coral reefs and closely associated ecosystems, adopted by
the twelfth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity;263
278. Encourages States to cooperate, directly or through competent international bodies, in exchanging
information in the event of accidents involving vessels on coral reefs and in promoting the development of economic
assessment techniques for both restoration and non-use values of coral reef systems;
279. Notes that ocean noise has potential significant adverse impacts on living marine resources, affirms the
importance of sound scientific studies in addressing this matter, encourages further research, studies and consideration
of the impacts of ocean noise on living marine resources, notes the work of States and competent international
organizations in that regard, and requests the Division to continue to compile the peer-reviewed scientific studies it
receives from Member States and intergovernmental organizations pursuant to paragraph 107 of resolution 61/222
and, as appropriate, to make them, or references and links to them, available on its website;
280. Also notes the discussions at the nineteenth meeting of the Informal Consultative Process, in 2018, on the
theme of anthropogenic underwater noise, during which delegations, inter alia, expressed concern over the potential
social, economic and environmental impacts of anthropogenic underwater noise due to the growth of ocean-related
human activities, which has resulted in increased sound in many parts of the ocean, as well as the potential impacts of
anthropogenic underwater noise on different marine species and, in view of the continuing gaps in knowledge and
lack of data, stressed the urgent need for further research and international cooperation to assess and address the
potential effects of anthropogenic underwater noise in all ocean areas;264
281. Calls upon States to consider appropriate cost-effective measures and approaches to assess and address
the potential socioeconomic and environmental impacts of anthropogenic underwater noise, taking into account the
precautionary approach and ecosystem approaches and the best available scientific information, as appropriate;
282. Notes the approval by the International Maritime Organization of Guidelines for the Reduction of
Underwater Noise from Commercial Shipping to Address Adverse Impacts on Marine Life, and invites the
International Maritime Organization to promote and encourage their implementation for existing ships and new
vessels, when appropriate, including by promoting measures that may reduce cavitation,265 and encourages States to
continue their work at the International Maritime Organization to enhance understanding of the extent to which
improved ship technology, including efficient propeller design, could lead to reduced introduction of underwater noise
in the oceans;
283. Also notes the convening of the Quieting Ships to Protect the Marine Environment: Policy Workshop, in
Vancouver, Canada, on 4 and 5 November 2019;
284. Encourages further research into, and testing of, technologies to reduce the impact of underwater noise on
marine life;

_______________
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/29, sect. I, decision XII/23, annex.
See A/73/124.
265
International Maritime Organization, document MEPC.1/Circ.833, annex.
263
264

134

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

XI
Marine science
285. Calls upon States, individually or in collaboration with each other or with competent international
organizations and bodies, to continue to strive to improve understanding and knowledge of the oceans and the deep
sea, including, in particular, the extent and vulnerability of deep sea biodiversity and ecosystems, by increasing their
marine scientific research activities in accordance with the Convention;
286. Encourages, in that regard, relevant international organizations and other donors to consider supporting
the Endowment Fund of the Authority in order to promote the conduct of collaborative marine scientific research in
the international seabed area by supporting the participation of qualified scientists and technical personnel from
developing countries in relevant programmes, initiatives and activities;
287. Notes with concern that human-related threats, such as marine debris, ship strikes, underwater noise,
persistent contaminants, coastal development activities, oil spills and discarded fishing gear, together may severely
impact marine life, including its higher trophic levels, and calls upon States and competent international organizations
to cooperate and coordinate their research efforts in this regard so as to reduce these impacts and preserve the integrity
of the whole marine ecosystem, while fully respecting the mandates of relevant international organizations;
288. Invites all relevant organizations, funds, programmes and bodies within the United Nations system, in
consultation with interested States, to coordinate relevant activities with regional and national marine scientific and
technological centres in small island developing States, as appropriate, to ensure the more effective achievement of
their objectives in accordance with relevant United Nations small island developing States development programmes
and strategies;
289. Welcomes the resolution adopted by the Assembly of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission at its twenty-eighth session, held in Paris from 18 to 25 June 2015, regarding the adoption of the
Second International Indian Ocean Expedition as an important catalyst project linking Indian Ocean processes to
the global ocean and atmosphere, officially launched in Goa, India, on 4 December 2015 for an initial period of
five years, invites States to participate in this initiative, and notes that two nodes of the Second International Indian
Ocean Expedition Joint Project Office have been established to coordinate operations of the expedition in Perth,
Australia, and Hyderabad, India;
290. Notes with appreciation the work of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, with the advice
of the Advisory Body of Experts on the Law of the Sea, on the development of procedures for the implementation of
Parts XIII and XIV of the Convention;
291. Notes that the depth of a significant percentage of the world’s oceans, seas and waterways has yet to be
measured directly and that bathymetric knowledge underpins the safe, sustainable and cost-effective execution of
almost every human activity in, on or under the sea;
292. Welcomes the work of the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans project under the International
Hydrographic Organization and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and, in particular, the outcome
of the Forum for Future Ocean Floor Mapping, held in June 2016 in Monaco, and the subsequent development by the
Guiding Committee of the Seabed 2030 project for improving bathymetry globally;
293. Encourages Member States to consider contributing to mechanisms that encourage the widest possible
availability of all bathymetric data, so as to support the sustainable development, management and governance of the
marine environment;
294. Notes with appreciation the contribution to marine biodiversity research of the Ocean Biogeographic
Information System, a free and open-access data holding and sharing facility, hosted by the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission;
295. Welcomes the increasing attention being focused on oceans as a potential source of renewable energy, and
notes in this regard the summary of discussions of the Informal Consultative Process at its thirteenth meeting,
in 2012;266

_______________
266

See A/67/120.

135

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

296. Stresses the importance of increasing the scientific understanding of the oceans-atmosphere interface,
including through participation in ocean observing programmes and geographic information systems, such as the
Global Ocean Observing System, sponsored by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the World Meteorological Organization and the International Science Council,
particularly considering their role in monitoring and forecasting climate change and variability, in supporting Earth
system prediction267 and in the establishment and operation of tsunami warning systems;
297. Welcomes the progress made by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and Member States
towards the establishment and operation of regional and national tsunami warning and mitigation systems, also
welcomes the continued collaboration of the United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations in this effort,
further welcomes the development and recent dissemination of the new Enhanced Tsunami Products for the Pacific
Tsunami Warning and Mitigation System and the development of Enhanced Tsunami Products for the Tsunami and
Other Coastal Hazards Warning System for the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions, which will assist countries in the
Pacific and the Caribbean to assess tsunami threats and issue warnings, and encourages Member States to establish
and sustain their national warning and mitigation systems, within a global, ocean-related multi-hazard approach, as
necessary, to reduce loss of life and damage to national economies and strengthen the resilience of coastal
communities to natural disasters;
298. Stresses the need for continued efforts in developing mitigation and preparedness measures for natural
disasters, particularly following tsunami events such as the 11 March 2011 event in Japan and the events on
28 September and 22 December 2018 in Indonesia;
299. Takes note of the sixth Global Environment Outlook, entitled Healthy Planet, Healthy People, approved
on 24 January 2019, which, inter alia, identifies the principal drivers of change facing oceans and coasts and their
impacts;
300. Urges States to take necessary action and to cooperate in relevant organizations, including the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the World
Meteorological Organization, to address damage to ocean data buoys deployed and operated in accordance with
international law, including through education and outreach about the importance and purpose of these buoys and by
strengthening these buoys against such damage and increasing reporting of such damage;
301. Notes the discussions at the twentieth meeting of the Informal Consultative Process, from 10 to 14 June
2019, on the theme of ocean science and the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development,
during which delegations, inter alia, stressed the importance of marine scientific research, international cooperation
and coordination, as well as of a stronger science-policy interface in understanding and effectively addressing the
unprecedented pressures on the ocean, provided input to assist in preparing for the Decade and considered that the
Decade will be an important opportunity to address gaps in ocean science, increase knowledge, improve synergies
and support the sustainable conservation and management of marine resources, and during which several delegations
underlined the important complementary role of traditional knowledge held by indigenous peoples and local
communities;144
302. Welcomes the steps taken by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission to prepare the
implementation plan for the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
(2021–2030) in consultation with Member States, specialized agencies, funds, programmes and bodies of the United
Nations, as well as other intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations and relevant stakeholders,
and requests the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission to continue to provide information on the
development of the implementation plan and present it to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
303. Requests that the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission regularly consult with, and report
to, Member States on the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development and its
implementation;
304. Invites the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly on the implementation of the United
Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development through his report on oceans and the law of the sea,
on the basis of information to be provided by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission;

_______________
267

136

See World Meteorological Organization resolution 47 (Cg-18).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

305. Invites UN-Oceans and its participants to collaborate with the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission on the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development;
XII
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects
306. Reiterates the need to strengthen the regular scientific assessment of the state of the marine environment
in order to enhance the scientific basis for policymaking;
307. Reaffirms the principles guiding the Regular Process and its objective and scope, recalls the crucial
importance of the Regular Process for ongoing ocean-related intergovernmental processes and its possible inputs,
including for the 2030 Agenda, the development of an international legally binding instrument under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United
Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea, among other relevant
processes, and notes the importance of continuing support and cooperation between the activities of the United
Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development and those of the Regular Process;
308. Recalls the importance of ensuring that assessments, such as those included in the Global Sustainable
Development Report and those prepared under the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services and the Regular Process, support
one another and avoid unnecessary duplication, and also recalls the importance of compatibility and synergies
between such assessments and assessments at the regional level;
309. Reaffirms the importance of the first World Ocean Assessment as the outcome of the first cycle of the
Regular Process, recalls the technical abstracts of the Assessment, and reiterates its concern as reflected in the findings
of the Assessment, as recorded in paragraph 289 of its resolution 71/257 and in subsequent resolutions;
310. Recalls the decision that, in the first cycle, the scope of the Regular Process focused on establishing a
baseline, and that the scope of the second cycle would extend to evaluating trends and identifying gaps, also recalls
the approval by the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole of the outline for the second world ocean assessment, notes
the consideration by the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working Group during the intersessional period of an annotated outline
for the second world ocean assessment, and also notes the further revised timetable and implementation plan for the
second world ocean assessment prepared by the Group of Experts in consultation with the secretariat of the Regular
Process;
311. Welcomes the holding of the second round of regional workshops in support of the second cycle of the
Regular Process in Koror, Palau, on 8 and 9 August 2018, in Valletta on 27 and 28 August 2018, in Odessa, Ukraine,
on 17 and 18 October 2018, in Bali, Indonesia, on 8 and 9 November 2018, in Doha on 28 and 29 November 2018,
in Accra on 3 and 4 December 2018 and in Guayaquil, Ecuador, on 17 and 18 December 2018, and takes note of the
summaries of those workshops;
312. Recognizes the need for early preparation for possible future regional workshops in support of the Regular
Process, and invites States to consider hosting such workshops and inform the secretariat of their intent as early as
possible;
313. Recalls the importance of raising awareness of the first World Ocean Assessment and the Regular Process,
and recognizes with appreciation the activities undertaken to raise awareness of the Assessment, including during the
regional workshops held in 2017 and 2018 in support of the second cycle of the Regular Process;
314. Welcomes the holding of the multi-stakeholder dialogue and capacity-building partnership event on
24 and 25 January 2019, notes the summary of discussions, and welcomes the approval by the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole at its twelfth meeting of the conclusions from the partnership event;143
315. Reiterates its invitation to States and intergovernmental and non‑governmental organizations to provide
relevant information to the secretariat for inclusion in the capacity-building inventory of needs and opportunities
relevant for the Regular Process, and expresses its appreciation for the information contributed thus far and for the
work undertaken by the secretariat;

137

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

316. Also reiterates its request to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide
information on recent and ongoing assessments and other processes at the regional and global levels relevant to the
Regular Process in order for the secretariat to update the inventory, and expresses its appreciation for the information
contributed thus far and for the work of the secretariat in compiling the information received;
317. Welcomes the holding of the twelfth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on 29 and
30 July 2019, in accordance with paragraph 334 of resolution 73/124, and endorses the recommendations adopted by
the Ad Hoc Working Group at its twelfth meeting;143
318. Decides to launch the third cycle of the Regular Process, to cover five years, from 2021 to 2025, and
requests the Bureau, with the assistance of the Group of Experts and the secretariat, to develop a draft programme of
work for the third cycle, on the basis of the possible outcomes and building blocks of the third cycle prepared by the
Bureau and endorsed by the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole at its twelfth meeting and taking into account
lessons learned from the second cycle, and to report to Member States in advance of the thirteenth meeting of the
Ad Hoc Working Group;
319. Requests the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole to consider the lessons learned from the
second cycle of the Regular Process, including with regard to the duration of the cycle and its outputs, in line with the
modalities set forth in paragraph 282 of resolution 70/235 and on the basis of input received from Member States and
other participants in the Ad Hoc Working Group and the Group of Experts, as well as from the secretariat, and also
requests the Bureau to inform the Ad Hoc Working Group of the views received and to circulate that information in
advance of the thirteenth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group;
320. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare the resource requirements for the third cycle of the Regular
Process on the basis of the draft programme of work for the third cycle, to be developed in the intersessional period
by the Bureau, and to report to Member States in advance of the thirteenth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of
the Whole;
321. Recognizes with appreciation the important role of the Co-Chairs and the Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole in providing guidance during the intersessional period before the twelfth meeting of the Ad Hoc
Working Group, requests the Bureau to continue to implement the decisions and guidance of the Ad Hoc Working
Group during the intersessional period before the thirteenth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group, and recognizes
the support provided by the secretariat in that regard;
322. Also recognizes with appreciation the continued work of the members of the Group of Experts and that of
the Pool of Experts of the Regular Process in the implementation of the second cycle of the Regular Process;
323. Urges regional groups that have not yet done so to appoint experts to the Group of Experts, taking into
account the need to ensure equitable geographical distribution and adequate expertise in socioeconomic disciplines;
324. Welcomes the appointment of additional experts to the Pool of Experts for the second cycle of the Regular
Process by States and through recommendations from relevant intergovernmental organizations, in accordance with
the revised mechanism for the establishment of the Pool of Experts for the second cycle of the Regular Process;
325. Also welcomes the designation by States of national focal points pursuant to paragraph 319 of resolution
73/124, and urges States that have not yet done so to designate their national focal points as soon as possible;
326. Recalls its invitation to the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United Nations
Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme, the International
Maritime Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Meteorological
Organization and relevant United Nations system organizations, bodies, funds and programmes, as appropriate, to
assist in the implementation of the second cycle of the Regular Process with regard to the following activities:
awareness-raising, the identification of experts for the Pool of Experts, technical and scientific support for the Bureau
and the Group of Experts, hosting meetings of the writing teams and capacity-building, and also recalls its invitation
to relevant intergovernmental organizations to contribute, as appropriate, to the activities of the second cycle;
327. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the thirteenth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole on 9 and 10 September 2020 with a view to providing recommendations to the General Assembly on progress
138

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

in the implementation of the second cycle and on the draft programme of work and resource requirements for the third
cycle of the Regular Process, and also to convene the fourteenth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group for one day
in December 2020 or January 2021, depending on the calendar of meetings of the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly, with a view to considering the second world ocean assessment and providing recommendations to the
General Assembly;
328. Urges States, international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make financial contributions to the voluntary
trust fund and to make other contributions to the Regular Process;
329. Recalls the potential of the Regular Process special scholarship fund, established pursuant to resolution
64/71, to support training programmes for developing countries, including through cooperation projects among
various stakeholders, in order to strengthen the human and institutional capacity of those countries to carry out
integrated assessments, and encourages States, international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental
organizations, non‑governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make financial contributions to
that fund;
XIII
Regional cooperation
330. Notes with appreciation efforts and initiatives at the regional level, in various regions, to further the
implementation of the Convention and to respond, including through capacity-building, to issues related to maritime
safety and security, the conservation and sustainable use of living marine resources, the protection and preservation
of the marine environment and the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity;
331. Invites States and international organizations to enhance their cooperation to better protect the marine
environment;
332. Notes the Caribbean-focused Assistance Fund, which is intended to facilitate, mainly through technical
assistance, the voluntary undertaking of maritime delimitation negotiations between Caribbean States, notes once
again the Fund for Peace: Peaceful Settlement of Territorial Disputes, established by the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States in 2000 as a primary mechanism, given its broader regional scope, for the prevention
and resolution of pending territorial, land border and maritime boundary disputes, and calls upon States and others in
a position to do so to contribute to these funds;
333. Recalls the outcome document of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States,
the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway268 and the modalities set forth for strengthened action
on a range of small island developing States challenges and priorities, including challenges related to the conservation
and sustainable use of marine resources, and the preservation of the marine environment, and in this regard welcomes
the convening of the high-level midterm review of the Samoa Pathway in September 2019 and the adoption of its
political declaration,269 which notes the importance of oceans, seas and marine resources to small island developing
States and acknowledges their efforts to develop and implement strategies for the conservation and sustainable use of
the ocean and its resources, and reaffirms its commitment to work with small island developing States towards the
full implementation of the Samoa Pathway to ensure its success;
334. Recognizes the results of the International Polar Year, 2007–2008 with particular emphasis on new
knowledge about the linkages between environmental change in the polar regions and global climate systems, and
encourages States and scientific communities to strengthen their cooperation in this respect;
335. Acknowledges the important contributions to scientific understanding of the marine environment and its
resources, as well as the scientific advice for their sustainable use, provided by the International Council for the

_______________
268
269

Resolution 69/15, annex.
Resolution 74/3.

139

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Exploration of the Sea in its wide-ranging cooperation with organizations at the regional level under the Convention
for the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, 1964;270
336. Welcomes regional cooperation, and in this regard notes the Pacific Oceanscape Framework as an initiative
to enhance cooperation among coastal States in the Pacific island region to foster marine conservation and sustainable
development;
337. Notes with appreciation the various cooperative efforts displayed by States at the regional and subregional
levels, and in this regard welcomes initiatives, such as the Integrated Assessment and Management of the Gulf of
Mexico Large Marine Ecosystem;
338. Acknowledges relevant cooperation among the members of the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the
South Atlantic;
339. Recalls the decision of the Assembly of the African Union in January 2015 to adopt Agenda 2063, also
recalls that the African Union launched the Decade of African Seas and Oceans (2015–2025), and notes that the
African Day of the Seas and Oceans is to be celebrated annually on 25 July;
340. Notes the adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014–2024 by the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, held in Vienna
from 3 to 5 November 2014,271 following the comprehensive 10-year review of the implementation of the Almaty
Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global
Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries,272 and also notes
the need for cooperation to address the development needs and challenges faced by landlocked developing countries
associated with, inter alia, their lack of direct territorial access to the sea, remoteness and isolation from world markets,
in line with the objectives of the Vienna Programme of Action;
341. Also notes the efforts of the Sargasso Sea Commission, led by the Government of Bermuda, to raise
awareness of the ecological significance of the Sargasso Sea;
342. Further notes the Agreement on Enhancing International Arctic Scientific Cooperation, negotiated under
the auspices of the Arctic Council, and notes that its implementation will increase the development of scientific
knowledge about the region;
343. Notes the cooperation between the OSPAR Commission established by the Convention for the Protection
of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic273 and the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission;
XIV
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
344. Welcomes the report of the Co-Chairs on the work of the Informal Consultative Process at its twentieth
meeting, which focused on the theme of ocean science and the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development;144
345. Recognizes the role of the Informal Consultative Process as a unique forum for comprehensive discussions
on issues related to oceans and the law of the sea, consistent with the framework provided by the Convention and
chapter 17 of Agenda 21,146 and that the perspective of the three pillars of sustainable development should be further
enhanced in the examination of the selected topics;

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 652, No. 9344.
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
272
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003
(A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
273
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2354, No. 42279.
270
271

140

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

346. Welcomes the work of the Informal Consultative Process and its contribution to improving coordination
and cooperation between States and strengthening the annual debate of the General Assembly on oceans and the law
of the sea by effectively drawing attention to key issues and current trends;
347. Also welcomes efforts to improve and focus the work of the Informal Consultative Process, and in that
respect recognizes the primary role of the Informal Consultative Process in integrating knowledge, the exchange of
opinions among multiple stakeholders and coordination among competent agencies, and enhancing awareness of
topics, including emerging issues, while promoting the three pillars of sustainable development;
348. Recalls the need to strengthen and improve the efficiency of the Informal Consultative Process, and
encourages States, intergovernmental organizations and programmes to provide guidance to the Co-Chairs to this
effect, particularly before and during the preparatory meeting for the Informal Consultative Process;
349. Requests the Secretary-General to convene, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 54/33,
the twenty-first meeting of the Informal Consultative Process, in New York for eight meetings during the week
of 22 to 26 June 2020, to provide it with the facilities necessary for the performance of its work, including
documentation, and to arrange for support to be provided by the Division, in cooperation with other relevant parts of
the Secretariat, as appropriate;
350. Expresses its continued serious concern regarding the lack of resources available in the voluntary trust
fund established pursuant to resolution 55/7 for the purpose of assisting developing countries, in particular least
developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked developing States, in attending the meetings of
the Informal Consultative Process, and urges States, international financial institutions, donor agencies,
intergovernmental organizations, non‑governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make
additional contributions to the trust fund;
351. Decides that those representatives from developing countries who are invited by the Co-Chairs, in
consultation with Governments, to make presentations during the meetings of the Informal Consultative Process shall
receive priority consideration in the disbursement of funds from the voluntary trust fund established pursuant to
resolution 55/7 in order to cover the costs of their travel, and shall also be eligible to receive daily subsistence
allowance subject to the availability of funds after the travel costs of all other eligible representatives from those
countries mentioned in paragraph 350 above have been covered;
352. Also decides that, in its deliberations on the report of the Secretary-General on oceans and the law of the
sea, the Informal Consultative Process shall focus its discussions at its twenty-first meeting, in 2020, on the theme
“Sea-level rise and its impacts”;
XV
Coordination and cooperation
353. Encourages States to work closely with and through international organizations, funds and programmes,
as well as the specialized agencies of the United Nations system and relevant international conventions, to identify
emerging areas of focus for improved coordination and cooperation and how best to address these issues;
354. Expresses its concern at the desecration of graves at sea and the looting of wrecks of ships constituting
such graves, and calls upon States to cooperate, as appropriate, to prevent the looting and desecration of wrecks of
ships constituting graves in order to ensure that proper respect is given to all human remains located in maritime
waters, consistent with international law, including, as appropriate, the 2001 Convention on the Protection of the
Underwater Cultural Heritage, among parties thereto;
355. Encourages bodies established by the Convention to strengthen coordination and cooperation, as
appropriate, in fulfilling their respective mandates;
356. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of heads of
intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations engaged in
activities relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea, as well as funding institutions, and underlines the importance
of their constructive and timely input for the report of the Secretary-General on oceans and the law of the sea and of
their participation in relevant meetings and processes;
141

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

357. Welcomes the work done by the secretariats of relevant United Nations specialized agencies, programmes,
funds and bodies and the secretariats of related organizations and conventions to enhance inter-agency coordination
and cooperation on ocean issues, including, where appropriate, through UN-Oceans, the inter-agency coordination
mechanism on ocean and coastal issues within the United Nations system;
358. Recognizes the work undertaken by UN-Oceans, in particular the inventory of mandates and the
development of a draft methodology for the indicator for target 14.c of the 2030 Agenda, under the revised terms of
reference for the work of UN-Oceans, and with the United Nations Legal Counsel/the Division as the focal point of
UN-Oceans, and, as an interim measure, in this regard invites States, international financial institutions, donor
agencies, intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make
financial earmarked contributions to the trust fund established by the Secretary-General for the Office of Legal Affairs
to support the promotion of international law, and authorizes the Secretary-General to disburse funds from such
contributions to that trust fund for the purposes of the maintenance of an online searchable database for an inventory
of the mandates of UN-Oceans members and priorities approved by the respective governing bodies of the
participating organizations of UN-Oceans, with a view to identifying possible areas of collaboration and synergy, as
well as for travel associated with the performance of the functions of the focal point;
359. Recalls its decision to defer the review of the terms of reference for the work of UN-Oceans until its
seventy-fifth session;
XVI
Activities of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
360. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the annual reports on oceans and the law of the
sea, prepared by the Division, as well as for the other activities of the Division, which reflect the high standard of
assistance provided to Member States by the Division;
361. Notes with satisfaction the eleventh observance by the United Nations of World Oceans Day in 2019,274
recognizes with appreciation the efforts deployed by the Division in this regard, and invites the Division to continue
to promote and facilitate international cooperation on the law of the sea and ocean affairs in the context of the future
observance of World Oceans Day, as well as through its participation in other events;
362. Recalls the responsibilities and functions entrusted to the Secretary-General in the Convention and in the
related resolutions of the General Assembly, including resolutions 49/28 and 52/26, notes the increased number of
requests to the Division for additional outputs and servicing of meetings and in relation to the support to be provided
by the Division as secretariat of the Regular Process during the second cycle of the Regular Process, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure the allocation of appropriate resources to the Division for the performance of its activities
under the approved budget for the Organization;
363. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication activities of the Division, in particular through
the publication of Guidelines on deposit with the Secretary-General of charts or lists of geographical coordinates
under the Convention275 and the Law of the Sea Bulletin;
XVII
Seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly
364. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare reports for consideration by the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session, namely, a report on developments and issues relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea,
including the implementation of the present resolution, in accordance with resolutions 49/28, 52/26 and 54/33, and a
report on the topic that is the focus of the twenty-first meeting of the Informal Consultative Process;
365. Emphasizes the critical role of the annual reports of the Secretary-General, which integrate information
on developments relating to the implementation of the Convention and the work of the Organization, its specialized
agencies and other institutions in the field of ocean affairs and the law of the sea at the global and regional levels, and

_______________
274
275

142

By its resolution 63/111, the General Assembly designated 8 June as World Oceans Day.
This publication replaces The Law of the Sea: A Select Bibliography.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

as a result constitute the basis for the annual consideration and review of developments relating to ocean affairs and
the law of the sea by the General Assembly as the global institution having the competence to undertake such a review;
366. Notes that the reports referred to in paragraph 364 above will also be submitted to States Parties pursuant
to article 319 of the Convention regarding issues of a general nature that have arisen with respect to the Convention;
367. Also notes the desire to further improve the efficiency of and effective participation of delegations in the
informal consultations concerning the annual General Assembly resolution on oceans and the law of the sea, decides
that the period of the informal consultations on that resolution should not exceed a maximum of eight days in total
and that the consultations should be scheduled in such a way that the Division has sufficient time to produce the report
on developments and issues relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea referred to in paragraph 364 above, requests
the Secretary-General to continue to provide support to the consultations through the Division, and encourages States
to submit proposals for the resolution to the Coordinator of the informal consultations no later than one week before
the first day of the first round of the informal consultations;
368. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Oceans and the
law of the sea”.
RESOLUTION 74/20
Adopted at the 44th plenary meeting, on 11 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.26 and
A/74/L.26/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, Niger,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Zambia

74/20.

Global health and foreign policy: an inclusive approach to strengthening health systems

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 63/33 of 26 November 2008, 64/108 of 10 December 2009, 65/95 of 9 December 2010,
66/115 of 12 December 2011, 67/81 of 12 December 2012, 68/98 of 11 December 2013, 69/132 of 11 December
2014, 70/183 of 17 December 2015, 71/159 of 15 December 2016, 72/139 of 12 December 2017 and 73/132 of
13 December 2018,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a wide, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development goals that are integrated and indivisible and
balanced in its three dimensions – economic, social and environmental – and its commitment to building upon the
achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business, recommitting
that no one will be left behind and endeavouring to reach the furthest behind first,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the strong commitments made through the political declarations adopted at the high-level
meetings of the General Assembly on universal health coverage, on ending AIDS, on tackling antimicrobial
resistance, on ending tuberculosis and on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, as well as the
resolutions of the Assembly on consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in
developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2030,

143

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,276 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,277 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,278 the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,279 the Convention on the Rights of
the Child,280 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,281 the Constitution of the World Health
Organization282 and relevant provisions of international humanitarian law,
Noting the significant role of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative in promoting synergies between
foreign policy and global health, as well as the contribution of the Oslo Ministerial Declaration of 20 March 2007,
entitled “Global health: a pressing foreign policy issue of our time”,283 which was reaffirmed, with renewed actions
and commitments, in the ministerial communiqué of the Initiative, entitled “Renewing 10 years of concerted efforts
and preparing for new challenges”, of 22 September 2017,284
Reaffirming that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of the social, economic and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, that, despite progress made, challenges in global health still remain, with special regard to inequities
and inequalities within and among countries, regions and populations, and that investments in health contribute to
sustainable, inclusive economic growth, social development, environmental protection, eradication of poverty, hunger
and malnutrition, achieving gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and reducing inequalities,
and acknowledging the reciprocal benefits between the attainment of Sustainable Development Goal 3 and the
achievement of all other Goals,
Reaffirming also the right of every human being, without distinction of any kind, to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health and to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of
oneself and one’s family, including adequate food, safe drinking water, clothing and housing, and to the continuous
improvement of living conditions, with particular attention to the alarming situation of millions of people for whom
access to health-care services and medicines remains a distant goal, in particular those who are vulnerable or in
vulnerable situations,
Recognizing that all human rights are important for a transparent, responsible, accountable, open and
participatory health system governance responsive to the needs and aspiration of persons to realize the right to the
highest attainable standard of physical and mental health,
Recalling the Rio Political Declaration on Social Determinants of Health, adopted at the 2011 World Conference
on Social Determinants of Health, which reaffirmed that health inequities within and between countries are politically,
socially and economically unacceptable, as well as unfair and largely avoidable, and noting that many of the
underlying determinants of health and risk factors of communicable and non-communicable diseases are associated
with social, economic, environmental and behavioural conditions,
Recognizing the need to tackle health inequities and inequalities within and among countries through political
commitment, policies and international cooperation, including those that address social, economic and environmental
determinants of health,
Recognizing also the fundamental importance of equity, social justice and social protection mechanisms as well
as the elimination of the root causes of discrimination and stigma in health-care settings to ensure universal and
equitable access to quality health services without financial hardship for all people, particularly for those who are
vulnerable or in vulnerable situations,

_______________
Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
278
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
279
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
280
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
281
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
282
Ibid., vol. 14, No. 221.
283
A/63/591, annex.
284
A/72/559, annex.
276
277

144

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming the commitment to ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive
rights as agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development285 and the Beijing Platform for Action286 and the outcome documents of their review conferences,
Reaffirming also the importance of national ownership and the primary responsibility of Member States to
determine and promote their own path towards achieving universal health coverage, including through community
outreach and private sector engagement, and with the support of the international community,
Recognizing that universal health coverage implies that all people have access, without discrimination, to
nationally determined sets of the needed promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative essential health
services, and essential, safe, affordable, effective and quality medicines and vaccines, while ensuring that the use of
these services does not expose the users to financial hardship, with a special emphasis on the poor, vulnerable and
marginalized segments of the population,
Noting that “health in all policies” refers to taking the health implications of decisions systemically into account
in public policies across sectors, seeking synergies and avoiding harmful health impacts, in order to improve
population health and health equity through assessing the consequences of public policies on the determinants of
health and well-being and on health systems,
Recognizing that good health requires a universal, inclusive, equitable, effective, responsive and accessible
quality health system and that it is also dependent on the involvement of and dialogue with other sectors and actors,
as their performance may have significant health impacts, and collaboration in coordinated and intersectoral policy
actions in an effective way,
Recognizing also that the promotion of people’s engagement, particularly of women and girls, families and
communities, and inclusiveness is fundamental for the effective implementation of health policies, strategies and
plans, especially in the context of health emergencies preparedness and response,
Recognizing further that women and girls play a vital role as agents of development, acknowledging that
achieving gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and the elimination of all forms of violence
against women and girls are crucial to the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and
recognizing also that nutrition and other related policies should be sensitive to the needs of women and empower
women and girls, thereby contributing to women’s equal access to social protection and resources, including income,
land, water, finance, education, training, science and technology, and health services, thus promoting food security
and health,
Recognizing that adequate quality antenatal care reduces the risks of maternal mortality and morbidity,
premature births and other complications of pregnancy and delivery that can result in poor health outcomes for
mothers and neonates, and also that universal access to cost-effective perinatal and neonatal health interventions,
including through the application of outreach, family, community and facility-based prevention, promotion and
treatment services, significantly reduces a huge proportion of perinatal and neonatal deaths worldwide,
Acknowledging that the promotion of health equity and the elimination of stigma and discrimination in healthcare settings are important for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and building a more inclusive society
whereby those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations, especially women and girls, children, youth, older
persons, indigenous peoples, refugees, internally displaced persons and migrants, persons with disabilities, persons
living with mental health conditions or psychological disabilities, and those living with, at risk of or affected by
communicable diseases, including HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and cholera, and non‑communicable and other diseases,
will have a better quality of life and well-being, and in this regard taking note of the joint United Nations statement
on ending discrimination in health-care settings,
Promoting increased access to affordable, safe, effective and quality medicines, including generics, vaccines,
diagnostics and health technologies, reaffirming the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects

_______________
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
286
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
285

145

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) as amended, and also reaffirming the 2001 World Trade
Organization Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which recognizes that intellectual
property rights should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of the right of Member States to protect
public health and, in particular, to promote access to medicines for all, and notes the need for appropriate incentives
in the development of new health products,
Recalling the World Health Organization Global Strategy and Plan of Action on Public Health, Innovation and
Intellectual Property,287 designed to promote medicinal innovation, build capacity and improve access to medicines,
encouraging further discussions on access to medicines, and reiterating that health research and development should
be needs-driven, evidence-based, guided by the core principles of affordability, effectiveness, efficiency and equity
and considered a shared responsibility, recalling the report of the High-level Panel on Access to Medicines, including
its recommendations,
Recognizing that effective and financially sustainable implementation of universal health coverage is based on
a resilient and responsive health system with capacities for broad public health measures, disease prevention, health
protection, health promotion and addressing of determinants of health through coherent policies across sectors,
including the promotion of the health literacy of the population,
Recognizing also the need for health systems that are strong, resilient, functional, well governed, responsive,
accountable, integrated, community-based, people-centred and capable of quality service delivery, supported by a
competent health workforce, adequate health infrastructure, enabling legislative and regulatory frameworks as well
as sufficient and sustainable funding,
Recognizing further that primary health care brings people into first contact with the health system and is the
most inclusive, effective and efficient approach to enhance people’s physical and mental health, as well as social wellbeing, and that primary health care is the cornerstone of a sustainable health system for universal health coverage and
health-related Sustainable Development Goals, as was declared in the Declaration of Alma-Ata and reaffirmed in the
Declaration of Astana,
Recalling the adoption of the Rome Declaration on Nutrition,288 which reaffirmed that national health systems
should integrate nutrition while providing access for all to integrated health services, a continuum of care approach
and a set of voluntary policy options and strategies for Governments, as well as its Framework for Action,289
Recalling also the importance of taking multisectoral action to promote active and healthy lifestyles, including
physical activity for the benefit of all people throughout their life course, and to ensure a world free from malnutrition
in all its forms, where all people are empowered to take responsibility for their own health supported by public
regulatory measures, and have access to safe drinking water and sanitation and safe, sufficient and nutritious food and
enjoy diversified, balanced and healthy diets throughout their life course, and taking note of the Nutrition for Growth
initiative, and in this regard looking forward to its upcoming summit in Tokyo in 2020,
Recognizing the consequence of the adverse impact of climate change, natural disasters, extreme weather events
as well as other environmental determinants of health, such as clean air, safe drinking water, sanitation, safe, sufficient
and nutritious food and secure shelter, for health, and in this regard underscoring the need to foster health in climate
change adaptation efforts, underlining that resilient and people-centred health systems are necessary to protect the
health of all people, in particular those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations, particularly those living in small
island developing States,
Noting that the increasing number of complex emergencies is hindering the achievement of universal health
coverage and that coherent and inclusive approaches to safeguard universal health coverage in emergencies are
essential, including through international cooperation, ensuring the continuum and provision of essential health
services and public health functions, in line with humanitarian principles,
Expressing the importance of respecting and protecting, in accordance with international humanitarian law, in
situations of armed conflict, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties,

_______________
See World Health Organization, document WHA61/2008/REC/1.
World Health Organization, document EB136/8, annex I.
289
Ibid., annex II.
287
288

146

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

their means of transport and equipment, and hospitals and other medical facilities, which must not be unlawfully
attacked, and ensuring that the wounded and sick receive, to the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible
delay, the medical care and attention required,
Expressing concern at the global shortfall of 18 million health workers, primarily in low- and middle-income
countries, and recognizing the need to train, build and retain a skilled and health workforce, including nurses,
midwives and community health workers, who are an important element of strong and resilient health systems, and
further recognizing that increased investment in a more effective and socially accountable health workforce can
unleash significant socioeconomic gains and contribute to the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
empowerment of all women and girls and reduction of inequality,
Recognizing the importance of human resources in strengthening health systems and in the successful realization
of the internationally agreed goals contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and noting with
concern that highly trained and skilled health personnel from the developing countries continue to emigrate at an
increasing rate to certain countries, which weakens health systems in the countries of origin,
Reaffirming the importance of creating adequate national human resources management frameworks to
substantially increase health worker training, recruitment, deployment, regulation, support and retention,
Acknowledging that rapidly changing technologies, particularly digital technologies, have the potential to
enhance people’s access to health services, to improve the responsiveness of the health system to the needs of
individuals and communities, to increase the quality and efficiency of health services and to empower patients, giving
them access to their own health-care information, promoting health literacy and strengthening patient involvement in
clinical decision-making with a focus on health professional-patient communication,
Recognizing the global challenge of antimicrobial resistance, which requires multisectoral actions, through the
One Health approach involving Member States, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Organization for Animal Health and other relevant stakeholders,
reaffirming the importance of the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
antimicrobial resistance,290 and acknowledging that, owing to antimicrobial resistance, many achievements of the
twentieth century are being gravely challenged, in particular, the reduction in illness and death from infectious diseases
achieved through social and economic development; access to health services and to quality, safe, efficacious and
affordable medicines; hygiene, safe drinking water and sanitation; disease prevention in community and health-care
settings, including immunization; safe and nutritious food; improvements in human and veterinary medicine; and the
introduction of new antimicrobial and other medicines,
Underscoring the fact that global health is a long-term objective which is national, regional and international in
scope and requires sustained high-level commitment and closer international cooperation, including far-reaching
partnerships among stakeholders, and the need to safeguard the progress made and to advance by paying due attention
to the continuity and sustainability of current actions on global health,
Underscoring also the importance of enhanced international cooperation to support the efforts of Member States
to achieve health goals, including the target of achieving universal health coverage, including financial risk protection,
access to quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines
and vaccines for all,
Reaffirming the importance of revitalizing and promoting strong global partnerships with all relevant
stakeholders to collaboratively support the efforts of Member States, as appropriate, to achieve universal health
coverage and other health-related targets of the Sustainable Development Goals, including through technical support,
capacity-building and strengthening advocacy, building on existing global networks such as the International Health
Partnership for UHC2030,
Taking note of the launch of the Global Action Plan for Healthy Lives and Well-being for All, in New York on
24 September 2019,

_______________
290

Resolution 71/3.

147

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking note also of the Inter-Parliamentary Union resolution of 17 October 2019, entitled “Achieving universal
health coverage by 2030: the role of parliaments in ensuring the right to health”,
Emphasizing that the United Nations system has an important responsibility and role to assist Member States,
upon their request, in the follow-up to and full implementation of agreements and commitments reached at the major
United Nations conferences and summits, especially those focusing on health-related areas, and emphasizing also the
primary role of the World Health Organization as the United Nations specialized agency for health, and other relevant
international organizations, in providing technical support to countries on how to best engage populations, civil society
and communities in national health policy,
1. Calls upon Member States to strengthen health systems, notably in terms of primary health care, in order
to provide universal access to a wide range of health-care services that are safe, quality, accessible, available and
affordable, timely, clinically and financially integrated, people-centred, gender-sensitive and community-based,
which will help to empower those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations in addressing their physical and
mental health needs, enhance health equity and equality, end discrimination and stigma, eliminate gaps in coverage
and create a more inclusive society;
2. Welcomes the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, held in New York on 23 September 2019,
and reaffirms its political declaration, entitled “Universal health coverage: moving together to build a healthier
world”;291
3. Calls upon Member States to accelerate efforts towards the achievement of universal health coverage by
2030 to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all throughout the life course, and in this regard re-emphasizes
the resolve:
(a) To progressively cover 1 billion additional people by 2023 with quality essential health services and
quality, safe, effective, affordable and essential medicines, vaccines, diagnostics and health technologies, with a view
to covering all people by 2030;
(b) To stop the rise and reverse the trend of catastrophic out-of-pocket health expenditure by providing
measures to ensure financial risk protection and eliminate impoverishment due to health-related expenses by 2030,
with special emphasis on the poor as well as those who are vulnerable or in vulnerable situations;
4. Recognizes that people’s engagement, particularly of women and girls, families and communities, and the
inclusion of all relevant stakeholders is one of the core components of health system governance, to fully empower
all people in improving and protecting their own health, giving due regard to addressing and managing conflicts of
interest and undue influence, contributing to the achievement of universal health coverage for all, with a focus on
health outcomes;
5. Calls upon Member States to ensure that no one is left behind, with an endeavour to reach the furthest
behind first, founded on the dignity of the human person and reflecting the principles of equality and
non-discrimination, as well as to empower those who are in vulnerable situations and address their physical and mental
health needs which are reflected in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,292 including all children, youth,
persons with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples, refugees and internally
displaced persons and migrants;
6. Also calls upon Member States to promote social protection mechanisms to ensure access to qualityassured and affordable essential health services, including medicines, vaccines, diagnostics, medical products and
health technologies;
7. Further calls upon Member States to take measures to share and implement the vision and commitments
of the Declaration of Astana, while reiterating the commitment of the Declaration of Alma-Ata, including to promote
the empowerment of individuals and communities, in the context of primary health care;
8. Calls upon Member States to ensure the right of every human being, without distinction of any kind, to
the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, while recalling that everyone has the

_______________
291
292

148

Resolution 74/2.
Resolution 70/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

right, individually or in association with others, to promote and strive for the protection and the realization of
particularly this right, and encouraging leaders in all sectors of society and in their respective communities to express
public support for it;
9. Encourages Member States to engage all relevant stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector
and academia, as appropriate, through the establishment of participatory and transparent multi-stakeholder platforms
and partnerships, to provide input to the development, implementation and evaluation of health- and social-related
policies and reviewing progress for the achievement of national objectives for universal health coverage, while giving
due regard to addressing and managing conflicts of interest and undue influence;
10. Also encourages Member States to mainstream a gender perspective on a systems-wide basis when
designing, implementing and monitoring health policies, taking into account the specific needs of all women and girls,
with a view to achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women in health policies and health systems
delivery;
11. Calls upon Member States to promote more coherent and inclusive approaches to safeguard universal
health coverage in emergencies, including through international cooperation, ensuring the continuum and provision
of essential health services and public health functions, in line with humanitarian principles;
12. Also calls upon Member States to ensure that persons affected by sexual violence in natural disasters,
humanitarian emergencies and armed conflicts have safe access to non-discriminatory health-care services;
13. Urges all Member States, as appropriate to local and national contexts and with the objective of the success
of primary health care and the achievement of universal health coverage, to implement community health worker
programmes in order to enable community health workers to deliver safe and high-quality care and to optimize
community health worker programmes at the national level as part of national health workforce and broader health
sector, employment and economic development strategies, in line with national priorities, resources and specificities;
14. Urges Member States to scale up efforts to promote the recruitment and retention of competent, skilled
and motivated health workers, including community health workers and mental health professionals, and encourage
incentives to secure the equitable distribution of qualified health workers especially in rural, hard-to-reach and
underserved areas and in fields with high demands for services, including by providing decent and safe working
conditions and appropriate remuneration for health workers working in these areas, consistent with the World Health
Organization Global Code of Practice on International Recruitment of Health Personnel,293 noting with concern that
highly trained and skilled health personnel continue to emigrate, which weakens health systems in the countries of
origin;
15. Calls upon Member States to develop evidence-based training that is sensitive to different cultures and the
specific needs of women, children and persons with disabilities, skills enhancement and education of health workers,
including midwives and community health workers, as well as promote a continued education and lifelong learning
agenda and expand community-based health education and training in order to provide quality care for people
throughout the life course;
16. Encourages Member States to fulfil their commitment to, by 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and
reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of
reproductive health into national strategies and programmes;
17. Calls upon Member States to strengthen efforts to address communicable diseases, including HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria and hepatitis, as part of universal health coverage and to ensure that the fragile gains are sustained
and expanded by advancing comprehensive approaches and integrated service delivery and ensuring that no one is
left behind;
18. Also calls upon Member States to further strengthen efforts to address non‑communicable diseases,
including cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, as well as kidney diseases, as part of
universal health coverage;

_______________
293

World Health Organization, document WHA63/2010/REC/1, annex 5.

149

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

19. Further calls upon Member States to take steps to promote actions to raise international awareness on the
issue of waterborne diseases, in particular cholera and child diarrhoea, which can be prevented through safe drinking
water and adequate sanitation and hygiene, engaging in partnerships with relevant stakeholders to implement projects
aimed at scaling up access to safe water and sanitation in developing countries;
20. Encourages Member States to develop health- and nutrition-promoting environments, including through
nutrition education in schools and other education institutions, as appropriate, and to scale up community-based
actions that support children and families, through the promotion of maternal health and recommended infant feeding
practices such as breastfeeding;
21. Calls upon Member States, in partnership with other relevant stakeholders, including international and
regional organizations and academia, to consider scaling up research and knowledge dissemination on the correlations
between health, notably its economic and social determinants, and nutrition and food systems to generate evidence
and guidance on effective nutrition programmes and policies;
22. Encourages Member States and relevant organizations to reinforce immunization and vaccination as one
of the most important ways to reduce the number of deaths caused by preventable diseases and also to reinforce in
their societies the safety and efficacy of vaccines, aiming at eliminating vaccine-preventable diseases, and calls upon
Member States to strengthen public health surveillance and data systems, improve routine immunization and
vaccination capacities, including by providing evidence-based information on countering vaccine hesitancy, and
expand vaccine coverage to prevent outbreaks as well as the spread and re-emergence of communicable and
non-communicable diseases, including for vaccine-preventable diseases already eliminated as well as for ongoing
eradication efforts, such as for poliomyelitis;
23. Calls upon Member States to scale up efforts to promote healthy and active ageing, to maintain and
improve quality of life of older persons and to respond to the needs of the rapidly ageing population, especially the
need for promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative care as well as specialized care and the
sustainable provision of long-term care, taking into account national contexts and priorities;
24. Also calls upon Member States to increase access to health services for all persons with disabilities,
remove physical, attitudinal, social, structural and financial barriers, provide quality standard of care and scale up
efforts for their empowerment and inclusion, noting that persons with disabilities, who represent 15 per cent of the
global population, continue to experience unmet health needs;
25. Encourages Member States to incorporate the health needs of migrants into national and local health-care
policies and plans, such as by strengthening capacities for service provision, facilitating affordable and
isnon-discriminatory access, reducing communication barriers, and training health-care providers on culturally
sensitive service delivery, in order to promote the physical and mental health of migrants and communities overall;
26. Calls upon Member States to enhance cooperation at the national, regional and global levels to address
antimicrobial resistance, using an integrated and systems-based one-health approach, including through health system
strengthening, capacity-building, including for research and regulatory capacity, and technical support and ensure
equitable access to affordable, safe, effective and quality existing and new antimicrobial medicines, vaccines and
diagnostics as well as effective stewardship, as antimicrobial resistance poses a challenge to achieving universal health
coverage, noting the work of the ad hoc inter-agency coordination group on antimicrobial resistance and its
recommendations as contained in the report of the Secretary-General on antimicrobial resistance,294 and looking
forward to the discussion thereof during the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, taking into account
World Health Assembly resolution 72.5 of 28 May 2019;295
27. Also calls upon Member States to promote equitable distribution of and increased access to quality, safe,
effective, affordable and essential medicines, including generics, vaccines, diagnostics and health technologies, to
ensure affordable quality health services and their timely delivery;
28. Further calls upon Member States to improve availability, affordability and efficiency of health products
by increasing transparency of prices of medicines, vaccines, medical devices, diagnostics, assistive products, cell- and

_______________
294
295

150

A/73/869.
See World Health Organization, document WHA72/2019/REC/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

gene-based therapies and other health technologies across the value chain, including through improved regulations
and building constructive engagement and a stronger partnership with relevant stakeholders, including industries, the
private sector and civil society, in accordance with national and regional legal frameworks and contexts, to address
the global concern about the high prices of some health products and in this regard encourages the World Health
Organization to continue its efforts to biennially convene the Fair Pricing Forum with Member States and all relevant
stakeholders to discuss the affordability and transparency of prices and costs relating to health products;
29. Reaffirms the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), which provides flexibilities
for the protection of public health and promotes access to medicines for all, in particular for developing countries, and
the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which recognizes that intellectual property
protection is important for the development of new medicines and also recognizes the concerns about its effects on
prices;
30. Calls upon Member States to explore, encourage and promote a range of innovative incentives and
financing mechanisms for health research and development, including a stronger and transparent partnership between
the public and the private sectors as well as academia, recognizing the need for increasing public health-driven
research and development that is needs-driven and evidence-based, guided by the core principles of safety,
affordability, effectiveness, efficiency, equity and considered as a shared responsibility, as well as appropriate
incentives in the development of new health products and technologies;
31. Also calls upon Member States to recognize the important role played by the private sector in research
and development of innovative medicines, encourage the use, where appropriate, of alternative financing mechanisms
for research and development as a driver of innovation for new medicines and new uses for medicines and continue
to support voluntary initiatives and incentive mechanisms that separate the cost of investment in research and
development from the price and volume of sales, facilitate equitable and affordable access to new tools and other
results to be gained through research and development;
32. Urges Member States to improve the digital skills of all persons, including through working with civil
society to build public trust and support for digital health solutions, and to promote the application of digital health
technology in the provision of, and access to, everyday health-care services, with emphasis on health promotion and
predictive testing and screening, while ensuring access to important clinical information, safety risks and protection
of privacy;
33. Calls upon Member States to invest in and encourage ethical and public health-driven use of relevant
evidence-based and user-friendly technologies, including digital technologies, and innovation to increase access to
quality health and related social services and relevant information, improve the cost-effectiveness of health systems
and efficiency in the provision and delivery of quality care in a manner that recognizes the need to build and strengthen
interoperable and integrated health information systems for the management of health systems and public health
surveillance, as well as the need to protect data and privacy and narrow the digital divide;
34. Also calls upon Member States to explore ways to consider integrating, as appropriate, safe and evidencebased traditional and complementary medicine services within national and/or subnational health systems, particularly
at the level of primary health care, according to national context and priorities;
35. Further calls upon Member States to encourage engagement among Governments, international
organizations, non-governmental organizations, academic and research institutions, philanthropic foundations and the
private sector and greater policy coherence and coordinated actions through whole-of-government and health-in-allpolicies approaches to find solutions to health challenges, such as the need for public health-driven research and
development, improved existing and alternative frameworks to adequately reward innovation, pricing and
affordability of health products, and leveraging innovative technologies, including digital technologies, and solutions
for health;
36. Calls upon Member States to strengthen health information systems and collect quality, timely and reliable
data, including vital statistics, disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability,
geographical location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts as required to monitor progress and
identify gaps in the universal and inclusive achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 3 and all other healthrelated Sustainable Development Goals, while protecting the privacy of data that could be linked to individuals, and
151

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

to ensure that the statistics used in the monitoring progress can capture the actual progress made on the ground, for
the achievement of universal health coverage, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
37. Also calls upon Member States to set measurable national targets and strengthen national monitoring and
evaluation platforms, as appropriate, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to support regular
tracking of the progress made for the achievement of universal health coverage by 2030;
38. Further calls upon Member States to provide strategic leadership on universal health coverage at the
highest political level and promote greater policy coherence and coordinated actions through whole-of-government
and health-in-all-policies approaches, and forge a coordinated and integrated whole-of-society and multisectoral
response, while recognizing the need to align support from all stakeholders to achieve national health goals;
39. Encourages Member States to enhance international cooperation and official development assistance for
health, and to develop primary health care preparedness for health emergencies, to support and complement national
and regional strategies, policies and programmes, and surveillance initiatives;
40. Also encourages Member States to ensure sufficient domestic public spending on health, where
appropriate, expand pooling of resources allocated to health, maximize efficiency and ensure equitable allocation of
health spending, to deliver cost-effective, essential, affordable, timely and quality health services, improve service
coverage, reduce impoverishment from health expenditure and ensure financial risk protection, while noting the role
of private sector investment, as appropriate;
41. Further encourages Member States to mobilize all relevant development cooperation partners and
stakeholders from the health sector and beyond within their respective mandates, to ensure necessary and sustained
financing for health system strengthening, including through the implementation of innovative mechanisms,
enhancement of international cooperation and promotion of universal access to quality health-care services, including
through partnerships with civil society, relevant research institutions and the private sector;
42. Encourages the Secretary-General to promote discussion among Member States and relevant
stakeholders, in particular United Nations agencies, on appropriate policy options to promote access to medicines,
innovation and health technologies in the context of strengthening health systems;
43. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the Director General of the World Health
Organization, to address, inter alia, the challenges and opportunities of inclusive approaches to strengthening health
systems in the context of the progress report to be submitted during the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly
as requested in the political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage.
RESOLUTION 74/21
Adopted at the 45th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.23 and
A/74/L.23/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

74/21.

Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Charter of the United Nations, including the purposes and principles contained therein, and
especially the dedication to saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war,

152

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which states
that, “since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be constructed”,
Recognizing the importance of the Declaration296 and Programme of Action297 on a Culture of Peace, adopted
by the General Assembly on 13 September 1999, which serve as the universal mandate for the international
community, particularly the United Nations system, for the promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence that
benefits humanity, in particular future generations,
Recalling its previous resolutions on a culture of peace, in particular resolution 52/15 of 20 November 1997
proclaiming 2000 the International Year for the Culture of Peace, resolution 53/25 of 10 November 1998 proclaiming
the period 2001–2010 the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World
and resolutions 56/5 of 5 November 2001, 57/6 of 4 November 2002, 58/11 of 10 November 2003, 59/143 of
15 December 2004, 60/3 of 20 October 2005, 61/45 of 4 December 2006, 62/89 of 17 December 2007, 63/113
of 5 December 2008, 64/80 of 7 December 2009, 65/11 of 23 November 2010, 66/116 of 12 December 2011, 67/106
of 17 December 2012, 68/125 of 18 December 2013, 69/139 of 15 December 2014, 70/20 of 3 December 2015,
71/252 of 23 December 2016, 72/137 of 11 December 2017 and 73/126 of 12 December 2018, adopted under its
agenda item entitled “Culture of peace”,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration,298 which calls for the active promotion of a culture
of peace,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”,
Recalling its resolutions 70/262 of 27 April 2016 on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
and 72/276 of 26 April 2018 on the follow-up to the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace,
Recalling also its resolutions 72/241 of 20 December 2017 on a world against violence and violent extremism,
72/284 of 26 June 2018 on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review, and 70/254 of 12 February
2016 on the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, and noting the establishment of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism under resolution 71/291 of 15 June 2017,
Taking note of the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly,299
Welcoming the observance of 10 December as Human Rights Day,300 9 December as the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This Crime301 and
2 October as the International Day of Non-Violence,302 as proclaimed by the United Nations,
Recognizing that all efforts made by the United Nations system in general and the international community at
large for the prevention of conflicts, the peaceful settlement of disputes, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, mediation,
disarmament, sustainable development, the promotion of human dignity and human rights, social inclusion,
democracy, the rule of law, good governance and gender equality at the national and international levels contribute
greatly to a culture of peace,
Recognizing also that efforts towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace need to take into account the
promotion of a culture of peace and vice versa,

_______________
Resolution 53/243 A.
Resolution 53/243 B.
298
Resolution 55/2.
299
Resolution 60/1.
300
Resolution 423 (V).
301
Resolution 69/323.
302
Resolution 61/271.
296
297

153

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing further the importance of respect and understanding for religious and cultural diversity throughout
the world, of choosing dialogue and negotiations over confrontation and of working together and not against each
other,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,303 which provides an overview of the activities that have
been carried out by the main United Nations entities working in the areas of a culture of peace as well as interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace since the adoption by the General Assembly of
its resolutions 73/126 and 73/129 of 12 December 2018,
Recalling the proclamation by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization of
21 February as International Mother Language Day, which aims at protecting, promoting and preserving linguistic
and cultural diversity and multilingualism, in order to foster and enrich a culture of peace, social harmony, crosscultural dialogue and mutual understanding,
Recalling also the proclamation by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
of 30 April as International Jazz Day, which aims to develop and increase intercultural exchanges and understanding
between cultures for the purpose of mutual comprehension, tolerance and the promotion of a culture of peace,
Welcoming the efforts of the international community to enhance understanding through constructive dialogue
among civilizations, in particular through various initiatives at the local, national, regional and international levels,
Expressing its appreciation for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in promoting
a culture of peace through a number of practical projects in the areas of youth, education, media and migrations, in
collaboration with Governments, international organizations, foundations and civil society groups, as well as media
and the private sector,
Taking note of the eighth United Nations Alliance of Civilizations Forum, held at United Nations Headquarters
on 19 and 20 November 2018 under the theme “#Commit2Dialogue: partnerships for prevention and sustaining
peace”,
Taking note also of the meeting of the Group of Friends of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, held at
United Nations Headquarters on 27 September 2019 at the level of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and heads of
international organizations, on the theme “Relevance of the work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations to
the United Nations prevention agenda and its impact on the ground”,
Welcoming the successful holding on 13 September 2019 of the General Assembly High-level Forum on the
Culture of Peace, on the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration and Programme of Action, convened
by the President of the Assembly, at which Member States emphasized a wide-ranging partnership and inclusive
collaboration among Member States, international organizations and civil society for the implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action, and taking note with appreciation of the Chair’s summary of the meeting on
the theme “The Culture of Peace: empowering and transforming humanity”,
Noting with appreciation that the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace continues to find
relevance across the three pillars of the United Nations, which are interconnected and mutually reinforcing, in
addressing contemporary global challenges,
Welcoming the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly, known as the Nelson Mandela Peace
Summit, convened by the President of the Assembly on 24 September 2018, and the adoption of its political
declaration,304
Recognizing the role of women and youth, as well as the contribution of children and older persons in advancing
a culture of peace, and in particular the importance of greater involvement of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in activities promoting a culture of peace, including in post-conflict situations,
Noting the important and positive contribution of youth in efforts to counter terrorism and prevent violent
extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, as well as for the promotion of peace and security,

_______________
303
304

154

A/74/476.
Resolution 73/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the adoption by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its thirty-sixth session of a programme of action for a culture of peace and non-violence, and noting
that the objectives of that programme of action are in line with the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace adopted by the General Assembly,
Recognizing the activities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization related to the
culture of peace and non-violence and their focus on concrete actions at the global, regional and subregional levels,
and noting its support for the Member States, upon their request, in promoting the culture of peace at the national
level,
Noting the initiatives of civil society, in collaboration with Governments, to strengthen civilian capacities to
enhance the physical safety of vulnerable populations under threat of violence and to promote the peaceful settlement
of disputes,
Encouraging the continued and increasing efforts and activities on the part of civil society organizations
throughout the world in advancing a culture of peace as envisaged in the Declaration and Programme of Action,
1. Reiterates that the objective of the effective implementation of the Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace297 is to strengthen further the global movement for a culture of peace following the observance of the
International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World, 2001–2010, and calls
upon all concerned to renew their attention to this objective;
2. Welcomes the inclusion of the promotion of a culture of peace in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;305
3. Invites Member States to continue to place greater emphasis on and expand their activities promoting a
culture of peace at the national, regional and international levels and to ensure that peace and non-violence are fostered
at all levels;
4. Invites the entities of the United Nations system, within their existing mandates, to integrate, as
appropriate, the eight action areas of the Programme of Action into their programmes of activities, focusing on
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence at the national, regional and international levels;
5. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for strengthening efforts
to mobilize all relevant stakeholders within and outside the United Nations system in support of a culture of peace,
and invites the Organization to continue to enhance communication and outreach, including through the culture of
peace website;
6. Commends the practical initiatives and actions by relevant United Nations bodies, including the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the University for Peace, as well as their activities in further promoting a culture of peace and
non‑violence, in particular the promotion of peace education and activities related to specific areas identified in the
Programme of Action, and encourages them to continue and further strengthen and expand their efforts;
7. Underlines that early childhood development contributes to the development of more peaceful societies
through advancing equality, tolerance, human development and promoting human rights, and calls for investment
in early childhood education, including through effective policies and practices, towards promoting a culture of
peace;
8. Encourages Member States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional organizations and relevant
actors to consider instituting mechanisms to involve youth in the promotion of a culture of peace, tolerance and
intercultural and interreligious dialogue and develop, as appropriate, an understanding of respect for human dignity,
pluralism and diversity, including, as appropriate, through education programmes, that could discourage their
participation in acts of terrorism, violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, violence, xenophobia and all
forms of discrimination;

_______________
305

Resolution 70/1.

155

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Encourages the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations to increase its activities that focus on peace
education and global citizenship education in order to enhance an understanding among young people of values such
as peace, tolerance, openness, inclusion and mutual respect, which are essential in developing a culture of peace;
10. Encourages the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to continue to promote peacebuilding and
sustaining peace activities, as outlined in its resolution 72/276, and to advance a culture of peace and non-violence in
post-conflict peacebuilding efforts at the country level;
11. Urges the appropriate authorities to provide age-appropriate education in children’s schools that builds a
culture of peace and non-violence, including lessons in mutual understanding, respect, tolerance, active and global
citizenship and human rights;
12. Encourages the involvement of media, especially the mass media, in promoting a culture of peace and
non-violence, with particular regard to children and young people;
13. Commends civil society, non-governmental organizations and young people for their activities in further
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence, including through their campaign to raise awareness on a culture of
peace and the peaceful settlement of disputes;
14. Encourages civil society and non-governmental organizations to further strengthen their efforts to
promote a culture of peace, inter alia, by adopting their own programme of activities to complement the initiatives of
Member States, the United Nations system and other international and regional organizations, in line with the
Declaration296 and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace;
15. Invites Member States, all entities of the United Nations system and civil society organizations to accord
increasing attention to their observance of the International Day of Peace on 21 September each year as a day of global
ceasefire and non-violence, in accordance with its resolution 55/282 of 7 September 2001, and of the International
Day of Non-Violence on 2 October, in accordance with its resolution 61/271 of 15 June 2007;
16. Reiterates its request to the President of the General Assembly to consider convening a high-level forum,
as appropriate and within existing resources, devoted to the implementation of the Programme of Action on the
occasion of the anniversary of its adoption, on or around 13 September, and requests the Secretariat to provide required
logistical support for its effective organization within their respective mandates and existing resources;
17. Welcomes the convening by the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session, on
13 September 2019, of the High-level Forum on the Culture of Peace, on the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
the Declaration and Programme of Action, as mandated by its resolution 73/126, devoted to the implementation of
the Declaration and Programme of Action, unanimously adopted two decades ago, which encourages actions at all
levels – the individual, the family, the community, the national, the regional and the global;
18. Appreciates, in this context, that the High-level Forum provided an opportunity for Member States, United
Nations entities, civil society and non‑governmental organizations and all relevant stakeholders to exchange ideas and
make suggestions on how to build and further promote the Culture of Peace in the twenty-first century, and
acknowledges that the theme for the High-level Forum, “The Culture of Peace: empowering and transforming
humanity”, reflected the enduring value of the culture of peace, inter alia, for full and effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
19. Invites the Secretary-General, within existing resources, in consultation with the Member States and taking
into account the observations of civil society organizations, to explore mechanisms and strategies, in particular
strategies in the sphere of information and communications technology, for the implementation of the Declaration and
Programme of Action and to initiate outreach efforts to increase global awareness of the Programme of Action and its
eight areas of action aimed at their implementation, including through public information activities by the Department
of Global Communications of the Secretariat;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report,
within existing resources, on actions taken by Member States, on the basis of information provided by them, and those
taken system-wide by all concerned entities of the United Nations to implement the present resolution and on
heightened activities by the Organization and its affiliated agencies to implement the Programme of Action and to
promote a culture of peace and non-violence;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Culture of peace”.
156

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 74/22
Adopted at the 45th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.24 and
A/74/L.24/Add.1, sponsored by: Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, China, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam

74/22.

World Chess Day

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and recalling the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,306 as well as the purpose of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization of advancing, through the educational, scientific and cultural relations of the peoples of the world, the
objectives of international peace and of the common welfare of humankind,
Recalling the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which states
that “a peace based exclusively upon the political and economic arrangements of governments would not be a peace
which could secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples of the world, and that the peace must
therefore be founded, if it is not to fail, upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind”,
Recognizing that sports, the arts and physical activity have the power to change perceptions, prejudices and
behaviours, as well as to inspire people, break down racial and political barriers, combat discrimination and defuse
conflict, as reflected in the political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit in 2018,307
Recognizing also the valuable contribution of such activities in promoting education, sustainable development,
peace, cooperation, solidarity, social inclusion and health at the local, regional and international levels,
Recalling article 31 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,308 outlining a child’s right to rest and leisure,
to engage in play and recreational activities, and the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the
General Assembly on children, entitled “A world fit for children”,309 stressing the promotion of physical, mental and
emotional health through play and sports,
Recalling also articles 1 and 30 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,310 in which States
parties recognized the right of persons with disabilities to take part on an equal basis with others in cultural life,
recreation, leisure and sport, and recognizing that the active involvement of persons with disabilities in such activities
contributes to the full and equal realization of their human rights, as well as respect for their inherent dignity,
Recalling further its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries,
Recognizing the important role of chess as an affordable and inclusive activity, which can be exercised anywhere
and played by all, across the barriers of language, age, gender, physical ability or social status,
Noting that chess is one of the most ancient, intellectual and cultural games, with a combination of sport,
scientific thinking and elements of art,
Acknowledging that chess is a global game, which promotes fairness, inclusion and mutual respect, and noting
in this regard that it can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance and understanding among peoples and nations,

_______________
Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 73/1.
308
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
309
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
310
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
306
307

157

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the mission and role of the International Olympic Committee, as set out in the Olympic Charter, in
placing sport at the service of humankind and in promoting a peaceful society and healthy lifestyles by associating
sport with culture and education and safeguarding human dignity without any discrimination whatsoever, and
welcoming the partnerships that the Committee has established with many organizations of the United Nations
system, including the International Forum on Sport, Peace and Development, organized jointly with the United
Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace,
Recognizing the important role of the World Chess Federation in supporting international cooperation for chess
activity and aiming to improve friendly harmony among all peoples of the world, and noting in this regard the
recognition of the World Chess Federation by the International Olympic Committee as an International Sports
Federation,
Recalling the political declaration311 and outcome312 adopted at the five-year review of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action313 and the commitments made therein to ensure equal opportunities for women and girls in
recreational and sports activities, as well as in participation in athletics and physical activities at the national, regional
and international levels, such as access, training, competition, remuneration and prizes, and stressing in this regard the
need to promote the advancement of women and girls in chess activities, in particular by supporting the higher
participation of women and girls in chess events,
Acknowledging the important opportunities offered by chess in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development314 and the Sustainable Development Goals, including, inter alia, in strengthening education,
realizing gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls and fostering inclusion, tolerance, mutual
understanding and respect,
1.

Decides to designate 20 July as World Chess Day;

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, other international and regional
organizations, the private sector and civil society, including non-governmental organizations, individuals and other
relevant stakeholders, to observe World Chess Day in an appropriate manner and in accordance with national
priorities, and to disseminate the advantages of chess, including through educational and public awareness-raising
activities;
3. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to facilitate the observance
of World Chess Day in collaboration with other relevant organizations, mindful of the provisions contained in the
annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67;
4. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders for appropriate observance.
RESOLUTION 74/23
Adopted at the 45th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.25 and
A/74/L.25/Add.1, sponsored by: Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, China, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russian Federation, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam

_______________
Resolution S-23/2, annex.
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
313
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
314
Resolution 70/1.
311
312

158

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

74/23.

Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,315 in particular the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Recalling its resolution 73/129 of 12 December 2018 on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace, and its other related resolutions,
Recalling also its resolution 53/243 of 13 September 1999 on the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, which serves as a universal mandate for the international community for the promotion of a culture
of peace and non‑violence that benefits humanity, in particular future generations, and welcoming the convening of
the High-level Forum on the Culture of Peace by the President of the General Assembly on 13 September 2019, in
connection with the observance of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration and Programme of
Action, which provided an opportunity for renewing the commitment to further strengthening the global movement
for a culture of peace,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 67/104 of 17 December 2012, it proclaimed the period 2013–2022 the
International Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures and invited the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, in that context, to be the lead agency in the United Nations system,
Encouraging, in this regard, activities aimed at promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue in order to
enhance peace and social stability, respect for diversity and mutual respect and to create, at the global level, and also
at the regional, national and local levels, an environment conducive to peace and mutual understanding,
Recalling its resolution 69/312 of 6 July 2015 on the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, in which it
reaffirmed its support for the Alliance and reiterated the valuable role of the Alliance in promoting greater
understanding and respect among civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs,
Recalling also its resolution 72/241 of 20 December 2017 on a world against violence and violent extremism
and its resolution 72/284 of 26 June 2018 on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review,
Recalling further its resolution 53/22 of 4 November 1998, by which it declared 2001 the United Nations Year
of Dialogue among Civilizations and expressed its firm determination to facilitate and promote dialogue among
civilizations,
Recalling its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination
of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling also its resolution 73/328 of 25 July 2019 on promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
tolerance in countering hate speech,
Bearing in mind the valuable contribution that interreligious and intercultural dialogue can make to an improved
awareness and understanding of the common values shared by all humankind,
Noting that interreligious and intercultural dialogue has made significant contributions to mutual understanding,
tolerance and respect, as well as to the promotion of a culture of peace and an improvement of overall relations among
people from different cultural and religious backgrounds and among nations,
Noting also the growing importance of interreligious and intercultural dialogue in the context of the global
phenomenon of migration, which increases interaction among persons and communities from various traditions,
cultures and religions,
Recognizing that cultural diversity and the pursuit of cultural development by all peoples and nations are sources
of mutual enrichment for the cultural life of humankind,
Convinced that the promotion of cultural pluralism and tolerance towards and dialogue among various cultures
and civilizations would contribute to the efforts of all peoples and nations to enrich their cultures and traditions by
engaging in a mutually beneficial exchange of knowledge and intellectual, moral and material achievements,

_______________
315

Resolution 217 A (III).

159

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the launch by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech,
Noting also the leading role played the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in preparing the United Nations
Plan of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites, noting further the launch of the Plan of Action by the Secretary-General
on 12 September 2019, and inviting Member States to consider implementing the relevant recommendations
addressed to them, in collaboration with other stakeholders, as appropriate,
Noting further the Unite for Heritage campaign launched by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization in March 2015, which is aimed at celebrating and safeguarding cultural heritage and diversity
around the world, and the Conference on Safeguarding Endangered Cultural Heritage, held in Abu Dhabi
on 2 and 3 December 2016, and the declaration adopted at the Conference,
Recalling that States have the primary responsibility to promote and protect human rights, including the human
rights of persons belonging to religious minorities, including their right to exercise their religion or belief freely,
Recalling also its resolution 73/296 of 28 May 2019, in which it decided to designate 22 August as the
International Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts of Violence Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling further its resolution 73/329 of 25 July 2019, in which it declared 5 April the International Day of
Conscience,
Bearing in mind that tolerance of cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic diversities contributes towards peace,
mutual understanding and friendship among people of different cultures and nations and that these diversities should
be made part of intercultural and interreligious dialogue efforts, as appropriate,
Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,316 and acknowledging that the 2030 Agenda
includes the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
Noting the various initiatives at the local, national, regional and international levels for enhancing interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation, and for strengthening people-to-people bonds, which are
mutually reinforcing and interrelated, such as the establishment of the Hamad bin Khalifa Civilization Center in
Copenhagen in 2014, the African Initiative on Education for Peace and Development through Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue, launched in Cotonou, Benin, in May 2015, the thirteenth Doha Conference on Interfaith
Dialogue, held in Qatar, the sixth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, held in Astana in October
2018, the third World Nomad Games, held in Issyk-Kul, Kyrgyzstan, and organized under the patronage of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in September 2018, the establishment of the International
Institute for Tolerance and the Muslim Council of Elders in the United Arab Emirates, in 2017, and the launch of the
World Tolerance Summit, in Abu Dhabi, all of which contribute to promoting social cohesion and inclusion, peace
and development,
Noting also the cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other organizations in the promotion
of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
Noting further the adoption of the Yerevan Declaration of the seventeenth Summit of Heads of State and
Government of la Francophonie, on the theme “Living together”, held in Yerevan on 11 and 12 October 2018,
Welcoming the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as
the work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, in promoting intercultural dialogue,
Welcoming also the work of the Anna Lindh Foundation and the ongoing work of the King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna,
Noting the declaration of the Forum on the Role of Religious Leaders in Preventing Incitement that could Lead
to Atrocity Crimes, held in Fez, Morocco, on 23 and 24 April 2015, and further efforts that build on the Rabat Plan of
Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence317 and the Istanbul Process for Combating Intolerance, Discrimination and
Incitement to Hatred and/or Violence on the Basis of Religion or Belief,

_______________
316
317

160

Resolution 70/1.
A/HRC/22/17/Add.4, appendix.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the Declaration on Promoting Cultural Pluralism and Peace through Interfaith and Inter-ethnic
Dialogue, endorsed by the 137th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, held in Saint Petersburg, Russian
Federation, from 14 to 18 October 2017,
Referring to the World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue, organized biennially by Azerbaijan in cooperation with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations,
the World Tourism Organization, the Council of Europe and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, as a key global platform for promoting intercultural dialogue,318
Acknowledging the positive contribution of individuals and of relevant civil society organizations to the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and the culture of peace,
Underlining the importance of education, including education on culture, peace, tolerance, mutual
understanding and human rights, in promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue, respect for diversity, and the
elimination of discrimination based on religion or belief,
Recognizing the contributions of the media and of new information and communications technologies to
promoting peoples’ understanding of different cultures and religions, including through the promotion of dialogue,
Reaffirming the importance of sustaining the process of engaging all stakeholders, including young men and
women as relevant actors, in interreligious and intercultural dialogue within the appropriate initiatives at various
levels, which is aimed at challenging prejudices, improving mutual understanding and fostering cooperation,
Recognizing the commitment of all religions to peace and the contribution that interreligious and intercultural
dialogue among religions, groups and individuals, in particular religious leaders, can make towards an improved
awareness and understanding of the common values shared by all humankind,
Noting the Appeal for Peace, signed by religious leaders during the World Day of Prayer for Peace, held in
Assisi, Italy, on 20 September 2016,
Taking note of the document entitled “Human fraternity for world peace and living together”, which was signed
by Pope Francis and the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar, Ahmad al-Tayyib, on 4 February 2019 in Abu Dhabi,
1. Reaffirms that mutual understanding and interreligious and intercultural dialogue constitute important
dimensions of the dialogue among civilizations and of the culture of peace;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace;319
3. Recognizes the importance of interreligious and intercultural dialogue and its valuable contribution to
promoting social cohesion and inclusion, peace and development, and calls upon Member States to consider, as
appropriate and where applicable, interreligious and intercultural dialogue as an important tool in efforts aimed at
achieving peace and social stability and the full realization of the Sustainable Development Goals;316
4. Also recognizes the efforts by relevant stakeholders to foster peaceful and harmonious coexistence within
societies by promoting respect for religious and cultural diversity, including by engendering sustained and robust
interaction among various segments of society;
5. Further recognizes the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on intercultural dialogue and its contribution to interreligious dialogue, as well as its activities related to
the culture of peace and non‑violence and its focus on concrete actions at the global, regional and subregional levels,
and recognizes the contribution by the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in this regard;
6. Encourages Member States and relevant intergovernmental and non‑governmental organizations to
continue to consider carrying out activities in support of the Action Plan for the International Decade for the
Rapprochement of Cultures (2013–2022), adopted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural

_______________
318
319

A/74/476, para. 9.
A/74/476.

161

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Organization,320 which provides a framework for enhancing interreligious and intercultural dialogue and promoting
tolerance and mutual understanding, while placing emphasis on the involvement of women and youth in such
dialogue;
7. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media, social media or any other means;
8. Reaffirms the solemn commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations and commitments to promote
universal respect for and observance and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights315 and other
instruments relating to human rights and international law, the universal nature of these rights and freedoms being
beyond question;
9. Welcomes the initiative to open up the Kartarpur Sahib Corridor in the spirit of interfaith harmony and
peaceful neighbourhood, and appreciates the agreement between the Governments of India and Pakistan to allow
visa-free access to pilgrims of all faiths, especially Nanak Naam Levas and the Sikh community from across the
world, as a landmark initiative for interreligious and intercultural cooperation for peace;
10. Also welcomes the declarations adopted by the Global Forums of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, and invites relevant stakeholders to continue their efforts to promote mutual understanding among
different civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs;
11. Further welcomes the joint statement issued by Spain and Turkey as co‑sponsors of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations after the successful conclusion of the eighth Global Forum of the Alliance, on the theme
“#Commit2Dialogue: partnerships for prevention and sustaining peace”, held in New York on 19 and 20 November
2018, and invites relevant stakeholders to continue their efforts to promote cross-cultural dialogue and mutual
understanding among different civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs;
12. Underlines the importance of moderation as a value within societies for countering violent extremism as
and when conducive to terrorism, while respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, and for further
contributing to the promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, tolerance, understanding and cooperation,
and encourages efforts, as appropriate, to enable voices of moderation to work together in order to build a more secure,
inclusive and peaceful world;
13. Welcomes the efforts by the media to promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue, encourages the
further promotion of dialogue among the media from all cultures and civilizations, emphasizes that everyone has the
right to freedom of expression, and reaffirms that the exercise of this right carries with it special duties and
responsibilities and may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but that these can be only such as are provided by
law and necessary for respect of the rights or reputations of others, and protection of national security or of public
order, or of public health or morals, and are non-discriminatory and applied in a manner that does not obstruct the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion;
14. Also welcomes the efforts to use information and communications technologies, including the Internet, to
promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue, including through the Interfaith Dialogue ePortal established
following the Special Non-Aligned Movement Ministerial Meeting on Interfaith Dialogue and Cooperation for Peace
and Development, held in Manila in 2010, as well as the Peace and Dialogue ePortal of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and encourages relevant stakeholders to utilize the opportunity to
disseminate their best practices and experiences on interreligious and intercultural dialogue by contributing to the
Interfaith Dialogue ePortal and to the Peace and Dialogue ePortal;
15. Encourages Member States to consider, as and where appropriate, initiatives that identify areas for
practical action in all sectors and levels of society for the promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
tolerance, understanding and cooperation, inter alia, the ideas suggested during the High-level Dialogue on
Interreligious and Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for Peace, held in New York in October 2007,
including the idea of an enhanced process of dialogue among world religions, as well as the ideas suggested during
the third High Panel on Peace and Dialogue among Cultures, held in Paris in November 2012;

_______________
320

162

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Executive Board decision 194 EX/10.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16. Acknowledges the active engagement of the United Nations system with faith-based and cultural
organizations and other relevant non-governmental organizations in the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and in bringing together people of different cultures, religions, faiths or beliefs to discuss common issues
and objectives;
17. Also acknowledges the important role of civil society, including academia, in fostering interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, and encourages support for practical measures that mobilize civil society, including building
capacities, opportunities and frameworks for cooperation;
18. Invites Member States to further promote reconciliation to help to ensure durable peace and sustained
development, including by working with faith leaders and communities and through reconciliatory measures and acts
of service and by encouraging forgiveness and compassion among individuals;
19. Recognizes that the Office of Intergovernmental Support and Coordination for Sustainable Development
in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat plays a valuable role as focal point within the
Secretariat on the issue, and encourages it to continue to interact and coordinate with the relevant entities of the United
Nations system and coordinate their contribution to the intergovernmental process aimed at promoting interreligious
and intercultural dialogue;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/114
Adopted at the 49th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.30 and
A/74/L.30/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
China, Croatia, Cuba, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Luxembourg, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, Nicaragua,
North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

74/114. Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 71/125 of 8 December 2016,
Reaffirming also its resolution 68/99 of 13 December 2013 on the strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, as well as its
other relevant resolutions on the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, and taking note of the decisions
adopted by the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system in the implementation of those resolutions,
Acknowledging the importance of the efforts made by the Governments of Belarus, the Russian Federation and
Ukraine, the United Nations system, other international organizations and civil society to study, mitigate and minimize
the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster,
Acknowledging also the organization of the international conference entitled “Chernobyl 30 years later: from an
emergency to a revival and sustainable social and economic development of affected territories”, held in Minsk on
25 April 2016, and taking note of the adoption of the Minsk Declaration,321
Recognizing, three decades after the Chernobyl disaster, the still-persistent serious long-term consequences
thereof, as well as the continuing related needs of the affected communities and territories,

_______________
321

A/70/916, annex.

163

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the completion of the Decade of Recovery and Sustainable Development of the Affected
Regions, 2006–2016,322
Stressing the need for continued coordination by the United Nations Development Programme of the United
Nations activities aimed at the short-term and long-term recovery of territories affected by the Chernobyl disaster and
for the United Nations agencies to strengthen strategic partnerships, build alliances and mobilize resources for the
development of the Chernobyl-affected territories,
Noting with satisfaction that the new safe confinement, provided by over 45 donor nations through funds
managed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, is now in place in Chernobyl,
Welcoming events organized by Member States, relevant agencies of the United Nations system and other
international organizations, as well as civil society, to mark International Chernobyl Disaster Remembrance Day,
observed on 26 April,
Welcoming also global efforts to enhance awareness of the needs of people and territories affected by the
Chernobyl disaster, including through web-based resources,
Stressing the significance of the upcoming thirty-fifth anniversary of the accident for the further strengthening
of international cooperation to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;323

2. Greatly appreciates the coordinating role of the United Nations Development Programme in the
international cooperation on Chernobyl, including the work undertaken by the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Chernobyl;
3. Acknowledges the need for continuing international cooperation on Chernobyl under the auspices of the
United Nations that can contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development324 and the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030;325
4. Stresses the need, in this regard, to continue the environmental and health monitoring of the Chernobylaffected regions and communities for the purpose of assessing the efficiency of international assistance;
5. Encourages Member States and all interested partners to support international cooperation on Chernobyl
aimed at achieving the Sustainable Development Goals in the Chernobyl-affected regions, including through
partnerships, innovation and investment;
6. Acknowledges the need to enhance networking around specialized national scientific institutions to study
long-term medical, radioecological, radiobiological and other consequences of the Chernobyl disaster;
7. Recognizes the role of regional centres, as referred to in the Minsk Declaration,321 in raising awareness
among the population of the Chernobyl-affected regions on the issues of personal and social safety to ensure better
adaptation with respect to the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster;
8. Requests the United Nations Development Programme and the Inter‑Agency Task Force on Chernobyl to
continue to coordinate international cooperation on Chernobyl as a means to further the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and to continue to develop, in collaboration with the affected countries and in
consultation with Member States, a concise outline of general principles of engagement of the United Nations system
in Chernobyl recovery efforts, along with agency-specific priorities;
9. Recognizes the need to continue the sustainable development of the recovering regions, focusing on the
development of local entrepreneurship and tourism, the creation of new jobs, the transition of local economies to
environmentally sound technologies, the promotion of sustainable forest management and agricultural innovations,
the inclusion of people in vulnerable situations in local development processes and the promotion of healthy lifestyles;

_______________
See resolution 62/9.
A/74/461.
324
Resolution 70/1.
325
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
322
323

164

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

10. Invites all Member States, relevant agencies of the United Nations system and other international
organizations, as well as civil society, to observe International Chernobyl Disaster Remembrance Day, and notes that
the costs of all activities that may arise should be met from voluntary contributions;
11. Welcomes the initiatives of the Governments of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine to host
international events to mark the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident, and invites organizations of the
United Nations system, donor countries and other development agencies to contribute to the effective realization of
the events;
12. Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system to actively engage in and fund, within existing resources, the preparations for the events;
13. Encourages Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, major groups, the
private sector and other donors to contribute to the relevant preparatory processes for the events;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, as appropriate, the full involvement of the resident coordinators
and country teams in Belarus and Ukraine in preparations for the events;
15. Requests the President of the General Assembly to convene, within existing resources, on 26 April 2021,
a special commemorative meeting of the Assembly in observance of the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Chernobyl
disaster;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session, under
the sub-item entitled “Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster” of the item entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance”, a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/115
Adopted at the 49th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.31 and
A/74/L.31/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, State of Palestine (on behalf of the States that are members of the Group of 77 and China,
taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018)

74/115. International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991, the annex to which contains the guiding principles for
the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations system, as well as
all its resolutions on international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development, and recalling the resolutions of the humanitarian segments of the substantive sessions of the
Economic and Social Council,
Reaffirming also the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of
humanitarian assistance,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration326 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,327
adopted by the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Sendai, Japan, from
14 to 18 March 2015,

_______________
326
327

Resolution 69/283, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.

165

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that the Sendai Framework applies to the risk of small-scale and large-scale, frequent and
infrequent, sudden and slow-onset disasters caused by natural or man-made hazards, as well as related environmental,
technological and biological hazards and risks,
Noting with concern that slow-onset disasters such as droughts are on the rise in many places and can have
significant impacts on affected populations and lead to increased vulnerability to other hazards,
Recognizing the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction as the main forum at the global level for strategic
advice coordination and partnership development for disaster risk reduction, and recognizing also the contribution of
the relevant regional and subregional platforms,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement328 and its early entry into force, and encouraging all the parties to the
Agreement to fully implement the Agreement and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change329 that have not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession,
where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development330
and the Paris Agreement, and noting with concern the findings contained in the Special Report on Global Warming
of 1.5°C of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
Noting with appreciation the hosting by the Government of Poland of the twenty-fourth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the fourteenth session
of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the third part of the
first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, held in
Katowice, Poland, from 2 to 15 December 2018, and noting with appreciation also the convening by the Government
of Chile, with the assistance of the Government of Spain, of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the Parties,
the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and
the second session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, in
Madrid from 2 to 13 December 2019,
Welcoming the holding of the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on
23 September, and taking note of the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit,
Noting with appreciation the hosting by the Government of Switzerland of the sixth session of the Global
Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Geneva from 13 to 17 May 2019,
Taking note of its resolution 71/1 of 19 September 2016, in which the General Assembly adopted the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants and the annexes thereto,
Welcoming the convening of the intergovernmental conference held on 10 and 11 December 2018 in Marrakech,
Morocco, and recalling that it adopted the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, also known as
the Marrakech Compact on Migration,331
Emphasizing the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, reaffirming, in situations in which
military capacity and assets are used as a last resort to support the implementation of humanitarian assistance in the
field of natural disasters, the need for their use to be undertaken with the consent of the affected State and in conformity
with international law, including international humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian principles, and emphasizing
also in this regard the need for Member States to coordinate with all relevant actors early on in a disaster response so
as to ensure the predictable, coherent and needs-based deployment of military assets and personnel supporting
humanitarian assistance,

_______________
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
330
Resolution 70/1.
331
Resolution 73/195, annex.
328
329

166

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Emphasizing also that the affected State has the primary responsibility in the initiation, organization,
coordination and implementation of humanitarian assistance within its territory and in the facilitation of the work of
humanitarian organizations in mitigating the consequences of natural disasters,
Emphasizing further the primary responsibility of each State to undertake disaster risk reduction, including
preparedness, and disaster risk management, including through the voluntary implementation of and follow-up to the
Sendai Framework, as well as response and early recovery efforts, in order to minimize the impact of disasters and
build resilience, while recognizing the importance of international cooperation in support of the efforts of affected
countries which may have limited capacities in this regard,
Recalling the Bangkok Principles for the implementation of the health aspects of the Sendai Framework as a
contribution to the Sendai Framework to build resilient health systems,
Recognizing the primary role of Member States in preparing for and responding to outbreaks of infectious
disease, including those that become humanitarian crises, in compliance with the International Health Regulations
(2005) adopted by the World Health Assembly,332 highlighting the critical role played by Member States, the World
Health Organization as the directing and coordinating authority on international health work, the United Nations
humanitarian system, regional organizations, non‑governmental organizations, the private sector and other
humanitarian actors in providing financial, technical and in-kind support in order to bring epidemics or pandemics
under control, and recognizing also the need to strengthen local and national health systems, early reporting and early
warning systems, preparedness, cross-sectoral response capacities, and resilience linked to outbreaks of infectious
disease, including through capacity-building for developing countries,
Expressing its deep concern at the increasing challenges to Member States and to the United Nations
humanitarian response capacity to deal with the consequences of natural disasters, given the effects of global
challenges, including the impact of climate change, the adverse impacts of the global financial and economic crisis
and volatile food prices on food security and nutrition, and other key factors that exacerbate the vulnerability of
populations and exposure to natural hazards and the impact of natural disasters,
Expressing its deep concern also that rural and urban poor communities in the developing world are the hardest
hit by the effects of increased disaster risk,
Noting with concern that women, persons with disabilities, older persons, children and youth are often
disproportionately affected in natural disasters, and stressing the need to ensure that their specific needs are identified
and addressed in emergency preparedness and response,
Acknowledging the impacts of rapid urbanization in the context of natural disasters and the adverse effects of
climate change and that urban disaster preparedness and responses require appropriate disaster risk reduction
strategies, including in urban planning, early action, rapid response and early recovery strategies implemented from
the initial stage of relief operations, as well as mitigation, rehabilitation and sustainable development strategies, giving
special attention to the needs and capacities of persons in vulnerable situations, and that action by humanitarian and
development actors in urban areas needs to recognize the complexity of cities and build urban resilience, with
improved urban expertise and capacities within organizations, while building on the capabilities, opportunities and
potential new partnerships present in cities and other human settlements,
Reaffirming the adoption of the outcome document entitled “New Urban Agenda” at the United Nations
Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October
2016,333 and in this regard noting the commitments therein undertaken by Member States regarding affected
populations in urban areas, and noting also the importance of implementing policies to ensure more effective disaster
risk reduction, including preparedness, and disaster risk management,
Recognizing that local communities are the first responders in most disasters, underlining the critical role played
by in-country capacities in disaster risk reduction, including preparedness, and capacity-building for community

_______________
332
333

World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.
Resolution 71/256, annex.

167

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

resilience, as well as response and recovery, and acknowledging the need to support the efforts of Member States to
develop and enhance national and local capacities which are fundamental to improving the overall delivery of
humanitarian assistance,
Stressing the need for all relevant actors involved in international responses to natural disasters to ensure that
such responses are tailored to context, make use of appropriate tools and support local systems, including by building
on local expertise and capacities,
Recognizing the adverse effects of climate change as contributors to environmental degradation and extreme
weather events, which may, in certain instances, among other factors, contribute to disaster-induced human mobility,
Recognizing also the high numbers of persons affected by natural disasters, including in this respect displaced
persons,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in support of the efforts of the affected States in dealing
with natural disasters in all their phases, in particular in preparedness, response and the early recovery phase, and of
strengthening the response capacity of countries affected by disaster,
Recognizing the importance of sharing and making use of effective practices as part of transboundary
cooperation in preparation for cross-border disaster situations, such as simulation exercises or preparedness or
evacuation drills,
Recognizing also that scientific advancements can contribute to the effective forecasting of extreme weather
events, which allows for a more accurate prediction and early warning of such events, leading to early action,
Taking note of the launch of the Coalition for Disaster-Resilient Infrastructure, the Risk-Informed Early Action
Partnership, the Climate Risk and Early Warning Systems (CREWS) initiative, and the Year of Action launched by
the Global Commission on Adaptation that will culminate in the 2020 Climate Adaptation Summit,
Recognizing the progress made by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (UN‑SPIDER) in its mission,
Noting the progress made by and the role of the Global Framework for Climate Services in developing and
providing science-based climate information and prediction for climate risk management and for adaptation to climate
variability and change, and looking forward to continued progress in this regard, including to address identified gaps
in coordinating and enabling partnerships,
Welcoming the important role played by Member States, including developing countries, that have granted
necessary and continued generous assistance to countries and peoples stricken by natural disasters,
Recognizing the significant role played by national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, as part of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, in disaster preparedness and risk reduction, disaster response,
rehabilitation and development,
Recognizing also the significant achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in facilitating lifesaving assistance to crisis-affected people by providing timely funding, enabling humanitarian organizations and their
implementing partners to act quickly when tragedy strikes and steer resources to crises that do not receive the attention
that they need and deserve, emphasizing the need to broaden and diversify the income base of the Fund, and
welcoming in this regard the call by the Secretary-General to achieve an annual funding level of 1 billion United
States dollars,
Emphasizing the need to address vulnerability and to integrate disaster risk reduction, including prevention,
mitigation and preparedness, into all phases of natural disaster management, post-natural disaster recovery and
development planning through close collaboration of all relevant actors and sectors,
Reaffirming that strengthening resilience contributes to withstanding, adapting to and quickly recovering from
disasters,
Reaffirming also the importance of considering increasing investment in building the resilience of communities,
which can be the first line of response,
168

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the changing scope, scale and complexity of humanitarian crises, including natural disasters, and
their adverse impact on efforts to achieve economic growth, sustainable development and internationally agreed
development goals, in particular the Sustainable Development Goals, and noting the positive contribution that these
efforts can make in strengthening the resilience and preparedness of populations to such disasters and reducing
displacement risk in the context of disasters,
Recognizing also the clear relationship between emergency response, rehabilitation and development, and
reaffirming that, in order to ensure a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, emergency
assistance must be provided in ways that will be supportive of short-term and medium-term recovery, leading to
long-term development, and that certain emergency measures should be seen as a step towards sustainable
development,
Emphasizing, in this context, the important role of development organizations, international financial institutions
and other relevant stakeholders in supporting national efforts to prepare for and mitigate the consequences of natural
disasters,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;334

2. Expresses its deep concern at the increasing impact of natural disasters, resulting in massive losses of life
and property worldwide, food insecurity, water and sanitation-related challenges, shelter and infrastructure losses,
and, in some instances, displacement, in particular in vulnerable societies lacking adequate capacity to mitigate
effectively the long-term negative social, economic and environmental consequences of natural disasters;
3. Reaffirms the importance of implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030,327 to ensure the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the
economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities and countries, and
underlines the importance of tackling the underlying disaster risk drivers and of integrating a disaster risk reduction
perspective into humanitarian assistance and development assistance programmes, as appropriate, to prevent new and
reduce existing disaster risk;
4. Encourages the United Nations to continue to increase its support for Member States in their prioritized
implementation of the Sendai Framework, including through the revised United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster
Risk Reduction for Resilience: Towards a Risk-informed and Integrated Approach to Sustainable Development, in
line with the Sendai Framework, to ensure that the implementation of the Sendai Framework most effectively
contributes to a risk-informed and integrated approach to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,330 in particular through building resilience against disasters, reducing displacement risk in the context
of disasters and supporting national and local preparedness and response capacities;
5. Emphasizes the need to promote and strengthen disaster risk reduction and preparedness activities at all
levels, in particular in hazard-prone areas, and encourages Member States, the United Nations system and other
relevant humanitarian and development actors to continue to increase funding and cooperation for disaster risk
reduction activities, including the strengthening of preparedness and mitigation, as well as for responding to disasters;
6. Encourages Member States, in line with the call in the Sendai Framework, to promote disaster risk reduction,
including prevention, mitigation and preparedness, response and recovery with a view to ensuring a rapid and effective
response to disasters and to promoting international cooperation to build resilience and reduce disaster risk;
7. Also encourages Member States to provide dedicated financial contributions to disaster risk reduction,
including prevention, mitigation and preparedness, as well as early action, rapid response and recovery efforts, in a
harmonized, flexible and complementary approach that fully utilizes and helps to coordinate humanitarian and
development funding options and potential;
8. Calls upon all States to adopt, where required, and to continue to implement effectively, necessary
legislative and other appropriate measures to mitigate the effects of natural disasters and integrate disaster risk
reduction strategies into development planning, as well as to incorporate a gender perspective into policies, planning
and funding, and in this regard requests the international community to continue to assist developing countries as well
as countries with economies in transition, as appropriate;

_______________
334

A/74/319.

169

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Acknowledges that climate change, among other factors, contributes to environmental degradation and to
the increase in the intensity and frequency of climate and extreme weather events, both of which amplify disaster risk
and contribute to displacement risk in the context of disasters, and in this regard encourages Member States, as well
as relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, in accordance with their specific mandates, to
support adaptation to the adverse effects of climate change, to strengthen disaster risk reduction and to substantially
increase the availability of and access to multi-hazard early warning systems in order to minimize the humanitarian
consequences of natural disasters, including through the provision of technology and support for capacity-building in
developing countries;
10. Urges the United Nations, relevant humanitarian and development organizations, international financial
institutions and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen the capacity and resilience of Member States, including
through capacity-building for community resilience, the application of new science and technology and investments
in the context of disasters and climate change;
11. Encourages Member States to address the humanitarian and development needs arising from natural
disaster-induced displacement, including through national policies and resilience-building, and in this regard
encourages Member States, supported by the United Nations, to develop national laws and policies on internal
displacement, as appropriate, which address such displacement, detail responsibilities and measures to minimize the
impact of disasters, protect and assist internally displaced persons following disasters and identify, promote and
support safe, dignified and durable solutions, and in this respect encourages Member States to adopt standards, as
appropriate, in line with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement,335 the Framework on Durable Solutions for
Internally Displaced Persons of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee336 and the basic principles and guidelines on
development-based evictions and displacement;337
12. Also encourages Member States to develop coherent approaches to address the challenges of displacement
in the context of natural disasters, including sudden-onset and slow-onset, and takes note of relevant initiatives in this
regard;
13. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to
integrate the building of resilience and human mobility into relevant strategies, plans and legal frameworks, in
particular regarding disaster risk management and climate change adaptation, as integral elements of sustainable
development at the national and regional levels so as to help to prevent and mitigate displacement in the context of
disasters and the adverse effects of climate change, including in urban settings where displaced persons have
particular needs, requirements and vulnerabilities, and to enhance cooperation and coordination, where appropriate,
to comprehensively and coherently respond to such displacement, including by preventing, preparing for and
addressing it;
14. Recognizes the increase in the number and scale of natural disasters, including those related to the adverse
effects of climate change, which in certain instances may contribute to displacement and to additional pressure on
host communities, encourages Member States, the United Nations and relevant organizations and actors to further
strengthen the efforts aimed at addressing the needs of persons displaced in the context of disasters, including those
induced by climate change, and notes in this regard the importance of sharing best practices on prevention of and
preparation for such displacements, and on the collection of data on such displacement and on durable solutions;
15. Encourages Member States, the United Nations, relevant humanitarian and development organizations
and other relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, to enhance understanding, analysis, monitoring and assessment of the
drivers, scale, dynamics, effects, patterns and duration of displacement in the context of slow-onset disasters, gradual
environmental degradation and climate change, to strengthen the systematic, impartial and timely collection and
sharing of data disaggregated by sex, age and disability and to strengthen evidence-based policy and operational
responses at all levels in this regard, including to address the root causes of such displacement and strengthen the
resilience of displaced persons and their host communities;

_______________
E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
A/HRC/13/21/Add.4.
337
A/HRC/4/18, annex I.
335
336

170

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16. Encourages Member States to integrate displacement considerations into disaster preparedness strategies
and promote cooperation with neighbouring and other relevant countries to prepare for early warning, contingency
planning, stockpiling, coordination mechanisms, evacuation planning, reception and assistance arrangements, and
public information;
17. Calls upon Member States and relevant organizations and actors to recognize and address the
consequences of humanitarian emergencies for migrants, in particular those in vulnerable situations, and to strengthen
coordinated international efforts for their assistance and protection in concert with national authorities;
18. Encourages Member States to strengthen operational and legal frameworks for international disaster relief
and initial recovery, to adopt and implement national laws and regulations, as appropriate, to reduce the impact of the
underlying drivers of disaster risk and vulnerability, and to adopt comprehensive rules and procedures for
the facilitation and regulation of international disaster assistance, drawing, as appropriate, from the Guidelines for the
Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster Relief and Initial Recovery Assistance, and calls upon
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, relevant United Nations organizations and other partners
for technical support in achieving these aims;
19. Welcomes the effective cooperation among the affected States, relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, donor countries, regional and international financial institutions and other relevant stakeholders, such as the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, municipalities, civil society and the private sector, in the
coordination and delivery of emergency relief, and stresses the need to continue such cooperation and delivery
throughout relief operations and medium- and long-term rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, in a manner that
reduces vulnerability to future natural hazards;
20. Reiterates the commitment to support, as a matter of priority, the efforts of countries, in particular
developing countries, to strengthen their capacities at all levels in order to assess and reduce risks, prepare for and
respond rapidly, effectively and safely to natural disasters and mitigate their impact;
21. Also reiterates the need to build the capacities of governments to manage and respond to disaster and
climate risks, including by providing support for and strengthening national and, as appropriate, local preparedness
and response capacities, and to build resilience, taking into account the differing needs of women, girls, boys and men
of all ages, including persons with disabilities;
22. Underlines the need to address the economic, social and environmental impacts of climate change, and
emphasizes the need for action at all levels to enhance efforts to build resilience through, inter alia, the sustainable
management of ecosystems, in order to reduce the impacts and costs of natural disasters;
23. Urges Member States to develop, update and strengthen early warning systems, disaster preparedness and
risk reduction measures at all levels, in accordance with the Sendai Framework, taking into account their own
circumstances and capacities and in coordination with relevant actors, as appropriate, and to improve their response
to early warning information in order to ensure that early warning leads to early action, implemented effectively in a
timely manner, including through scaled‑up, predictable and multi-year support, such as forecast-based financing and
other anticipatory risk financing instruments, and encourages all stakeholders to support the efforts of Member States
in this regard;
24. Urges Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to continue
to support early warning and early action efforts, including through forecast-based financing at the global, regional
and national levels, including for multi-hazard early warning systems, climate services, exposure and vulnerability
mapping, new technologies and communication protocols, so that persons in vulnerable situations who are exposed
to natural hazards, including in geographically remote locations, receive timely, reliable, accurate and actionable early
warning information, and encourages the international community to further support national efforts in this regard;
25. Encourages the United Nations, humanitarian and development organizations, the private sector and other
relevant stakeholders to support, as appropriate, the efforts of Member States to address the underlying vulnerability
and root causes of disaster risk and to work towards ensuring financing support that is coherent, layered and
sequenced;
26. Encourages Member States to develop or enhance forecast-based preparedness and early action and rapid
response systems, including through the establishment and networking of risk management centres, as well as the
171

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

coordination of existing networks, ensure that comprehensive procedures are in place and make resources available
for actions in anticipation of natural disasters, and invites relevant bodies of the United Nations system and other
stakeholders to engage in these efforts;
27. Also encourages Member States to consider elaborating and presenting to the United Nations Office for
Disaster Risk Reduction their national platforms for disaster risk reduction in accordance with the Sendai Framework,
and encourages States to cooperate with each other to reach this objective;
28. Encourages Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations, in
accordance with their respective mandates, to provide, in a coordinated manner, support for national and regional
efforts by providing, in the context of natural disasters, the assistance necessary to increase sustainable food production
and access to healthy and nutritious food and its utilization, while fully respecting the humanitarian principles for
humanitarian action;
29. Recognizes the importance of applying a multi-hazard approach to preparedness, and encourages Member
States, taking into account their specific circumstances, and the United Nations system to continue to apply the
approach to their preparedness activities, including by giving due regard to, inter alia, secondary environmental
hazards stemming from industrial and technological accidents;
30. Stresses that, to increase further the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, particular international
cooperation efforts should be undertaken to enhance and broaden further the utilization of national and local capacities
and, where appropriate, of regional and subregional capacities for disaster preparedness and response, which may be
made available in closer proximity to the site of a disaster, and more efficiently and at lower cost;
31. Acknowledges that the recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction phase, which needs to be prepared ahead
of a disaster, is a critical opportunity to “build back better”;
32. Encourages Member States, the United Nations and other relevant stakeholders to continue to support the
localization of disaster preparedness and response and work to ensure that national and local actors are enabled to
respond to community-level needs and priorities, and strengthen collaboration and partnerships between international,
national, local and regional actors with a view to reinforcing national and local capacities, leadership and coordination
mechanisms;
33. Encourages Member States and the United Nations to continue to implement community engagement
approaches through which communities receive timely information and which can improve the targeting of
humanitarian assistance;
34. Encourages Member States and regional organizations to work together to strengthen regional
cooperation to improve national and regional capacity to understand and reduce risks and prepare for and respond to
disasters in support of national efforts, including by exchanging experiences and best practices;
35. Encourages Member States to move from reactive to more anticipatory risk-based, multi-hazard and
inclusive approaches, such as the promotion of ex ante investments to prevent disaster risks and build resilience, the
promotion of environmental and spatial measures and the integration of lessons from past disasters, as well as
awareness of new risks, into future planning;
36. Encourages innovative practices that draw on the knowledge of people affected by natural disasters to
develop locally sustainable solutions and to produce life-saving items locally, with minimal logistical and
infrastructure implications;
37. Stresses, in this context, the importance of strengthening international cooperation, particularly through
the effective use of multilateral mechanisms, in the timely provision of humanitarian assistance through all phases of
a disaster, from relief and recovery to development, including the provision of adequate resources;
38. Encourages all relevant stakeholders, including Member States, to take appropriate measures to reduce
and discourage the sending of unsolicited, unneeded or inappropriate relief goods in response to disasters;
39. Encourages all Member States to facilitate, to the extent possible, the transit of emergency humanitarian
assistance and development assistance and the entry of humanitarian personnel and supplies, provided in the context
of international efforts, including in the phase from relief to development, in full accordance with the provisions of
172

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

resolution 46/182 and the annex thereto, and in full respect of the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence, and their obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law;
40. Encourages Member States to put in place, as appropriate, customs measures to improve effectiveness in
responding to natural disasters;
41. Reaffirms the leading role of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat as
the focal point within the overall United Nations system for the advocacy for and coordination of humanitarian
assistance among United Nations humanitarian organizations and other humanitarian partners;
42. Welcomes the important contribution of the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination system
to the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance in supporting Member States, upon their request, and the United
Nations system in preparedness and humanitarian response, and encourages the continued incorporation into this
mechanism of experts from developing countries that are prone to natural disasters;
43. Also welcomes the important contribution of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group to the
effectiveness of international urban search and rescue assistance, and encourages Member States to continue to
support the Advisory Group, in line with General Assembly resolution 57/150 of 16 December 2002;
44. Urges Member States, the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to consider the specific
and differentiated consequences of natural disasters in both rural and urban areas when designing and implementing
disaster risk reduction, prevention and mitigation, preparedness, humanitarian assistance and early recovery strategies,
giving special emphasis to addressing the needs of those living in rural and urban poor areas prone to natural disasters;
45. Encourages Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations, in
accordance with their respective mandates, and other relevant stakeholders to continue to take concrete action for the
effective implementation of the New Urban Agenda,333 in order to strengthen resilience to disasters and the adverse
effects of climate change, and ensure that sustainable development in urban settings is informed by disaster risk, giving
special attention to the needs and capacities of persons in vulnerable situations;
46. Recognizes the important contribution of healthy ecosystems to reducing disaster risk and building
community resilience, and encourages all States, United Nations entities and other relevant actors to promote
ecosystem-based approaches and nature-based solutions for disaster risk reduction at all levels and across all phases
of disaster risk reduction and management;
47. Welcomes the continued efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to build
partnerships with regional organizations, traditional and non-traditional donors and the private sector, and encourages
Member States and the United Nations system to continue to strengthen partnerships at the global, regional, national
and local levels in support of national efforts in situations of natural disasters, in order to cooperate effectively in
providing humanitarian assistance to those in need and ensure that their collaborative efforts adhere to the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence;
48. Encourages Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to
increase efforts to engage the private sector, including small and medium-sized enterprises, through strategic
partnerships in disaster risk reduction activities and disaster response and recovery, as appropriate;
49. Recognizes that information and telecommunications technology can play an important role in disaster
response, encourages Member States to develop emergency response telecommunications capacities that are
accessible to all, including persons with disabilities, encourages the international community to assist the efforts of
developing countries in this area, where needed, including in the recovery phase, and in this regard encourages
Member States that have not acceded to or ratified the Tampere Convention on the Provision of Telecommunication
Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations338 to consider doing so;
50. Encourages the further use of space-based and ground-based remote-sensing technologies, including as
provided by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency
Response (UN‑SPIDER), as well as the sharing of geographical data, for the forecasting, prevention, mitigation and

_______________
338

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2296, No. 40906.

173

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

management of natural disasters, where appropriate, and invites Member States to continue to provide their support
to the consolidation of the United Nations capability in the area of satellite-derived geographical information for early
warning, preparedness, response and early recovery;
51. Encourages Member States to provide all support necessary, on a voluntary basis, to UN-SPIDER,
including financial support, to enable it to carry out its workplan for 2020–2021, and reiterates the importance of
enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster management and emergency
response through greater access to and use of space-based services for all countries and by facilitating capacitybuilding and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in developing countries;
52. Recognizes the opportunities for new technologies, when utilized in a coordinated fashion and based on
humanitarian principles, potentially to improve the effectiveness and accountability of humanitarian response, and
encourages Member States, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to consider engaging, inter alia, with the
volunteer and technical communities, as appropriate, in order to make use of the variety of data and information
available during emergencies and disaster risk reduction efforts to strengthen the evidence-based shared understanding
of disaster risk and impacts and to work to improve efficiencies in this regard;
53. Encourages the United Nations to continue to strengthen its provision of data-related services and policy
advice and build the data skills of its humanitarian staff, in order to improve the effectiveness of disaster preparedness
and response;
54. Encourages Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and international financial institutions
to enhance the global capacity for sustainable post-disaster recovery in areas such as coordination with traditional and
non-traditional partners, identification and dissemination of lessons learned, development of common tools and
mechanisms for recovery needs assessment, strategy development and programming, and incorporation of disaster
risk reduction into all recovery processes, and welcomes the ongoing efforts to this end;
55. Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to support national initiatives that address the
differentiated impacts of natural disasters on the affected population, including through the collection and analysis of
data disaggregated, inter alia, by sex, age and disability, using, inter alia, the existing information provided by States,
and through the development of tools, methods and procedures that will result in more timely and useful initial needs
assessments that lead to targeted and more effective assistance, and taking into account the environmental impact;
56. Calls upon United Nations humanitarian organizations, in consultation with Member States, as
appropriate, to strengthen the evidence base for effective humanitarian assistance by further developing common
mechanisms to improve the quality, transparency and reliability of, and make further progress towards, common
humanitarian needs assessments, to assess their performance in assistance and to ensure the most effective use of
humanitarian resources by these organizations;
57. Encourages Member States to take steps to develop or to improve data collection and analysis and to facilitate
the exchange of relevant non-sensitive information with humanitarian and development organizations of the United
Nations, including through shared platforms and a common approach, in order to inform policy and measures designed
to address disaster risks and their consequences, to support preparedness efforts, including forecast-based action and
financing and disaster risk financing, and to improve the effectiveness and accountability of a needs-based humanitarian
response, and encourages the United Nations system, as appropriate, and other relevant actors to continue to assist
developing countries in their efforts to build local and national capacities for data collection and analysis;
58. Also encourages Member States, with support from the United Nations upon request, to establish and
strengthen national disaster loss databases, risk profiles and available capacities and to continue to collect, share and
use such data to inform relevant policies and strategies;
59. Encourages Member States, regional organizations, the United Nations and humanitarian and
development organizations to continue to improve the identification, mapping and analysis of risks and vulnerabilities,
including the local impact of future disaster risk drivers, and the development and implementation of appropriate
strategies and programmes to anticipate and address them, including through the use of science, technology and
innovation, and in this regard encourages all the relevant stakeholders to support Governments in capacity
development, including at the regional and local levels, through the sharing of expertise and tools and the provision
of necessary resources, as appropriate, to ensure that effective disaster management plans and capacities are in place
in accordance with national priorities for disaster risk management;

174

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

60. Stresses the importance of the full and equal participation of women in decision-making and of gender
mainstreaming in developing and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness, early action, rapid response and
recovery strategies, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that gender mainstreaming
is better taken into account in all aspects of humanitarian responses and activities, including the analysis of allocations
and programme implementation, and through greater use of the Gender with Age Marker;
61. Encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations humanitarian organizations, to
promote women’s leadership, gender equality and empowerment of women and their full and effective participation
in the planning and implementation of natural disaster response strategies and humanitarian response to effectively
address their specific needs, including through strengthening partnerships with, and building the capacities of, national
and local institutions, including national and local women’s organizations and civil society actors, as appropriate, to
adopt gender-responsive programming on mitigation and adaptation to climate change and to support the resilience
and adaptive capacities of women and girls to respond to and recover from adverse impacts of climate change;
62. Encourages Governments, local authorities, the United Nations system and regional organizations, and
invites donors and other assisting countries, to address the vulnerabilities and capacities of women and girls through
gender-responsive programming, including with regard to sexual and reproductive health needs and means to address
sexual and gender-based violence and various forms of exploitation during emergencies and in post-disaster
environments, and the allocation of resources in their disaster risk reduction, response and recovery efforts in
coordination with the Governments of affected countries;
63. Encourages Member States, humanitarian organizations and other relevant stakeholders, in the context of
natural disasters, to ensure access to safe drinking water and adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all,
including women and girls;
64. Emphasizes the importance of mainstreaming the perspective of persons with disabilities in disaster risk
reduction, and recognizes the importance of non‑discrimination and their inclusive and active participation in and
contribution to disaster risk reduction, preparedness, emergency response, recovery and transition from relief to
development, as well as the implementation of systematic approaches, policies and programmes that are inclusive of
and accessible to persons with disabilities, recognizing that persons with disabilities are disproportionately affected in
humanitarian emergencies and face multiple obstacles in accessing humanitarian assistance, and recalls the Charter
on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action;
65. Encourages efforts to provide safe and enabling learning environments and access to quality education
for all, especially for girls and boys, in humanitarian emergencies caused by natural disasters, including in order to
contribute to a smooth transition from relief to development;
66. Encourages Member States and relevant regional and international organizations to identify and improve
the dissemination of best practices for improving disaster preparedness, response and early recovery and to scale up
successful local initiatives, as appropriate;
67. Requests the United Nations humanitarian and development organizations to improve their coordination
of disaster recovery efforts, from relief to development, inter alia, by strengthening institutional, coordination and
strategic planning efforts in disaster preparedness, resilience-building and recovery, in support of national authorities,
and by ensuring that development actors participate in strategic planning at an early stage;
68. Encourages the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to support national,
subnational and local governments and communities in their responsibility to develop long-term strategies, forecastbased financing and preparedness systems and multi-year operational plans for preparedness that are embedded within
disaster risk reduction and resilience strategies in line with the Sendai Framework;
69. Calls upon the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to improve the dissemination of tools
and services to support enhanced disaster risk reduction, in particular preparedness, early action, rapid response and
early recovery;
70. Calls upon relevant United Nations humanitarian and development organizations, in consultation with
Member States, to strengthen tools and mechanisms to ensure that early recovery needs and support are integrated
into the planning and implementation of disaster preparedness, humanitarian response and development cooperation
activities, as appropriate;

175

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

71. Encourages the United Nations system and humanitarian organizations to continue their efforts to
mainstream early recovery into humanitarian programming, acknowledges that early recovery is an important step
towards resilience-building and should receive further funding, and encourages the provision of timely, flexible and
predictable funding for early recovery, including through established and complementary humanitarian and
development instruments;
72. Urges Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to prioritize
risk management and shift towards an anticipatory approach to humanitarian crises in order to prevent and reduce
human suffering and economic losses;
73. Urges Member States, humanitarian and development organizations and other stakeholders to ensure a
comprehensive and coherent approach at the global, regional, national and local levels to El Niño and La Niña
phenomena and similar or related events, including by strengthening forecasting, early warning and early action,
prevention, preparedness, resilience-building and timely response, supported by effective leadership and predictable,
adequate and early funding, when feasible, in regions, countries and communities likely to be affected, and notes the
work of the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General on El Niño and Climate and the blueprint for action prepared by
them, and the standard operating procedures for El Niño/Southern Oscillation events of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee;
74. Encourages Member States and the United Nations to enhance the use of common risk analysis, including
the use of the Index for Risk Management, to establish the evidence base for short-, medium- and long-term planning
and joint strategies for disaster and climate risk management, capacity development and resilience-building, allowing
for greater prioritization of resources where the risk is greatest;
75. Encourages the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to work towards a
common understanding of underlying risks, clarify roles and responsibilities according to their respective mandates
and establish joint objectives and programmes informed by affected people, data and analysis to strengthen
coordination, collaboration and coherence among short-, medium- and long-term activities to progressively reduce
needs and vulnerability, build resilience and manage the risk related to climate change and of disasters and
development setbacks over multi-year planning cycles, including through integrating risk management into national
sustainable development plans and ensuring the connectivity of humanitarian plans with the longer-term sustainable
development priorities of Member States, with a view to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals;
76. Stresses the need to strengthen resilience at all levels, and in this regard encourages Member States, the
United Nations system and other relevant actors to support efforts, as appropriate, to integrate resilience into
humanitarian and development programming, and encourages humanitarian and development actors to pursue, where
appropriate, common resilience and risk management objectives, achievable through joint analysis, planning,
programming and funding;
77. Encourages Member States, international financial institutions and the private sector to support further
development and, where appropriate, the strengthening of anticipatory financing approaches, to mobilize predictable
and multi-year support and to work collectively towards common results in order to reduce need, risk and
vulnerability, making use of a wide range of financing flows and instruments and partnerships to mobilize additional
resources in the field of natural disasters;
78. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to provide emergency
assistance in ways that are supportive of recovery and long-term development, in collaboration with development
organizations, as appropriate, in accordance with their respective mandates, including by prioritizing humanitarian
tools and approaches that strengthen resilience, including preparedness, and support livelihoods, and to support further
development and, where appropriate, the strengthening of anticipatory financing approaches, such as, but not limited
to, cash transfers, vouchers, local procurement of food and services and social safety nets;
79. Encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and development actors to support
humanitarian coordinators and resident coordinators in order to strengthen their capacity, inter alia, to support the host
Government in implementing preparedness measures and to coordinate preparedness activities of country teams in
support of national efforts, and encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian actors to further
strengthen the ability to quickly and flexibly deploy humanitarian professionals to support Governments and country
teams in the immediate aftermath of a disaster;

176

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

80. Encourages Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations to
identify ways to improve the current financing architecture in order to better provide coherent, predictable and flexible
longer-term funding for risk management in multi-year strategies and forecasting, in particular preparedness, on the
basis of a global assessment of risk, allowing for better prioritization of resources where the risk is greatest;
81. Emphasizes the need to mobilize adequate, flexible and sustainable resources for preparedness and disaster
risk reduction, early action, rapid response and early recovery activities in order to ensure predictable and timely access
to resources for humanitarian assistance in emergencies resulting from disasters associated with natural hazards;
82. Welcomes the important achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in ensuring a more
timely and predictable response to humanitarian emergencies, stresses the importance of continuing to improve the
functioning of the Fund, and in this regard encourages the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized
agencies to review and evaluate, where necessary, their partnership policies and practices in order to ensure the timely
disbursement of funds from the Fund to implementing partners in order to ensure that resources are used in the most
efficient, effective, accountable and transparent manner possible;
83. Calls upon all Member States, and invites the private sector and all concerned individuals and institutions,
to consider increasing their voluntary contributions to the Central Emergency Response Fund in order to achieve an
annual funding level of 1 billion United States dollars, and to continue to reinforce and strengthen the Fund as the
global emergency response fund, and emphasizes that contributions should be additional to current commitments to
humanitarian programming and should not be to the detriment of resources made available for international
cooperation for development;
84. Invites Member States, the private sector and all other relevant stakeholders to harness their differentiated
skills, capacities and resources, and also to consider voluntary contributions to humanitarian funding mechanisms;
85. Strongly encourages giving appropriate consideration to disaster risk reduction, including preparedness,
and the building of resilience to disasters as integral elements of sustainable development and in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development339 and promoting a complementary and coherent approach between those
Agendas and the Sendai Framework;
86. Strongly encourages all relevant actors to work to ensure a comprehensive, coherent, systematic and
people-centred approach to managing risks, including through, as appropriate, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Sendai Framework, the Paris Agreement328 and the New Urban Agenda;
87. Takes note of the World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May 2016, and of
the report of the Secretary-General on the outcome of the World Humanitarian Summit;340
88. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the international response to natural disasters and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and to include in his report recommendations on
how to ensure that humanitarian assistance is provided in ways supportive of the transition from relief to development.
RESOLUTION 74/116
Adopted at the 49th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.32 and
A/74/L.32/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
State of Palestine

_______________
339
340

Resolution 69/313, annex.
A/71/353.

177

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

74/116. Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 on the strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
emergency assistance of the United Nations,
Recalling all relevant resolutions on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel, including its resolution 73/137 of 14 December 2018, as well as Security Council resolutions on
the protection of humanitarian personnel, including resolution 2175 (2014) of 29 August 2014, and relevant
statements by the President of the Council,
Recalling also all Security Council resolutions and presidential statements and reports of the Secretary-General
to the Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including resolution 2286 (2016) of 3 May 2016,
Reaffirming the principles, rules and relevant provisions of international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as all relevant treaties,341 and the need to further promote and ensure
respect thereof,
Recalling the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949342 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 8 June 1977,343
and the obligation of parties to armed conflict to respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian law in all
circumstances, and urging all such parties to comply with international humanitarian law and ensure respect for and
protection of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
Recalling also the specific obligations, under international humanitarian law, to respect and protect, in situations
of armed conflict, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means
of transport and equipment, and hospitals and other medical facilities, which must not be unlawfully attacked, and to
ensure that the wounded and sick receive, to the fullest extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the medical
care and attention required,
Deeply concerned by the continuous disregard, in many cases, for the principles and rules of international law,
in particular international humanitarian law,
Reaffirming the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of
humanitarian assistance,
Recalling that primary responsibility under international law for the security and protection of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel lies with the Government hosting a United Nations operation
conducted under the Charter of the United Nations or its agreements with relevant organizations,
Expressing its appreciation to those Governments which respect the internationally agreed principles on the
protection of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, while expressing concern over
the lack of respect for these principles in some areas,
Noting the fact that the number of States parties to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel,344 which entered into force on 15 January 1999, has reached 95, mindful of the need to promote
the universality of the Convention, and welcoming the entry into force on 19 August 2010 of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,345 which expands the scope of legal
protection under the Convention,

_______________
These include, notably, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations of 13 February 1946, the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies of 21 November 1947, the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 9 December 1994, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel of 8 December 2005, the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949 and
the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of 8 June 1977, and Amended Protocol II of 3 May 1996 to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects of 10 October 1980, as applicable.
342
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
343
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
344
Ibid., vol. 2051, No. 35457.
345
Ibid., vol. 2689, No. 35457.
341

178

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Expressing deep concern at the complex and dynamic security environment, marked by the diverse and
multifaceted threats and significant security risks faced by humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel as they operate in increasingly high-risk environments, and the increase in the number of attacks directed
against such personnel, including when they are on the roads, in public spaces, on United Nations premises and
providing humanitarian assistance,
Deeply concerned about the particular vulnerability of locally recruited humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel to safety and security-related incidents, including assault, arrest and detention, acts
of violence, road traffic accidents and abduction, and concerned that 56 per cent of United Nations personnel killed
in 2018 were locally recruited,346
Expressing deep concern at the exposure of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel to certain forms of crime and acts of intimidation and harassment, including sexual violence and other forms
of violence against women, and equally concerned at the significant number of reported sexual assaults against both
male and female United Nations personnel,
Expressing deep concern also that the occurrence of attacks and threats against humanitarian personnel and
United Nations and associated personnel is a factor that severely restricts the provision of assistance and protection to
populations in need, and commending the commitment of United Nations and other humanitarian personnel to stay
and deliver effectively the most critical programmes even in dangerous environments,
Stressing the need to uphold the respect and protection which the flag of the United Nations, and the nature of
humanitarian work, should command and ensure, and stressing the importance of fully respecting the obligations
relating to the use of vehicles and premises of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel
as defined by relevant international instruments, as well as the obligations relating to distinctive emblems recognized
in the Geneva Conventions,
Noting that medical personnel, and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, in an armed
conflict situation continue to be under a duty to provide competent medical service in full professional and moral
independence, with compassion and respect for human dignity, and always to bear in mind human life and to act in
the patient’s best interest, stressing the need to uphold their respective professional codes of ethics, and further noting
the applicable rules of international humanitarian law relating to the non-punishment of any person for carrying out
medical activities compatible with medical ethics,
Commending the courage and commitment of those who take part in humanitarian operations, especially
national and locally recruited personnel, and including those serving with national and international non-governmental
organizations in the field, often at great personal risk, especially when working in situations of armed conflict and
exposed to direct violence, injury and risk of illness with limited access to medical and emergency facilities,
Commending also the courage and commitment of those who take part in peace operations, including
peacekeeping operations,347 often at great personal risk, especially national and locally recruited personnel,
Noting with concern the evolving threats that United Nations personnel face when deployed and that, in 2018,
1,533 persons were affected by safety and security incidents, with 31 fatalities, of which 11 resulted from acts of
violence, namely, crime and armed conflict, 181 injuries, of which 67 resulted from acts of violence, 11 abductions,
85 arrests and detentions and 391 reported cases of intimidation and harassment,348 and noting that these figures do
not include United Nations personnel who are not part of the United Nations security management system, such as
locally recruited area staff of UNRWA, of whom 3 were killed, 10 were injured, 3 were arrested and detained and
128 reported cases of intimidation and harassment in 2018,349

_______________
A/74/464, para. 27.
The safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers is specifically addressed in the annual report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/73/19)). Except where
otherwise specified, the present resolution focuses only on the safety and security of civilian United Nations and associated personnel falling
under the United Nations security management system under the responsibility of the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat.
348
See A/74/464, annexes I and III.
349
Ibid., annex V.
346
347

179

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Strongly condemning all acts of violence, attacks and threats against humanitarian personnel, expressing
profound regret at the deaths, injuries, including those resulting in disabilities, and abductions resulting from these
attacks, noting with concern that there were 405 recorded attacks against humanitarian personnel in 2018, resulting in
at least 131 personnel killed, 144 injured and 130 abducted,350 and noting with concern that casualties continue to take
a heavier toll on personnel of non‑governmental organizations than on United Nations personnel,351
Strongly condemning also all acts of violence, attacks and threats against medical personnel and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and
other medical facilities, and the prevailing impunity for violations and abuses committed against such personnel,
which in turn may contribute to the recurrence of those acts, and deploring the long-term consequences of such acts,
which undermine relevant efforts to build up and strengthen health systems for the population and the health-care
systems of the countries concerned, and in this regard welcoming efforts by States, international and
non-governmental organizations and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen compliance with international
humanitarian law by raising awareness of and promoting preparedness to address the grave and serious humanitarian
consequences arising from such violence,
Noting with appreciation all the measures taken to enhance the performance of the United Nations security
management system,
Expressing profound regret at the deaths, illnesses and other adverse consequences affecting humanitarian
personnel and health-care personnel as a result of public health hazards, and stressing the need for a conducive
environment, appropriate equipment and resilient public health systems, and the urgency of preparedness,
Expressing deep concern at the deep and long-lasting impacts of acts of violence, attacks and threats against
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
Strongly condemning acts of murder and other forms of violence, rape and sexual assault and all forms of
violence committed in particular against women and children, and intimidation, armed robbery, abduction, hostagetaking, kidnapping, harassment and illegal arrest and detention, to which those participating in humanitarian
operations are exposed, as well as attacks on humanitarian convoys and acts of destruction and looting of property of
humanitarian and United Nations and associated personnel,
Affirming the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of attacks committed on their territory against
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and against their premises or assets do
not operate with impunity, that such attacks are investigated promptly and effectively and that the perpetrators of
such acts are brought to justice, as provided for by national laws and in accordance with obligations under
international law,
Recognizing the role of investigations in the prevention of incidents and the promotion of respect for
international humanitarian law,
Recalling the inclusion of attacks intentionally directed against personnel involved in a humanitarian assistance
or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians
or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict, as a war crime in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court,352 and noting the role that the Court can play in appropriate cases in bringing to justice those
responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law,
Reaffirming the need to ensure adequate levels of safety and security for United Nations and associated
personnel, including locally recruited personnel, which constitutes an underlying duty of the Organization, and
mindful of the need to promote and enhance security consciousness within the organizational culture of the United
Nations and a culture of accountability at all levels, as well as to continue to promote awareness of and sensitivity to
national and local cultures and laws,

_______________
See Aid Worker Security Report 2019.
These data are based entirely on voluntary reporting to the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat (see A/74/464,
annex IV). The personnel of non-governmental organizations are not covered by the United Nations security management system.
352
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
350
351

180

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Gravely concerned at the increased number of accidents and resulting casualties among United Nations and
associated personnel, and conscious of the importance of road and aviation safety in ensuring the continuity of United
Nations operations and preventing casualties among civilians and United Nations and associated personnel, and in
this regard regretting the loss of civilian life as a result of such incidents,
Stressing that acceptance of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel by the host
Governments, local authorities, local communities, populations and other parties as appropriate crucially contributes
to their safety and security,
Noting the importance of reinforcing close collaboration between the United Nations and the host country on
contingency planning, information exchange and risk assessment in the context of good mutual cooperation on issues
relating to the security of United Nations and associated personnel, as well as the importance of coordinating
prevention and mitigation measures and managing security in crisis situations,
Noting also the importance of further collaboration between the United Nations, its humanitarian agencies and
other humanitarian organizations working in accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence on information-sharing and risk assessment with regard to the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel, including, when feasible, national and locally recruited personnel,
Noting further that, in order to remain fit for purpose and to support the effective and principled delivery of
humanitarian assistance, the United Nations security management system needs to evolve in response to the
challenging global security environment, requiring, inter alia, an effective management structure, adequate and
predictable resources and the timely deployment of security personnel with appropriate skills and field experience and
of the equipment necessary for the performance of their duties, including vehicles and telecommunications equipment,
which have an essential role in facilitating the safety of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;353

2. Urges all States to make every effort to ensure the full and effective implementation of the relevant
principles and rules of international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights law, and refugee
law as applicable, related to the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel;
3. Condemns in the strongest possible terms the continued threats to and deliberate targeting of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, acts of terrorism and attacks on humanitarian convoys, and
the continued increase in the scale and the increasingly complex nature of threats faced by such personnel, such as the
disturbing trend of politically and criminally motivated attacks, including extremist attacks, against them;
4. Strongly urges all States to take the measures necessary to ensure the safety and security of national and
international humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel and to respect and ensure respect
for the inviolability of United Nations premises, which are essential to the continuation and successful implementation
of United Nations operations;
5. Calls upon all Governments and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed
conflicts and in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel
and the delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow those personnel to perform efficiently their task of
assisting the affected civilian population, including refugees and internally displaced persons;
6. Calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to and to respect fully their obligations under the
relevant international instruments;
7. Also calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court;352

_______________
353

A/74/464.

181

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Further calls upon all States to consider becoming parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,345 and urges States parties to put in place appropriate national
legislation, as necessary, to enable its effective implementation;
9. Calls upon all States, all parties involved in armed conflict and all humanitarian actors to respect the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of humanitarian assistance;
10. Welcomes the contribution of female humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel in humanitarian and United Nations operations, expresses concern that these personnel may be more
exposed to certain forms of violence, including sexual violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, crime and acts of
intimidation and harassment, strongly urges the United Nations system and Member States to analyse the different
forms of violence, including sexual violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, crime, acts of intimidation and
harassment, to which women and men are differently exposed, and also strongly urges the United Nations system
and Member States to choose appropriate and gender-sensitive approaches for their safety and security while
allowing them to fulfil their duties, and to ensure that female humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel are meaningfully included in decisions related to their safety and security, and that all reports
of sexual violence against humanitarian workers are thoroughly investigated and the alleged perpetrators brought to
justice, in accordance with applicable laws;
11. Strongly condemns all acts of violence, attacks and threats against humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel, also condemns attacks intentionally directed against personnel involved in a
peacekeeping mission347 in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations as long as they are entitled to protection
from attack under international humanitarian law, and reaffirms the need to prosecute, penalize and punish those
responsible for such acts;
12. Stresses the importance of continued close coordination and consultation with host Governments on the
functioning of the security risk management process and related tools, and in this regard encourages the SecretaryGeneral to continue to consult with the host Governments;
13. Also stresses the importance of ensuring that the security and safety of humanitarian and United Nations
personnel, including national and locally recruited personnel, is consistently and integrally considered in the planning
for humanitarian action;
14. Calls upon all States to comply fully with their obligations under international humanitarian law, including
as provided for under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949,354 in order to respect and protect civilians, including humanitarian personnel;
15. Stresses the obligation, in accordance with international humanitarian law and national laws and
regulations, as applicable, to respect and protect medical personnel, as well as humanitarian personnel exclusively
engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities,
in all circumstances, in this regard notes the role of domestic legal frameworks and other appropriate measures in
promoting the safety and protection of such personnel, urges States and all parties to armed conflict to develop and
integrate effective measures to prevent and address violence against such personnel, their means of transport and
equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities, and strongly urges States to conduct full, prompt, impartial
and effective investigations within their jurisdiction of violations of international humanitarian law related to the
protection of the wounded and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities in armed conflict, and,
where appropriate, to take action against those responsible in accordance with domestic and international law, with a
view to reinforcing preventive measures, ensuring accountability and addressing the grievances of victims;
16. Urges States, while undertaking counter-terrorism activities, to respect their international obligations,
including whenever international humanitarian law is applicable, in particular regarding the provision of humanitarian
assistance to civilian populations, and recognizes the key role that humanitarian organizations play in the provision of
principled humanitarian assistance, while also recognizing the importance of preventing and suppressing the financing
of and other forms of support to terrorism;

_______________
354

182

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

17. Strongly urges all States to take stronger action to ensure that crimes against humanitarian personnel and
United Nations and associated personnel, and personnel involved in a peacekeeping mission in accordance with the
Charter as long as they are entitled to protection from attack under international humanitarian law, do not remain
unpunished and are investigated fully and effectively, and affirms the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of any
such acts committed on their territory do not operate with impunity, as provided for by national laws and obligations
under international law;
18. Calls upon all States to provide adequate and prompt information in the event of the arrest or detention of
humanitarian personnel or United Nations and associated personnel so as to afford them the necessary medical
assistance and to allow independent medical teams to visit and examine the health of those detained and to ensure
their right to legal counsel, and urges States to take the measures necessary to ensure the speedy release of those who
have been arrested or detained in violation of the relevant conventions referred to in the present resolution and
applicable international humanitarian law;
19. Calls upon all parties involved in armed conflict not to abduct, take hostage or kidnap humanitarian
personnel or United Nations and associated personnel or to detain them in violation of the relevant conventions
referred to in the present resolution and applicable international humanitarian law, and speedily to release, without
harm or requirement of concession, any abductee or detainee;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary to promote full respect for the human
rights, privileges and immunities of United Nations and associated personnel, and also requests the Secretary-General
to seek the inclusion, in negotiations of headquarters and other mission agreements concerning United Nations and
associated personnel, of the applicable conditions contained in the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations,355 the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies356 and the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel;344
21. Recommends that the Secretary-General continue to seek the inclusion of, and that host countries include,
key provisions of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel, among others, those
regarding the prevention of attacks against members of the operation, the establishment of such attacks as crimes
punishable by law and the prosecution or extradition of offenders, in future as well as, if necessary, in existing statusof-forces, status-of-mission, host country and other related agreements negotiated between the United Nations and
those countries, mindful of the importance of the timely conclusion of such agreements, and encourages further efforts
in this regard;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen the ongoing efforts of the United Nations to develop a
more systematic follow-up process with relevant host Governments on cases of serious crimes and acts of violence
resulting in the death or serious injury of United Nations system personnel, in order to bring perpetrators to justice;
23. Notes with appreciation the adoption by the Department of Safety and Security, in collaboration with other
departments and offices of the Secretariat, of standard operating procedures on the victims of violence registry for
fatalities in service, designed to provide follow-up with relevant host Governments on cases of serious crimes and
acts of violence resulting in the death or serious injury of United Nations personnel;
24. Calls attention to and reaffirms the obligation of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel to respect and, where required, observe the national laws of the country in which they are
operating, in accordance with international law and the Charter;
25. Stresses the importance of ensuring that humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel are aware and respectful of national and local customs and traditions in their countries of assignment and
communicate clearly their purpose and objectives to local populations in order to enhance their acceptance, thereby
contributing to their safety and security, and in this regard ensure that humanitarian action is guided by humanitarian
principles;
26. Urges the United Nations and other relevant humanitarian actors to include, as part of their risk
management strategy and training, the building of good relations and trust with national and local governments and

_______________
355
356

Resolution 22 A (I).
Resolution 179 (II).

183

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the promotion of acceptance by local communities and all relevant actors, with a view to enhancing safety and security
and ensuring access to the affected populations, and encourages Member States to support efforts by the United
Nations and other relevant humanitarian actors to provide training to humanitarian personnel in this regard;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the measures necessary to ensure that United Nations
and other personnel carrying out activities in fulfilment of the mandate of a United Nations operation are properly
informed about and operate in conformity with mandatory security risk management measures and relevant codes of
conduct and are properly informed about the conditions under which they are called upon to operate and the standards
that they are required to meet, including those contained in relevant national laws and international law, and that
adequate training in security, human rights law and international humanitarian law is provided so as to enhance their
security and effectiveness in accomplishing their functions, and reaffirms the necessity for all other humanitarian
organizations to provide their personnel with similar support;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in coordination with Member States, to take the measures
necessary to ensure that all United Nations premises and assets, including staff residences, are compliant with the
United Nations mandatory security risk management measures and other relevant United Nations security standards,
and to continue the ongoing assessment of United Nations premises and physical security worldwide;
29. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure that all United Nations personnel receive
adequate safety and security training, stresses the need to continue to improve training so as to enhance cultural
awareness and knowledge of relevant law, including international humanitarian law, prior to their deployment to the
field, and reaffirms the necessity for all other humanitarian organizations to provide their personnel with similar
support;
30. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to provide counselling and support services to United
Nations personnel affected by safety and security incidents, and emphasizes the importance of making available stress
management, mental health and related services for United Nations personnel throughout the system, and encourages
all humanitarian organizations to provide their personnel with similar support;
31. Further welcomes the ongoing measures taken by the Secretary-General and the United Nations system
to enhance road safety, including through the United Nations system road safety strategy, so as to reduce incidents
caused by road hazards and, in particular, to reduce casualties or injuries resulting from such incidents among United
Nations and associated personnel and among the civilian population in the host country, encourages humanitarian
organizations to promote similar approaches among their personnel, and requests the Secretary-General to continue
the collection and analysis of data and to report on road incidents, including civilian casualties resulting from road
accidents;
32. Welcomes the progress made towards further enhancing the security management system of the United
Nations, including the major progress in the completion of the integration of all security personnel of the Secretariat
under the leadership of the Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security, and supports the continued
implementation of the stay-and-deliver strategy while focusing on effectively managing the risks to which personnel
are exposed in order to enable the United Nations system to deliver the most critical programmes, even in high-risk
environments;
33. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue consistent implementation of the programme criticality
framework as an operational tool allowing informed decisions on acceptable risk to United Nations personnel, and
welcomes the revised programme criticality framework;
34. Also encourages the Secretary-General to continue to develop enabling procedures that facilitate the
deployment of suitably qualified United Nations security personnel with the appropriate knowledge, skills and
experience, with the aim of improving the safety and security measures of the United Nations, in order to strengthen
the ability of the United Nations to deliver on its programmes, mandates and activities, including humanitarian
programmes;
35. Requests the Secretary-General, inter alia, through the Inter-Agency Security Management Network, to
continue the increased cooperation and collaboration among United Nations departments, organizations, funds and
programmes and affiliated international organizations, including between their headquarters and field offices, in the
planning and implementation of measures aimed at improving staff security, training and awareness, including field
crisis management and gender inclusion in security management, calls upon all relevant United Nations departments,
184

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

organizations, funds and programmes and affiliated international organizations to support those efforts, and notes the
approval by the Inter-Agency Security Management Network of a system-wide policy on the security of locally
recruited personnel;
36. Calls upon all relevant actors to make every effort to support in their public statements a favourable
environment for the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
including locally recruited personnel;
37. Emphasizes the need to pay particular attention to the safety and security of locally recruited
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, who play an important role, are often at great
personal risk, account for the large majority of casualties and are particularly vulnerable to attacks, including in cases
of kidnapping, harassment, banditry and intimidation, requests the Secretary-General to keep under review the
relevant United Nations safety and security policy and to enhance the safety and security of locally recruited
personnel, while maintaining operational effectiveness, and calls upon the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations to ensure that their personnel are adequately consulted on, informed about and trained in the relevant
security measures, plans and initiatives of their respective organizations, which should be in line with applicable
national laws and international law;
38. Requests the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat to further strengthen the security
management of the United Nations, focusing on strengthening security risk management policy and tools and their
application, increasing situational awareness and analysis capacity, strengthening policy development and promoting
best practices, increasing compliance with risk management measures and improving monitoring and evaluation,
enhancing surge capacity for emergency response, devising effective physical security measures, developing the
expertise of security professionals and strengthening support to the designated officials and the security management
teams in the field, and promoting an effective and preventive security management approach that is multidimensional;
39. Welcomes the work of the Secretary-General in enhancing security collaboration with host Governments,
including efforts to support United Nations designated officials with regard to collaboration with host government
authorities on the safety and security of personnel;
40. Stresses that the effective functioning at the country level of security operations requires a unified and
robust capacity for policy, standards, coordination, communication, compliance and threat and risk assessment and
operational and deployment flexibility to ensure that the security workforce reflects the changing dynamics of the
security environment, and notes the benefits thereof to United Nations and associated personnel, including those
achieved by the Department of Safety and Security since its establishment;
41. Welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-General thus far to strengthen partnerships, and encourages
further efforts to enhance coordination, cooperation and information-sharing, at both the headquarters and field levels,
between the United Nations, regional organizations and other humanitarian and non-governmental organizations on
matters relating to the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
with a view to addressing mutual security concerns in the field, based on the Saving Lives Together framework as
well as other relevant national and local initiatives in this regard, and requests the Secretary-General in this respect to
enhance further collaborative initiatives to address the security needs of implementing partners, including through
enhanced information-sharing, assistance in emergency situations, when feasible, and, where appropriate, security
training, invites Member States to consider increasing support to those initiatives, and requests the Secretary-General
to report on steps taken in this regard;
42. Underlines the urgent need to allocate adequate and predictable resources to the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel, through regular and extrabudgetary resources, including through the
consolidated appeals process, and encourages all States to contribute to the trust fund for security of staff members of
the United Nations system, inter alia, with a view to reinforcing the efforts of the Department of Safety and Security
to meet its mandate and responsibilities to enable the safe delivery of programmes;
43. Also underlines the need for better coordination between the United Nations and host Governments, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of international law and national laws, on the use and deployment of essential
equipment required to provide for the safety and security of United Nations personnel and associated personnel
working in the delivery of humanitarian assistance by United Nations organizations;

185

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

44. Calls upon States to consider acceding to or ratifying the Tampere Convention on the Provision of
Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief Operations of 18 June 1998,357 which entered into
force on 8 January 2005, and urges them to facilitate and expedite, consistent with their national laws and international
obligations applicable to them, the use of communications equipment in those and other relief operations, inter alia,
by limiting and, whenever possible, expeditiously lifting the restrictions placed on the use of communications
equipment by United Nations and associated personnel;
45. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a
comprehensive and updated report on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel and on the implementation of the present resolution, including an assessment of the impact of safety
and security risks on such personnel, and the development, implementation and outcomes of policies, strategies and
initiatives of the United Nations system in the field of safety and security.
RESOLUTION 74/117
Adopted at the 49th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.33 and
A/74/L.33/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zimbabwe

74/117. Assistance to the Palestinian people
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/256 of 20 December 2018, as well as its previous resolutions on the question,
Recalling also the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self‑Government Arrangements in
Washington, D.C., on 13 September 1993, by the Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people,358 and the subsequent implementation agreements
concluded by the two sides,
Recalling further all relevant international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, and, in particular,
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,359 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,359 the Convention on the Rights of the Child360 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women,361
Gravely concerned at the difficult living conditions and humanitarian situation affecting the Palestinian people,
in particular women and children, throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza Strip where
economic recovery and vast infrastructure repair, rehabilitation and development are urgently needed, especially in
the aftermath of the conflict of July and August 2014,
Conscious of the urgent need for improvement in the economic and social infrastructure of the occupied
territory,
Welcoming, in this context, the development of projects, notably on infrastructure, to revive the Palestinian
economy and improve the living conditions of the Palestinian people, stressing the need to create the appropriate
conditions to facilitate the implementation of these projects, and noting the contribution of partners in the region and
of the international community,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2296, No. 40906.
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
359
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
360
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
361
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
357
358

186

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Aware that development is difficult under occupation and is best promoted in circumstances of peace and
stability,
Noting the great economic and social challenges facing the Palestinian people and their leadership,
Emphasizing the importance of the safety and well-being of all people, in particular women and children, in the
whole Middle East region, the promotion of which is facilitated, inter alia, in a stable and secure environment,
Deeply concerned about the negative impact, including the health and psychological consequences, of violence
on the present and future well-being of children in the region,
Conscious of the urgent necessity for international assistance to the Palestinian people, taking into account the
Palestinian priorities, and recalling in this regard the National Early Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza,
Expressing grave concern about the grave humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, and underlining the
importance of emergency and humanitarian assistance and the need for the advancement of reconstruction in the
Gaza Strip,
Welcoming the results of the Conference to Support Middle East Peace, convened in Washington, D.C., on
1 October 1993, the establishment of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians and the work being done by the World Bank as its secretariat and the establishment of the
Consultative Group, as well as all follow-up meetings and international mechanisms established to provide assistance
to the Palestinian people,
Underlining the importance of the Cairo International Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, held on
12 October 2014, and urging the timely and full disbursement of pledges for expediting the provision of humanitarian
assistance and the reconstruction process,
Recalling the International Donors’ Conference for the Palestinian State, held in Paris on 17 December 2007,
the Berlin Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil Security and the Rule of Law, held on 24 June 2008, and the
Palestine Investment Conferences, held in Bethlehem from 21 to 23 May 2008 and on 2 and 3 June 2010, and the
International Conference in Support of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009,
Welcoming the ministerial meetings of the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development, convened in Tokyo in February 2013 and in Jakarta in March 2014, as a forum to mobilize
political and economic assistance, including through exchanges of expertise and lessons learned, in support of
Palestinian development,
Welcoming also the latest meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, held in Brussels on 27 May 2015 and in New York on 25 September 2013, 22 September
2014, 30 September 2015, 19 September 2016, 18 September 2017, 27 September 2018 and 26 September 2019,
Welcoming further the activities of the Joint Liaison Committee, which provides a forum in which economic
policy and practical matters related to donor assistance are discussed with the Palestinian Authority,
Welcoming the implementation of the Palestinian National Development Plan 2011–2013 on governance,
economy, social development and infrastructure and the adoption of the Palestinian National Development Plan
2014–2016: State-building to Sovereignty, and stressing the need for continued international support for the
Palestinian State-building process, as outlined in the summary by the Chair of the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee held on 22 September 2014,
Stressing the need for the full engagement of the United Nations in the process of building Palestinian
institutions and in providing broad assistance to the Palestinian people,
Recognizing, in this regard, the positive contribution of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
2014–2016, which is aimed, inter alia, at enhancing development support and assistance to the Palestinian people and
strengthening institutional capacity in line with Palestinian national priorities,
Welcoming steps to ease the restrictions on movement and access in the West Bank, while stressing the need for
further steps to be taken in this regard, and recognizing that such steps would improve living conditions and the
situation on the ground and could promote further Palestinian economic development,
187

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming also the tripartite agreement facilitated by the United Nations regarding access to the Gaza Strip,
and calling for its full implementation and complementary measures that address the need for a fundamental change
in policy that allows for the sustained and regular opening of the border crossings for the movement of persons and
goods, including for humanitarian and commercial flows and for the reconstruction and economic recovery of Gaza,
Stressing that the situation in the Gaza Strip is unsustainable and that a durable ceasefire agreement must lead
to a fundamental improvement in the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and ensure the safety
and well-being of civilians on both sides,
Stressing also the urgency of reaching a durable solution to the crisis in Gaza through the full implementation
of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009, including by preventing the illicit trafficking in arms
and ammunition and by ensuring the sustained reopening of the crossing points on the basis of existing agreements,
including the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access between the Palestinian Authority and Israel,
Stressing, in this regard, the importance of the effective exercise by the Palestinian Authority of its full
government responsibilities in the Gaza Strip in all fields, including through its presence at the Gaza crossing points,
Noting the active participation of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority in the activities of the Special Envoys of the Quartet,
Reaffirming the necessity of achieving a comprehensive resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict in all its aspects,
on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967,
338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002, 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003, 1850 (2008) of
16 December 2008 and 1860 (2009), as well as the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference and the principle of
land for peace, in order to ensure a political solution, with two States – Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous, sovereign and viable Palestinian State – living side by side in peace and security and mutual recognition,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,362
Expressing grave concern about continuing violence against civilians,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;362

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his rapid response and ongoing efforts regarding
assistance to the Palestinian people, including with regard to the emergency humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Member States, United Nations bodies and intergovernmental,
regional and non-governmental organizations that have provided and continue to provide assistance to the Palestinian
people;
4. Stresses the importance of the work of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Authority and of the steps taken under the auspices of the Secretary-General to ensure the achievement of
a coordinated mechanism for United Nations activities throughout the occupied territories;
5. Urges Member States, international financial institutions of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and regional and interregional organizations to extend, as rapidly and as
generously as possible, economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people, in close cooperation with the
Palestine Liberation Organization and through official Palestinian institutions;
6. Welcomes the meetings of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians of 25 September 2013, 22 September 2014, 27 May and 30 September 2015, 19 September
2016, 18 September 2017, 27 September 2018 and 26 September 2019, the outcome of the Cairo International
Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, held on 12 October 2014, and the generous donor response to support
the needs of the Palestinian people, and urges the rapid disbursement of donor pledges;

_______________
362

188

A/74/89-E/2019/73.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

7. Stresses the importance of following up on the results of the Cairo International Conference on Palestine:
Reconstructing Gaza to effectively promote economic recovery and reconstruction in a timely and sustainable manner;
8. Calls upon donors that have not yet converted their budget support pledges into disbursements to transfer
funds as soon as possible, encourages all donors to increase their direct assistance to the Palestinian Authority in
accordance with its government programme in order to enable it to build a viable and prosperous Palestinian State,
underlines the need for equitable burden-sharing by donors in this effort, and encourages donors to consider aligning
funding cycles with the Palestinian Authority’s national budget cycle;
9. Calls upon relevant organizations and agencies of the United Nations system to intensify their assistance
in response to the urgent needs of the Palestinian people in accordance with priorities set forth by the Palestinian side;
10. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, and recognizes the vital role of the Agency in providing humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip;
11. Calls upon the international community to provide urgently needed assistance and services in an effort to
alleviate the difficult humanitarian situation being faced by Palestinian women, children and their families and to help
in the reconstruction and development of relevant Palestinian institutions;
12. Stresses the role that all funding instruments, including the European Commission’s Palestinian-European
Mechanism for the Management of Socioeconomic Aid and the World Bank trust fund, have been playing in directly
assisting the Palestinian people;
13. Urges Member States to open their markets to exports of Palestinian products on the most favourable
terms, consistent with appropriate trading rules, and to implement fully existing trade and cooperation agreements;
14. Calls upon the international donor community to expedite the delivery of pledged assistance to the
Palestinian people to meet their urgent needs;
15. Stresses, in this context, the importance of ensuring free humanitarian access to the Palestinian people and
the free movement of persons and goods;
16. Also stresses the need for the full implementation by both parties of existing agreements, including the
Agreement on Movement and Access and the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, of 15 November 2005, to
allow for the freedom of movement of the Palestinian civilian population, as well as for imports and exports, within
and into and out of the Gaza Strip;
17. Further stresses the need to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel, premises, facilities,
equipment, vehicles and supplies, as well as the need to ensure safe and unhindered access by humanitarian personnel
and delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow such personnel to efficiently perform their task of assisting
affected civilian populations;
18. Urges the international donor community, United Nations agencies and organizations and
non-governmental organizations to extend to the Palestinian people, as rapidly as possible, emergency economic
assistance and humanitarian assistance, particularly in the Gaza Strip, to counter the impact of the current crisis;
19. Stresses the need for the continued implementation of the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations of
29 April 1994, fifth annex to the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, signed
in Washington, D.C., on 28 September 1995,363 including with regard to the full, prompt and regular transfer of
Palestinian indirect tax revenues;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the present resolution, containing:
(a)

An assessment of the assistance actually received by the Palestinian people;

(b)

An assessment of the needs still unmet and specific proposals for responding effectively to them;

_______________
363

A/51/889-S/1997/357, annex.

189

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including
special economic assistance”, the sub-item entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
RESOLUTION 74/118
Adopted at the 49th plenary meeting, on 16 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.34 and
A/74/L.34/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Zambia, Zimbabwe

74/118. Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 and the guiding principles contained in the annex
thereto, other relevant General Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions and agreed conclusions of the
Council,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations364 and on the Central Emergency Response Fund,365
Reaffirming the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming also the need for all actors engaged in the provision of humanitarian
assistance in situations of complex emergencies and natural disasters to promote and fully respect these principles,
Expressing grave concern at the increasing challenges caused by the unprecedented number of people affected
by humanitarian emergencies, including protracted displacement, which are increasing in number, scale and severity
and are stretching humanitarian response capacities, and expressing deep concern about the impact of climate change,
the ongoing consequences of the financial and economic crisis, regional food crises, continuing food and energy
insecurity, water scarcity, unplanned and rapid urbanization of populations, epidemics, natural hazards, environmental
degradation, armed conflicts and acts of terrorism, which are adding to underdevelopment, poverty and inequality and
are increasing the vulnerability of people while reducing their ability to cope with humanitarian crises,
Underscoring the need, in order to ensure a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and development, to
better align, wherever appropriate, humanitarian and development assistance with national development priorities and
strategies, and encouraging Member States, as well as the United Nations system and regional organizations in
supporting the efforts of Member States, to tackle the root causes of humanitarian crises, including poverty and
underdevelopment, build the resilience of affected States, including host communities, and reduce humanitarian
needs,
Concerned about the growing gap between humanitarian needs and resources, welcoming non-traditional
donors, and emphasizing the need to mobilize adequate, predictable, timely and flexible resources for humanitarian
assistance, based on and in proportion to assessed risks and needs, with a view to planning for, mitigating, preparing
for, responding to and recovering from humanitarian emergencies,

_______________
364
365

190

A/74/81-E/2019/60.
A/74/138.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing, in this regard, the significant achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in facilitating
life-saving assistance to crisis-affected people by providing timely funding, enabling humanitarian organizations and
their implementing partners to act quickly when tragedy strikes and steer resources to crises that do not receive the
attention that they need and deserve, emphasizing the need to broaden and diversify the income base of the Fund, and
welcoming in this regard the call by the Secretary-General to increase the level of the Fund to 1 billion United States
dollars,
Recognizing also the significant achievements of country-based pooled funds in facilitating assistance to people
in need, noting the Secretary-General’s call for donors to increase the proportion of humanitarian appeal funding
channelled through country-based pooled funds, and noting also that other pooled funding mechanisms can make
important contributions,
Emphasizing that strengthened needs analysis, risk management and strategic planning, in coordination with
affected States, including through the use of open and disaggregated data, are crucial elements to ensure a better
informed, more effective, transparent and collective response to the needs of people affected by crises,
Reiterating the need for Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to
mainstream a gender perspective into humanitarian assistance and integrate a gender perspective into all disaster risk
reduction efforts, including by addressing the specific needs, and promoting the priorities and capacities, of women,
girls, men and boys in a comprehensive and consistent manner, and also respecting and protecting their rights,
recognizing that in humanitarian emergencies, women, girls and boys face heightened risks to their safety, health and
well-being, and reiterating also that it is essential to ensure that women are empowered to effectively and meaningfully
participate in leadership and decision-making processes,
Reiterating also the need for Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to
improve accountability at all levels to the needs of affected populations, and recognizing the importance of inclusive
participation in decision-making,
Recognizing that persons with disabilities are disproportionately affected in humanitarian emergencies and
face multiple barriers in accessing assistance, recalling the need for the involvement of persons with disabilities in
decision-making processes and for mainstreaming, where possible, their perspectives and needs in humanitarian
preparedness and response, and in this regard recalling the Charter on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in
Humanitarian Action,
Expressing its deep concern about the increasing challenges faced by Member States and the United Nations
humanitarian response system and their capacities as a result of the consequences of disasters, including those related
to the continuing impact of climate change, and reaffirming the need for the implementation of the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,366
Welcoming the Paris Agreement367 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully implement
the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change368 that have not yet
done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as
possible,
Reaffirming the adoption of the New Urban Agenda by the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,369 and noting the
commitments undertaken therein by Member States regarding persons affected by humanitarian crises in urban areas,
Recognizing the primary role of Member States in preparing for and responding to outbreaks of infectious
disease, in compliance with the International Health Regulations (2005) adopted by the World Health Assembly,370
including those that become humanitarian crises, highlighting the critical role played by Member States, the World

_______________
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
368
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
369
Resolution 71/256, annex.
370
World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.
366
367

191

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Health Organization as the directing and coordinating authority of international health work, the United Nations
humanitarian system, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and other
humanitarian actors in providing financial, technical and in-kind support in order to bring epidemics or pandemics
under control, and recognizing also the need to strengthen local and national health systems, early reporting and early
warning systems, preparedness, cross-sectoral response capacities, and resilience linked to outbreaks of infectious
disease, including through capacity-building for developing countries,
Recognizing also that developing countries, in particular the least developed countries and small island
developing States, remain acutely vulnerable to human and economic loss resulting from natural hazards, and
recognizing further the need for strengthening international cooperation, as appropriate, to strengthen their resilience
in this regard,
Recognizing further that inclusive economic growth and sustainable development are essential for the
prevention of and preparedness for natural disasters and other emergencies,
Recognizing, in this respect, that building national and local preparedness and response capacity through, inter
alia, appropriate, inclusive and conducive public policies and international assistance, is critical to a more predictable
and effective response and contributes to the achievement of humanitarian and development objectives, including
enhanced resilience and a reduced need for humanitarian response,
Emphasizing the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming, in situations in
which military capacity and assets are used as a last resort to support the implementation of humanitarian assistance,
the need for their use to be undertaken with the consent of the affected State and in conformity with international law,
including international humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian principles,
Recognizing the high number of people affected by humanitarian emergencies, including the unprecedented
number of people who are forcibly displaced, of whom a majority are women and children, owing to conflict, acts of
terrorism, persecution, violence and other reasons, and who are often displaced for protracted periods, wherein the
national authorities have the primary duty and responsibility to provide protection and humanitarian assistance and
promote durable solutions for internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction, bearing in mind their particular
needs,
Noting the need for increased awareness of the international community regarding the issue of internal
displacement worldwide, including the situation of the millions living in protracted situations of displacement, and
the urgency of providing adequate humanitarian assistance to and protection for internally displaced persons,
supporting host communities, addressing the root causes of displacement, finding durable solutions for internally
displaced persons in their countries and addressing possible obstacles in this regard, and recognizing that durable
solutions include voluntary return in safety and with dignity, as well as voluntary local integration in the areas to which
persons have been displaced or voluntary settlement in another part of the country, without prejudice to the right of
internally displaced persons to leave their country or to seek asylum,
Reaffirming the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on addressing large movements of refugees and migrants, held on 19 September 2016,371
Expressing concern about the particular difficulties faced by the millions of refugees in protracted situations,
recognizing that the average length of stay has continued to grow, and emphasizing the need to redouble international
efforts and cooperation to find practical and comprehensive approaches to resolving their plight and to realize durable
solutions for them, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, international law and relevant General Assembly
resolutions,
Noting with great concern that millions of people are facing famine or the immediate risk of famine or are
experiencing severe food insecurity in several regions of the world, and noting that armed conflicts, drought, poverty
and the volatility of commodity prices are among the factors causing or exacerbating famine and severe food
insecurity and that additional efforts, including international support, are urgently needed to address this,

_______________
371

192

Resolution 71/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the importance of international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions of 1949,372
which provides a vital legal framework for the protection of civilian persons in time of war, including the provision
of humanitarian assistance,
Strongly condemning all acts of violence, including direct attacks, against humanitarian personnel and facilities,
as well as against medical personnel and other humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their
means of transport and equipment, and hospitals and other medical facilities, which in a majority of cases affect locally
recruited personnel, noting with concern the negative implications for the provision of humanitarian assistance to
populations in need, and welcoming efforts such as the Health Care in Danger project of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement, together with States, international and non‑governmental organizations and other
relevant stakeholders, to strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law by raising awareness, and
promoting preparedness to address the grave and serious humanitarian consequences arising from such violence,
Recalling the obligations of all States and parties to an armed conflict, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of international humanitarian law to respect and protect, in situations of armed conflict, medical personnel and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, and hospitals
and other medical facilities, which must not be attacked, and to ensure that the wounded and sick receive, to the fullest
extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the medical care and attention required, and noting the applicable
rules of international humanitarian law relating to the non-punishment of any person for carrying out medical activities
compatible with medical ethics,
Noting with grave concern that violence, including sexual and gender-based violence, and violence against
children, including sexual violence, continues to be deliberately directed against civilian populations during and after
humanitarian situations,
Recognizing that, while women and girls are disproportionately affected, men and boys can also be victims
and/or survivors of sexual and gender-based violence,
Noting with appreciation the efforts that Member States, the United Nations and other relevant actors continue
to make to improve the effectiveness of humanitarian response based on needs, including by strengthening
humanitarian response capacities, improving humanitarian coordination, identifying and integrating appropriate
innovation into humanitarian preparedness, response and recovery, increasing transparency, reducing duplication,
strengthening partnerships with local and national responders as appropriate, enhancing flexible, predictable and
adequate funding and strengthening the accountability of all stakeholders,
Noting with grave concern that children and youth continue to lack education in situations of complex
emergencies, and emphasizing the urgent need for increased financing and more efficient delivery of quality education
in humanitarian emergencies,
Recognizing that, in strengthening the coordination of humanitarian assistance in the field, the organizations of
the United Nations system should continue to consult and work in close coordination with national Governments,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it and helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions,

_______________
372

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.

193

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Welcomes the outcome of the twenty-second humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and Social
Council at its substantive session of 2019,373 and also welcomes the adoption of Economic and Social Council
resolution 2019/14 of 26 June 2019;
2. Requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue his efforts to strengthen the coordination and
accountability of humanitarian assistance and leadership within the United Nations humanitarian response system,
including through the transformative agenda of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, and calls upon relevant United
Nations organizations and other relevant intergovernmental organizations, as well as other humanitarian and
development actors, to continue to work with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat to enhance the coordination, effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian assistance;
3. Also requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to continue to improve dialogue with all Member States
on the relevant processes, activities and deliberations of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee;
4. Encourages Member States and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to continue to
improve dialogue and collaboration on humanitarian issues, at the global and field levels, including on policy, in order
to foster a more consultative and inclusive approach to humanitarian assistance;
5. Welcomes the continued efforts by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to build
partnerships with regional organizations and non‑traditional donors and the private sector, and encourages Member
States and the United Nations system to continue to strengthen partnerships at the global, regional, national and local
levels in support of national efforts in order to effectively cooperate to provide humanitarian assistance to those in
need and ensure that their collaborative efforts adhere to the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and
independence;
6. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and humanitarian and development organizations
to continue to assess and improve, together with other relevant stakeholders, including the private sector, how
innovation can be more proactively and systematically identified and integrated into humanitarian action in a
sustainable manner and to promote the sharing of best practices and lessons learned on innovative tools, processes
and approaches, including those from large-scale natural disasters and humanitarian crises of a protracted nature, that
could improve the effectiveness and quality of humanitarian response, and in this regard encourages all relevant
stakeholders to continue to support the efforts of Member States, in particular developing countries, to strengthen their
capacities, including through facilitating access to information and communications technologies;
7. Welcomes innovative practices that draw on the knowledge of people affected by humanitarian
emergencies to develop locally sustainable solutions and to produce life-saving items locally, with minimal logistical
and infrastructure implications;
8. Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and, as appropriate, other relevant
humanitarian actors to continue efforts to improve the humanitarian response to natural and man-made disasters and
complex emergencies by further strengthening humanitarian response capacities at all levels, by continuing to
strengthen the provision and coordination of humanitarian assistance at the global, regional and field levels, including
through existing cluster coordination mechanisms and in support of national authorities of the affected State, as
appropriate, and by further enhancing efficiency, transparency, performance and accountability;
9. Recognizes the benefits of engagement and coordination with relevant humanitarian actors to the
effectiveness of humanitarian response, and encourages the United Nations to continue to pursue efforts to strengthen
partnerships at the global level with the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, relevant humanitarian
non-governmental organizations, other participants in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and other relevant
stakeholders;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen the support provided to United Nations
resident/humanitarian coordinators and to United Nations country teams, including by providing necessary training,
identifying resources and improving the identification of and the selection process for United Nations
resident/humanitarian coordinators, and enhancing their performance accountability;

_______________
373

194

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/74/3), chap. X.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Calls upon the Chair of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group and the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to continue to enhance their consultations before presenting final recommendations on the selection
process for resident coordinators in countries likely to require significant humanitarian response operations;
12. Requests the United Nations to continue to strengthen its ability to recruit and deploy appropriately senior,
skilled and experienced humanitarian staff quickly and flexibly, giving paramount consideration to the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, while paying due regard to gender equality and to recruiting on as
wide a geographical basis as possible, and in this regard encourages the United Nations Sustainable Development
Group to continue to strengthen the resident coordinator system, on which the humanitarian coordinator system is
based, ensuring, inter alia, full implementation of the management and accountability system of the Group and the
resident coordinator system;
13. Recognizes that diversity of humanitarian staff brings value to humanitarian work and understanding of
developing countries’ contexts, and requests the Secretary-General to address further the insufficient diversity in
geographical representation and gender balance in the composition of the humanitarian staff of the Secretariat and
other United Nations humanitarian agencies, in particular regarding professional and high-level staff, and to report on
concrete measures taken in this regard in his annual report;
14. Also recognizes that accountability is an integral part of effective humanitarian assistance, and emphasizes
the need for enhancing the accountability of humanitarian actors at all stages of humanitarian assistance;
15. Urges Member States to continue to give priority to efforts to prevent, respond to, investigate and
prosecute acts of sexual and gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies, calls upon Member States and
relevant organizations to improve coordination and strengthen capacity, to ensure that humanitarian relief integrates
prevention of, and risk mitigation for, sexual and gender-based violence and makes greater use of sex- and
age-disaggregated data and to strengthen support services for victims, survivors and others affected by such violence
beginning in the earliest stages of emergency response, taking into account their unique and specific needs resulting
from the impact of such violence, and notes the Call to Action initiative;
16. Underscores the critical importance of protecting all persons affected by humanitarian crises, in particular
women and children, from any form of sexual exploitation and abuse, including those perpetrated by humanitarian
personnel, welcomes the determination of the Secretary-General to fully implement the United Nations policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse and stresses that victims and survivors should be at the core of such efforts,
notes the six core principles relating to sexual exploitation and abuse adopted by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee,374 and encourages Member States to make greater efforts to prevent and respond to sexual exploitation
and abuse and to ensure that perpetrators are held accountable;
17. Urges Member States to continue to seek to prevent, respond to, investigate and prosecute violations and
abuses against children, including exploitation, in humanitarian emergencies, calls upon Member States and relevant
organizations to strengthen support services for children affected by humanitarian emergencies, including those who
have experienced violations and abuses, and calls for a more effective response in that regard, guided by the rights of
the child;
18. Reaffirms the importance of implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030366 to ensure the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihood and health and in the
economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities and countries, and
underlines the importance of tackling the underlying disaster risk drivers, of considering the impact of climate change
and of integrating a disaster risk reduction perspective into humanitarian assistance to prevent new and reduce existing
disaster risk;
19. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and relevant humanitarian and development organizations
to continue to support multi-year investment, when possible, in preparedness, response and coordination capacities,
and build the capacity at all levels of government, including local government, of organizations and of communities,
particularly in communities exposed to disasters, to better prepare for hazards, reduce disaster risk and the risk of
displacement within the context of disasters, build resilience and better respond to and recover from and build back

_______________
374

A/57/465, annex I, para. 10 (a).

195

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

better after disasters, and also calls upon all relevant stakeholders to complement, rather than substitute for or displace,
national capacities to respond to crises, especially where those crises are prolonged or recurrent;
20. Calls upon Member States and the international community to provide adequate, sustainable and timely
resources for disaster risk reduction in order to build resilience and reduce the risk of displacement within the context
of disasters, environmental degradation and climate change, including through complementary humanitarian and
development programming and the further strengthening of national and local capacities to prevent, prepare for
and respond to humanitarian emergencies, and encourages closer cooperation between national stakeholders and
humanitarian and development actors in this regard;
21. Urges Member States, the United Nations humanitarian system, regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and other humanitarian actors to reinforce preparedness and response capabilities in
relation to those outbreaks of infectious disease that trigger or exacerbate a humanitarian crisis, including by fully
implementing the International Health Regulations (2005),370 and calls upon the United Nations humanitarian system
and humanitarian organizations to respond rapidly, based on the level 3 activation procedure for infectious disease
events in humanitarian contexts, in close coordination with affected States;
22. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and other relevant organizations, as appropriate, to address
non-communicable diseases and their risk factors and to treat people living with them in humanitarian emergencies;
23. Encourages closer cooperation between development and humanitarian actors, in coordination with
Member States, to ensure that all relevant actors work together, in accordance with their mandates, towards common
results with the aim of reducing need, vulnerability and risk over multiple years, based on shared understanding of the
context and each actor’s operational strengths, in support of national priorities, while fully respecting the humanitarian
principles for humanitarian action;
24. Encourages humanitarian and development actors to pursue, where appropriate, common riskmanagement and resilience objectives, achievable through joint analysis and multi-year programming and planning
cycles;
25. Encourages the United Nations system, humanitarian organizations and development organizations to
continue their efforts to mainstream preparedness, early action and early recovery into their programming,
acknowledges that preparedness, early action and early recovery should receive further funding, and in this regard
encourages the provision of timely, flexible, predictable and adequate resources, including from both humanitarian
and development budgets, as appropriate;
26. Urges Member States, the United Nations and other relevant organizations to take further steps to provide
a coordinated emergency response to the food and nutrition needs of affected populations, while aiming to ensure that
such steps are supportive of national strategies and programmes aimed at improving food security and nutrition;
27. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations, humanitarian and development organizations and other
relevant actors to urgently and effectively respond to, prevent and prepare for rising global food insecurity affecting
millions of people, especially those who are facing famine or the immediate risk of famine, including by enhancing
humanitarian and development cooperation and providing urgent funding to respond to the needs of the affected
population, and calls upon Member States and parties to armed conflicts to respect international humanitarian law and
ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access;
28. Condemns strongly the use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare and prohibited by international
humanitarian law;
29. Expresses concern about the challenges related to, inter alia, safe access to and use of fuel, firewood,
alternative energy, water and sanitation, shelter and food and health-care services, including mental health and
psychosocial services, in humanitarian emergencies, and notes with appreciation initiatives at the national and
international levels, including those that systematically identify and integrate innovative approaches and share best
practices, that promote effective cooperation in this regard;
30. Encourages the international community, including relevant United Nations organizations and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, to support efforts of Member States aimed at
strengthening their capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters and to support efforts, as appropriate, to strengthen
196

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

systems, especially early warning systems, for identifying and monitoring disaster risk, including vulnerability and
natural hazards, and especially to substantially increase the availability of and access to multi-hazard warning systems;
31. Welcomes the growing number of Member States and regional organizations that have taken steps to
promote the implementation of the Guidelines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster
Relief and Initial Recovery Assistance, encourages others to do so, as appropriate, and welcomes the valuable support
that national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies are providing to their Governments in this area, in collaboration
with the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other partners;
32. Encourages States to create an enabling environment for the capacity-building of local authorities and of
national and local non-governmental and community-based organizations in order to ensure better preparedness in
providing timely, effective and predictable assistance, and encourages the United Nations and other relevant
organizations to provide support to such efforts, including, as appropriate, under the Common Framework for
Preparedness of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, the United Nations Sustainable Development Group and the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, through the transfer of technology, on mutually agreed terms, and
expertise to developing countries and through support to enhance the coordination capacities and build capacity in
science and technology of affected States;
33. Recognizes the increase in the number and scale of disasters, including those related to the adverse effects
of climate change, which in certain instances may contribute to displacement and to additional pressure on host
communities, encourages Member States, the United Nations and relevant organizations and actors to further
strengthen the efforts aimed at addressing the needs of persons displaced within the context of disasters, including
those induced by climate change, and notes in this regard the importance of sharing best practices to prevent and
prepare for such displacements;
34. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to provide emergency
assistance in ways that are supportive of recovery and long-term development, where appropriate, including through
multi-year funding and prioritizing humanitarian tools that strengthen resilience, such as, but not limited to, cashbased transfers, local procurement of food and services, including for school feeding programmes, and social
safety nets;
35. Encourages Member States and the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies
to respond more effectively to needs in humanitarian contexts by, inter alia, scaling up social protection policies and
cash-based transfer mechanisms, where feasible, including multipurpose cash programming, as appropriate, to offer
affected people flexibility on how to meet their humanitarian needs, and to support the development of local markets
and strengthen national and local capacities, and in this regard calls upon the United Nations humanitarian
organizations to continue building their capacity to systematically consider cash-based transfer programming,
alongside other forms of humanitarian assistance;
36. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant organizations to improve,
where possible, fast and flexible financing for preparedness, early action, early response and early recovery, and in
this regard encourages exploring, developing and, where appropriate, the strengthening of innovative and anticipatory
mechanisms and approaches, such as forecast-based financing and disaster risk insurance, to reduce the impact of
disasters and address humanitarian needs;
37. Takes note of the efforts of Member States, the United Nations system and the international community
to strengthen preparedness and local, national and regional humanitarian response capacity, calls upon the United
Nations and relevant partners to support capacity-building of Member States, and calls upon Member States to
continue to provide funding to humanitarian country-based pooled funds;
38. Encourages Member States, and calls upon relevant humanitarian organizations, to work closely with
national institutions, including local governments and the private sector, as appropriate, to examine effective, contextspecific ways to be better prepared for, respond to and recover from increasing emergencies in urban areas, which
may have an impact on the provision of such life-saving essential services as water, energy and health care;
39. Reaffirms the right to education for all and the importance of ensuring safe enabling learning environments
in humanitarian emergencies, as well as quality education at all levels, including for girls, including technical and
vocational training opportunities, where possible, including through adequate funding and infrastructural investments,
197

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

for the well-being of all, in this regard recognizes that access to quality education in humanitarian emergencies can
contribute to long-term development goals and reiterates the need to protect and respect educational facilities in
accordance with international humanitarian law, strongly condemns all attacks directed against schools and the use of
schools for military purposes, when in contravention of international humanitarian law, and encourages efforts to
promote safe and protective school environments in humanitarian emergencies;
40. Calls upon the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other United Nations
organizations to continue to work with Member States and relevant United Nations entities to facilitate the exchange
of updated, accurate and reliable information, including through mutually comprehensible, disaggregated and
harmonized data, to ensure better assessment and analysis of needs in order to improve preparedness and humanitarian
response;
41. Calls upon relevant United Nations organizations to support the improvement of the humanitarian
programme cycle, including the development of coordinated and comprehensive needs assessment tools, such as
multisector initial rapid assessments, the implementation of joint, impartial and timely needs assessments and
prioritized needs-based humanitarian response plans, in consultation with the affected States, in order to strengthen
the coordination of humanitarian action to meet the needs of people affected by humanitarian emergencies;
42. Encourages Member States to commit and to disburse in a timely fashion humanitarian funding based on,
and in accordance with, the humanitarian appeals brought forward by the United Nations;
43. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations organizations to explore innovative risk-sharing
mechanisms and to base risk management funding on objective data;
44. Encourages United Nations and humanitarian organizations to further advance efficiencies in delivering
assistance through reducing management costs, harmonizing partnership agreements, providing transparent and
comparable cost structures, and strengthening measures to achieve greater accountability by taking further actions to
reduce fraud, waste and abuse and identify ways to share incident reports and other information among United Nations
agencies, where appropriate;
45. Requests Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations of the United Nations system and other
relevant humanitarian actors to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women in all stages of humanitarian
response, to take measures to ensure the full participation of women, girls, men and boys, including persons with
disabilities and older persons, in all stages of decision-making, as appropriate, in order to, inter alia, reduce gender
inequalities and ensure that humanitarian assistance is informed, adapted, appropriate and effective, and to take into
account the specific needs, vulnerabilities and capacities of women, girls, men and boys, taking into consideration age
and disability, in the design of needs assessments and the implementation of all programming, including by seeking
to ensure the provision of access to the full range of medical, legal and psychosocial and livelihood services, without
discrimination, and in this regard encourages efforts to ensure gender mainstreaming, including in the collection and
analysis of disaggregated data, in the analysis of allocations and programme implementation, and through greater use
of the Gender with Age Marker;
46. Recognizes the important role that women can play as first responders, and encourages Member States,
the United Nations and other relevant humanitarian organizations to support women’s leadership and meaningful
participation in the planning and implementation of response strategies, including by strengthening partnerships and
building the capacities of national and local institutions, including national and local women’s organizations, and other
civil society actors, as appropriate;
47. Calls upon Member States, relevant humanitarian organizations of the United Nations system and other
relevant humanitarian actors to ensure non‑discrimination and opportunities for persons with disabilities to participate
on an equal basis with others in humanitarian preparedness and response;
48. Calls upon the United Nations and humanitarian and development organizations, in coordination with
Member States, to engage all people affected by disasters and crises, in particular those most at risk, including through
communication, enabling their participation in relevant processes and supporting their efforts and capacities to meet
their different needs, while taking into account, as appropriate, their culture, traditions and local customs;
49. Calls upon United Nations humanitarian organizations, in consultation with Member States, as
appropriate, to strengthen the evidence base for humanitarian assistance by further developing common mechanisms
198

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and methodologies for improving the quality, transparency, reliability, compatibility and comparability of common
humanitarian needs assessments, needs data and analysis, including through improved collection, analysis and
reporting of data disaggregated by sex, age and disability and taking into account environmental impact, to assess
their performance in assistance and to ensure the most effective use of humanitarian resources by those organizations;
50. Calls upon the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to enhance accountability to Member States,
including affected States, and all other stakeholders, including local governments, relevant local organizations and
other actors, as well as affected populations, and to further strengthen humanitarian response efforts, including by
monitoring and evaluating the provision of their humanitarian assistance, incorporating lessons learned into
programming and consulting with the affected populations in the planning and implementation of humanitarian
assistance, and making greater efforts in this regard, so that their needs are appropriately assessed and effectively
addressed;
51. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to identify better ways of
working to address the increasing capacity and resource gap, in order to effectively meet the needs of affected
populations, including by harmonizing and, where possible, simplifying reporting requirements, increasing the
flexibility of humanitarian funding, including through reduced earmarking and further minimizing the duplication of
costs, and making more use of innovation in humanitarian response;
52. Calls upon donors to provide adequate, timely, predictable and flexible resources based on and in
proportion to assessed needs and to mobilize support for addressing underfunded and forgotten emergencies, to
consider providing early and multi-year commitments to pooled humanitarian funds, including the Central Emergency
Response Fund and country-based pooled funds, and to continue to support diverse humanitarian funding channels,
encourages efforts to adhere to the Principles and Good Practice of Humanitarian Donorship375 and to improve
burden-sharing among donors, and in this respect encourages the private sector, civil society and other relevant entities
to make relevant contributions, complementary to those of other sources;
53. Welcomes the important achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund in ensuring a more
timely and predictable response to humanitarian emergencies, stresses the importance of continuing to improve the
functioning of the Fund, and in this regard encourages the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized
agencies to review and evaluate, where necessary, their partnership policies and practices in order to ensure the timely
disbursement of funds from the Fund to implementing partners in order to ensure that resources are used in the most
efficient, effective, accountable and transparent manner possible;
54. Calls upon all Member States, and invites the private sector and all concerned individuals and institutions,
to consider increasing their voluntary contributions to the Central Emergency Response Fund in order to achieve an
annual funding level of 1 billion United States dollars and to continue to reinforce and strengthen the Fund as the
global emergency response fund, and emphasizes the need to broaden and diversify the income base of the Fund and
that contributions should be additional to current commitments to humanitarian programming and should not be to
the detriment of resources made available for international cooperation for development;
55. Encourages Member States, the private sector and all relevant individuals and institutions to consider
increasing their voluntary contributions to country-based pooled funds and, as appropriate, other pooled funding
mechanisms, to facilitate humanitarian assistance to people in need;
56. Calls upon Member States that are in a position to do so and development and humanitarian partners, in
their efforts to provide flexible resources, to consider ways of better mainstreaming the need for preparedness and
building resilience in the provision of humanitarian and development assistance, including reconstruction and
rehabilitation, inter alia, with a view to ensuring smooth transition from relief to development;
57. Calls upon all Member States that are in a position to do so to increase their voluntary contributions to
humanitarian emergencies, including through flexible, unearmarked and multi-year funding where possible, in this
context reiterates that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should benefit from adequate and more
predictable funding, and underscores the importance of adequate, timely and flexible voluntary funding for the Office
to enable it to carry out its mandate;

_______________
375

A/58/99-E/2003/94, annex II.

199

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

58. Encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations humanitarian organizations, to
ensure that the basic humanitarian needs of affected populations, including clean water, food, shelter, health, including
sexual and reproductive health, education and protection, energy and information and communications technologies,
where possible, are addressed as components of humanitarian response, including through providing timely and
adequate resources, while ensuring that their collaborative efforts fully adhere to humanitarian principles;
59. Also encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant United Nations humanitarian organizations,
to ensure that women and girls have access to basic health-care services, including reliable and safe access to sexual
and reproductive health-care services and mental health and psychosocial support, from the onset of emergencies, in
this regard recognizes that such assistance protects women, adolescent girls and infants from preventable mortality
and morbidity that occur in humanitarian emergencies, and calls upon Member States, the United Nations and other
relevant actors to give such programmes due consideration;
60. Encourages Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian organizations to continue to work
together to understand and address the different protection needs of affected populations, particularly the most
vulnerable, in humanitarian crises and ensure that these needs are adequately integrated into preparedness, response
and recovery efforts;
61. Calls upon Member States and relevant organizations and actors to recognize and address the
consequences of humanitarian emergencies for migrants, in particular those in vulnerable situations, and to strengthen
coordinated international efforts for their assistance and protection in concert with national authorities;
62. Calls upon Member States to take steps to ensure the international protection of and respect for the rights
of refugees, including respect for the principle of non-refoulement and adequate standards of treatment in accordance
with international law, including, as applicable, the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees376 and
international human rights obligations;
63. Recognizes the importance of early registration and effective registration systems as a tool of protection
and as a means of carrying out the quantification and assessment of needs for the provision and distribution of
humanitarian assistance, notes the many and diverse challenges faced by refugees who remain without any form of
documentation attesting to their status, and underlines the importance of increasing accountability to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches its beneficiaries;
64. Reaffirms the obligation of all States and parties to an armed conflict to protect civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian law, encourages States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all measures
necessary to enhance the protection of civilians, and invites all States to promote a culture of protection, taking into
account the particular needs of women, girls, boys and men, older persons and persons with disabilities;
65. Urges Member States to continue to take the steps necessary to ensure the protection of the wounded and
sick, as well as the safety and security of medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties, their facilities, equipment, transports and supplies, including by developing effective measures to
prevent and address acts of violence, attacks and threats against them, and in this regard reaffirms the need for States
to ensure that those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law do not operate with impunity, urges
States to conduct full, prompt, impartial and effective investigations within their jurisdiction of violations of
international humanitarian law with a view to ensuring accountability, as provided for by national laws and obligations
under international law, and to ensure that the wounded and sick receive, to the fullest extent practicable and with the
least possible delay, the medical care and attention required, and notes the applicable rules of international
humanitarian law relating to the non-punishment of any person for carrying out medical activities compatible with
medical ethics;
66. Also urges Member States to continue to take the steps necessary to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, their facilities, equipment, transports and supplies, including by developing effective
measures to prevent and address acts of violence, attacks and threats against them, requests the Secretary-General to
expedite his efforts to enhance the safety and security of personnel involved in United Nations humanitarian
operations, and in this regard reaffirms the need for States to ensure that those responsible for violations of

_______________
376

200

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

international humanitarian law do not operate with impunity, urges States to conduct, full, prompt, impartial and
effective investigations within their jurisdiction of violations of international humanitarian law with a view to ensuring
accountability, as provided for by national laws and obligations under international law, and urges Member States to
scale up their efforts to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel;
67. Emphasizes the responsibility of States to adopt preventive measures and effective responses to acts of
violence committed against civilian populations in armed conflicts and to comply with the relevant obligations under
international law to end impunity and to ensure that those responsible for violations are promptly brought to justice,
in accordance with national law and their obligations under international law;
68. Calls upon all States and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular in armed conflict and
in post-conflict situations, in countries in which humanitarian personnel are operating, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law and national laws, to cooperate fully with the United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies and organizations and to ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel, as well as the
delivery of supplies and equipment, in order to allow such personnel to efficiently perform their task of assisting
affected civilian populations, including refugees and internally displaced persons;
69. Urges States, while undertaking counter-terrorism activities, to respect their international obligations,
including whenever international humanitarian law is applicable, in particular regarding the provision of humanitarian
assistance to civilian populations, as well as recognizes the key role humanitarian organizations play in the provision
of principled humanitarian assistance, while also recognizing the importance of preventing and suppressing the
financing of and other forms of support to terrorism;
70. Recognizes the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement377 as an important international framework
for the protection of internally displaced persons, and that forced displacement is not only a humanitarian but also a
development challenge, encourages Member States and humanitarian agencies to continue to work together, in
collaboration with host communities, in endeavours to provide a more predictable response to the needs of internally
displaced persons and in particular to address the long-term nature of displacement by adopting and implementing
long-term strategies and coherent multi-year planning, including in relation to issues such as livelihoods, and in this
regard calls for continued and enhanced international support, upon request, for the capacity-building efforts of States
and encourages humanitarian organizations to improve coordination, including with development organizations, to
better address the needs of internally displaced persons in support of Member States to promote durable solutions;
71. Welcomes the progress made towards further enhancing the security management system of the United
Nations, and supports the approach taken by the Secretary-General to focus the efforts of the security management
system on enabling the United Nations system to “stay and deliver” its most critical programmes even in high-risk
environments by effectively managing the risks to which personnel are exposed, including in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, and to adapt quickly to changes in local security conditions;
72. Encourages the United Nations and other relevant humanitarian actors to include, as part of their risk
management strategy, the building of good relations and trust with national and local governments and to promote
acceptance by local communities and all relevant actors, including religious leaders where appropriate, in order to
enable humanitarian assistance to be provided in accordance with humanitarian principles;
73. Requests the Secretary-General to report on actions taken to enable the United Nations to continue to
strengthen its ability to recruit and deploy staff quickly, effectively and flexibly, to procure emergency relief materials
and services rapidly, cost-effectively and locally, where applicable, and to quickly disburse funds in order to support
Governments and United Nations country teams in the coordination of international humanitarian assistance;
74. Takes note of the World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May 2016, and also
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the outcome of the World Humanitarian Summit;378
75. Urges all countries to integrate into their respective national policies and development frameworks the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,379 and urges Member States, the United Nations and relevant

_______________
E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
A/71/353.
379
Resolution 70/1.
377
378

201

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

stakeholders to work together to reduce the needs and build the resilience of the most vulnerable in order to contribute
to the achievement of the Goals included in the 2030 Agenda, including the call to leave no one behind;
76. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its 2020 session, on progress made in strengthening the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, and to submit a report to the Assembly on the detailed use of the
Central Emergency Response Fund.
RESOLUTION 74/179
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of the report of the Credentials
Committee (A/74/572)

74/179. Credentials of representatives to the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Credentials Committee380 and the recommendation contained therein,
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee.380
RESOLUTION 74/244
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.37 and
A/74/L.37/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Turkmenistan, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam

74/244. International Year of Fruits and Vegetables, 2021
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, in particular paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for
the proclamation of international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, in which it is stated that an international day
or year should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Considering the urgent need to raise awareness of the nutritional and health benefits of fruit and vegetable
consumption and to advocate for healthy diets through increased sustainable production and consumption of fruits
and vegetables,

_______________
380

202

A/74/572.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the Rome Declaration on Nutrition, as well as the Framework for Action, which provides a set of
voluntary policy options and strategies for use by Governments, as appropriate, adopted at the Second International
Conference on Nutrition, which was jointly organized by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Health Organization, in Rome from 19 to 21 November 2014,381
Recalling also its resolution 70/259 of 1 April 2016, by which it proclaimed the United Nations Decade of
Action on Nutrition (2016–2025), as well as its resolution 72/306 of 24 July 2018 on the implementation of the
Decade, and the need to promote sustainable food systems that foster diversified, balanced and healthy diets that
include a variety of foods and consumption of an abundance of fruits and vegetables,
Recalling further its resolution 73/165 of 17 December 2018, entitled “United Nations Declaration on the Rights
of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas”,
Recognizing that the agriculture sector is inextricably linked with the entire food system and that
agricultural technologies and digitalization can add value throughout the food system by improving the
sustainability of storage, transport, trade, processing, transformation, retail, waste reduction and recycling, as
well as interactions among these processes,
Recalling its resolution 72/239 of 20 December 2017, by which it proclaimed the United Nations Decade of
Family Farming (2019–2028), and the global launch of the Decade in Rome on 29 May 2019, and cognizant of the
important contributions of fruits and vegetables, particularly indigenous crops, to food security, nutrition, livelihoods
and incomes of family farmers, especially small-scale family farmers,
Calling upon Member States to take effective measures, as appropriate, to help to integrate smallholders into
global production, value and supply chains for the sustainable production and consumption of fruits and vegetables,
Taking note of the Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health, adopted in 2004 by the World Health
Assembly of the World Health Organization,382
Concerned about the high levels of loss and waste in the fruit and vegetable supply/value chains and the negative
economic, environmental and social impacts of such loss and waste, and in this regard inviting Member States and
other relevant stakeholders to strengthen the capacity-building of developing countries to adopt innovative approaches
and technology in combating loss and waste of fruits and vegetables,
Recognizing that the observance of an International Year of Fruits and Vegetables in 2021 by the international
community would contribute significantly to raising awareness on these issues,
1.

Decides to declare 2021 the International Year of Fruits and Vegetables;

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, other international and regional
organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector and academia, to observe the
International Year, as appropriate, through activities aimed at raising awareness of and directing policy attention to the
nutritional and health benefits of fruit and vegetable consumption, the contribution of fruit and vegetable consumption
to the promotion of diversified, balanced and healthy diets and lifestyles, reducing loss and waste of fruits and
vegetables and sharing best practices in this regard;
3. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, mindful of the provisions contained
in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to facilitate the implementation of the International
Year;
4. Also invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, mindful of the provisions of
paragraphs 23 to 27 of the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67, to inform the General Assembly
at its seventy-eighth session regarding the implementation of the present resolution, including an evaluation of the
International Year;
5. Stresses that the costs of all the activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met through voluntary contributions, including from the private sector;

_______________
381
382

World Health Organization, document EB136/8, annexes I and II.
World Health Organization, document WHA57/2004/REC/1, resolution 57.17, annex.

203

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6.

Invites all relevant stakeholders to contribute to and support the International Year;

7. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector
and academia, for appropriate observance.
RESOLUTION 74/245
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/74/L.38 and
A/74/L.38/Add.1, sponsored by: Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, China, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Lesotho, Maldives, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Palau, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

74/245. International Day of Banks
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recalling the report of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development entitled Financing for
Sustainable Development Report 2019,383
Emphasizing the relevance of inclusion in the international financial system at all levels and the importance of
considering financial inclusion as a policy objective in financial regulation, in accordance with national priorities and
legislation,
Recognizing the significant potential of multilateral development banks and other international development
banks in financing sustainable development and providing know-how,
Recognizing also, at the national level, the vital role of banking systems in Member States in contributing to the
improvement of the standard of living,
Reaffirming its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the proclamation
of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years
and anniversaries,
1.

Decides to designate 4 December as the International Day of Banks, to be observed annually;

2. Invites all Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations to observe the International Day of Banks, in a manner consistent with national priorities, in order to
highlight the role of banks in contributing to achieving sustainable development;

_______________
383

204

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.19.I.7.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3. Invites the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other relevant United Nations entities to
facilitate the observance of the International Day of Banks in collaboration with other relevant organizations, mindful
of the provisions contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67;
4. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders for appropriate observance.
RESOLUTION 74/248
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/74/L.20 and A/74/L.20/Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia

74/248. Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death
of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1759 (XVII) of 26 October 1962, 69/246 of 29 December 2014, 70/11 of 19 November
2015, 71/260 of 23 December 2016 and 72/252 of 24 December 2017,
Underlining the shared responsibility to pursue the full truth concerning the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him,
Recognizing that a further inquiry or investigation would be necessary to finally establish the facts of the matter,
Expressing appreciation for the continuing commitment of the Secretary-General to the search for the truth in
this regard,
Welcoming the report of the Eminent Person appointed pursuant to General Assembly resolution 72/252,384 and
recognizing the contributions by Member States to his work, in particular those that have appointed independent and
high-ranking officials,
Acknowledging the letter dated 12 September 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly, transmitting the report of the Eminent Person, together with his assessment of the way
forward,384
Noting, in particular, the conclusion drawn by the Eminent Person that it appears plausible that an external attack
or threat may have been the cause of the crash, whether by way of a direct attack causing flight SE-BDY to crash or
by causing a momentary distraction of the pilots,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to reappoint the Eminent Person appointed pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 72/252 to continue to review the information received and possible new information made available by

_______________
384

See A/73/973.

205

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Member States, including by individuals and private entities, to assess its probative value and to draw conclusions
from the investigations already conducted;
2. Urges all Member States, in particular those referred to in the report,384 to release any relevant records in
their possession and to provide to the Eminent Person and the Secretary-General relevant information related to the
death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him, and to ensure that they have
conducted a full review of their archives and records;
3. Calls upon those Member States referred to in the report to cooperate with and assist the Eminent Person
fully, including by appointing without delay independent and high-ranking officials to determine whether relevant
information exists within their security, intelligence and defence archives, and encourages the Eminent Person to
remain engaged with all high-ranking officials, including those who have concluded their work;
4. Calls upon Member States to encourage individuals and private entities to ensure that any relevant records
related to the death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him are made available for
review by the Eminent Person;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly before the end of its seventy-fifth
session on progress made;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session the item entitled “Investigation
into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the
party accompanying him”.

206

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/24.

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures ........................................209

74/25.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace................................................................212

74/26.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty .............................................................................................................213

74/27.

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ..................214

74/28.

Advancing responsible State behaviour in cyberspace in the context of international security .....................................216

74/29.

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security ...................218

74/30.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East...........................................................220

74/31.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non‑nuclear-weapon States against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons .........................................................................................................................222

74/32.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space ................................................................................................................224

74/33.

No first placement of weapons in outer space ..........................................................................................................227

74/34.

Further practical measures for the prevention of an arms race in outer space ..............................................................229

74/35.

Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament............................................230

74/36.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ..................................................................232

74/37.

Regional disarmament ...........................................................................................................................................234

74/38.

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels ..............................................................................235

74/39.

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context .....................................................................237

74/40.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction..........................................................................................238

74/41.

Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .........................................................................................................242

74/42.

Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons......................................................................................................243

74/43.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction ...............................................................245

74/44.

Reducing nuclear danger ........................................................................................................................................247

74/45.

Nuclear disarmament .............................................................................................................................................249

74/46.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments...........254

74/47.

Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world ................................................................................................259

74/48.

Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas ..................................................................................262

74/49.

The Arms Trade Treaty ..........................................................................................................................................264

74/50.

Nuclear disarmament verification ...........................................................................................................................267

74/51.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them.........................269

74/52.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on disarmament
and arms control ....................................................................................................................................................271

207

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/53.

Transparency in armaments ....................................................................................................................................272

74/54.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament .....................................274

74/55.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non‑proliferation ..........................................................277

74/56.

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament .........................................279

74/57.

Relationship between disarmament and development...............................................................................................281

74/58.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes .....................................................................................................282

74/59.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat
or use of nuclear weapons ......................................................................................................................................284

74/60.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects ..............................................................................287

74/61.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer
of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction ...................................................................................................291

74/62.

Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions..........................................................................................293

74/63.

Joint courses of action and future-oriented dialogue towards a world without nuclear weapons...................................296

74/64.

Youth, disarmament and non-proliferation ...............................................................................................................299

74/65.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus ........................................300

74/66.

Strengthening and developing the system of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties
and agreements......................................................................................................................................................303

74/67.

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities ..................................................................305

74/68.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons .................................................................................308

74/69.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific..................................................310

74/70.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament .....................................................................................311

74/71.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa......................................................................312

74/72.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean ........314

74/73.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa...................................................................................................................317

74/74.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament ..............................................................................................................322

74/75.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East ..................................................................................................323

74/76.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects ................................................................326

74/77.

Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region .....................................................................329

74/78.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty ................................................................................................................331

74/79.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction ..........................................................................................................333

208

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 74/24
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 176 to none, with 2 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/360, para. 8)1
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Malawi, Palau

74/24.

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/72 of 4 December 1998, 54/43 of 1 December 1999, 56/14 of 29 November 2001,
58/28 of 8 December 2003, 60/44 of 8 December 2005, 62/13 of 5 December 2007, 64/22 of 2 December 2009, 66/20
of 2 December 2011, 68/23 of 5 December 2013, 70/21 of 7 December 2015 and 72/20 of 4 December 2017 on
objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures,
Recalling also its resolution 35/142 B of 12 December 1980, which introduced the United Nations system for
the standardized reporting of military expenditures, its resolutions 48/62 of 16 December 1993, 49/66 of 15 December
1994, 51/38 of 10 December 1996 and 52/32 of 9 December 1997, in which the General Assembly called upon all
Member States to participate in the system, and its resolution 47/54 B of 9 December 1992, in which the Assembly
endorsed the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters and invited Member
States to provide the Secretary-General with relevant information regarding their implementation,
Noting that, since then, national reports on military expenditures and on the guidelines and recommendations
for objective information on military matters have been submitted by a number of Member States belonging to
different geographical regions,
Convinced that transparency in military matters is an essential element for building a climate of trust and
confidence between States worldwide and that a better flow of objective information on military matters can help to
relieve international tension and is therefore an important contribution to conflict prevention,
Noting the role of the standardized reporting system, as instituted through its resolution 35/142 B, as an
important instrument to enhance transparency in military matters,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Netherlands, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
1

209

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Conscious that the value of the standardized reporting system would be further enhanced by a broader
participation of all Member States,
Noting that a periodic review of the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures could facilitate its further
development and maintain its continued relevance and operation, and recalling that, in its resolution 66/20, the General
Assembly recommended the establishment of a process for periodic reviews,
Recalling, in that regard, the report of the Secretary-General on ways and means to implement the guidelines
and recommendations for objective information on military matters, including, in particular, on how to strengthen and
broaden participation in the standardized reporting system,2
Recalling also the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the Operation and Further Development of
the United Nations Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military Expenditures on further ways and means to
implement the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters, including, in particular,
on how to strengthen and broaden participation in the standardized reporting system,3
Welcoming the interactive web platform of the Secretariat on military expenditures, which includes an online
reporting feature, thus increasing user-friendliness and facilitating the submission of reports,4 in accordance with
resolution 66/20,
Noting the efforts of several regional organizations to promote transparency of military expenditures, including
standardized annual exchanges of relevant information among their member States,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the Report on Military Expenditures under the current political and
economic circumstances,
Recalling that, in its resolution 66/20, the General Assembly recommended that, for the purpose of reporting by
Member States of their national military expenditures in the framework of the Report on Military Expenditures,
“military expenditures” be commonly understood to refer to all financial resources that a State spends on the uses and
functions of its military forces and information on military expenditures represents an actual outlay in current prices
and domestic currency,
Mindful of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including its Article 26,
1. Calls upon Member States, with a view to achieving the broadest possible participation, to provide the
Secretary-General, by 30 April annually, with a report on their military expenditures for the latest fiscal year for which
data are available, using, preferably and to the extent possible, one of the online reporting forms, including, if
appropriate, a nil report or the “single figure” report on military expenditures or any other format developed in the
context of similar reporting on military expenditures to other international or regional organizations;
2. Recommends the guidelines and recommendations for objective information on military matters2 to all
Member States for implementation, fully taking into account specific political, military and other conditions prevailing
in a region;
3. Invites Member States to supplement their reports with explanatory remarks regarding submitted data to
explain or clarify the figures provided in the reporting forms, such as the total military expenditures as a share of gross
domestic product, major changes from previous reports and any additional information reflecting their defence policy,
military strategies and doctrines;
4.
contact;

Also invites Member States to provide, with their annual report, information on their national points of

_______________
A/54/298.
A/66/89, A/66/89/Corr.1, A/66/89/Corr.2 and A/66/89/Corr.3.
4
See www.un.org/disarmament/milex.
2
3

210

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Encourages relevant international bodies and regional organizations to promote transparency of military
expenditures and to enhance complementarities among reporting systems, taking into account the particular
characteristics of each region, and to consider the possibility of an exchange of information with the United Nations;
6.

Takes note of the annual report of the Secretary-General;5

7.

Requests the Secretary-General, within available resources:

(a) To continue the practice of sending an annual note verbale to Member States requesting the submission
of their report on military expenditures;
(b) To circulate annually a note verbale to Member States detailing which reports on military expenditures
were submitted and are available online;
(c) To continue consultations with relevant international bodies, with a view to ascertaining requirements for
adjusting the present instrument in order to encourage wider participation, and to make recommendations, based on
the outcome of those consultations and taking into account the views of Member States, on necessary changes to the
content and structure of the standardized reporting system;
(d) To encourage relevant international bodies and organizations to promote transparency of military
expenditures and to consult with those bodies and organizations with emphasis on examining possibilities for
enhancing complementarities among international and regional reporting systems and for exchanging related
information between those bodies and the United Nations;
(e) To continue to foster further cooperation with relevant regional organizations, with a view to raising
awareness of the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures and its role as a confidence-building measure;
(f) To encourage the United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament in Africa, in Asia and the
Pacific and in Latin America and the Caribbean to assist Member States in their regions in enhancing their knowledge
of the standardized reporting system;
(g) To promote international and regional or subregional symposiums and training seminars and to support
the development of an online training course by the Secretariat, with the financial and technical support of interested
States, with a view to explaining the purpose of the standardized reporting system and facilitating the secure online
filing of the reports;
(h)

To report on experiences gained during such symposiums and training seminars;

(i) To provide, upon request, technical assistance to Member States lacking the capacity to report data and to
encourage Member States to voluntarily provide bilateral assistance to other Member States;
8.

Encourages Member States:

(a) To inform the Secretary-General about possible problems with the standardized reporting system and their
reasons for not submitting the requested data;
(b) To continue to provide the Secretary-General with their views and suggestions on ways and means to
improve the future functioning of and broadened participation in the standardized reporting system, including
necessary changes to its content and structure, as well as recommendations to facilitate its further development;
9. Decides to remain seized of the matter of the possible establishment of a process of periodic reviews of
the Report on Military Expenditures, taking into account the information referred to in paragraph 8 above;
10. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session, under the item entitled
“Reduction of military budgets”, the sub-item entitled “Objective information on military matters, including
transparency of military expenditures”.

_______________
5

A/74/155.

211

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 74/25
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 134 to 3, with 45 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/361, para. 7)6
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, Ukraine

74/25.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of
16 December 1971, and recalling also its resolutions 54/47 of 1 December 1999, 56/16 of 29 November 2001, 58/29
of 8 December 2003, 60/48 of 8 December 2005, 62/14 of 5 December 2007, 64/23 of 2 December 2009, 66/22 of
2 December 2011, 68/24 of 5 December 2013, 70/22 of 7 December 2015 and 72/21 of 4 December 2017 and other
relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, held in New
York from 2 to 13 July 1979,7
Recalling further paragraph 102 of the Final Document of the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Kuala Lumpur on 24 and 25 February 2003,8 in which it was noted,
inter alia, that the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean would continue his informal consultations on
the future work of the Committee,
Emphasizing the need to foster consensual approaches that are conducive to the pursuit of such endeavours,
Noting the initiatives taken by countries of the region to promote cooperation, in particular economic
cooperation, in the Indian Ocean area and the possible contribution of such initiatives to overall objectives of a zone
of peace,
Convinced that the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime users
of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would assist the progress of a mutually
beneficial dialogue to develop conditions of peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 45 and corrigendum (A/34/45 and A/34/45/Corr. 1).
8
A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
6

212

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Considering that greater efforts and more time are required to develop a focused discussion on practical
measures to ensure conditions of peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean region,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee,9
1.

Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean;9

2. Reiterates its conviction that the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the
major maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would greatly
facilitate the development of a mutually beneficial dialogue to advance peace, security and stability in the Indian
Ocean region;
3. Requests the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee to continue his informal consultations with the members of
the Committee and to report through the Committee to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render, within existing resources, all necessary assistance
to the Ad Hoc Committee, including the provision of summary records;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session the item entitled “Implementation
of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace”.
RESOLUTION 74/26
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/362, para. 7)10

74/26.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/53 of 10 December 1996 and 56/17 of 29 November 2001 and all its other relevant
resolutions, as well as those of the Organization of African Unity and of the African Union,
Recalling also the signing of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba) in Cairo on
11 April 1996,11
Recalling further the Cairo Declaration adopted on that occasion,12 in which it was emphasized that nuclearweapon-free zones, especially in regions of tension, such as the Middle East, enhance global and regional peace and
security,
Recalling the statement made by the President of the Security Council on behalf of the members of the Council
on 12 April 1996,13 in which the Council affirmed that the signature of the Treaty constituted an important contribution
by the African countries to the maintenance of international peace and security,
Considering that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, especially in the Middle East, would enhance
the security of Africa and the viability of the African nuclear-weapon-free zone,
1. Recalls with satisfaction the entry into force of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of
Pelindaba)11 on 15 July 2009;
2.

Calls upon African States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Treaty as soon as possible;

_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/74/29).
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Austria, Canada, Georgia, Haiti,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malta, Mexico, Nigeria (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of
African States), Portugal, Samoa and Turkey.
11
A/50/426, annex.
12
A/51/113-S/1996/276, annex.
13
S/PRST/1996/17; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1996 (S/INF/52).
9

10

213

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Recalls the convening of the first Conference of States Parties to the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba), on 4 November 2010, the second Conference of States Parties, on 12 and 13 November
2012, the third Conference of States Parties, on 29 and 30 May 2014, and the fourth Conference of States Parties,
on 14 and 15 March 2018, all held in Addis Ababa;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the nuclear-weapon States that have signed the Protocols to the Treaty11 that
concern them, and calls upon those that have not yet ratified the Protocols that concern them to do so as soon as
possible;
5. Calls upon the States contemplated in Protocol III to the Treaty that have not yet done so to take all
measures necessary to ensure the speedy application of the Treaty to territories for which they are, de jure or de facto,
internationally responsible and which lie within the limits of the geographical zone established in the Treaty;
6. Calls upon the African States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons14 that
have not yet done so to conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency
pursuant to the Treaty, thereby satisfying the requirements of article 9 (b) and annex II to the Treaty of Pelindaba, and
encourages them to conclude additional protocols to their safeguards agreements on the basis of the model protocol
approved by the Board of Governors of the Agency on 15 May 1997;
7. Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency for the diligence with which
they have rendered effective assistance to the signatories to the Treaty;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “African NuclearWeapon-Free Zone Treaty”.
RESOLUTION 74/27
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/451, para. 7)15

74/27.

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of
Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of
Tlatelolco)16 was opened for signature in Mexico City on 14 February 1967,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, it welcomed with special satisfaction the
Treaty of Tlatelolco as an event of historic significance in the efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and to promote international peace and security,
Recalling further that, in its preamble, the Treaty of Tlatelolco states that militarily denuclearized zones are not
an end in themselves but rather a means for achieving general and complete disarmament at a later stage,
Recalling that, in its preamble, the Treaty of Tlatelolco notes that the establishment of militarily denuclearized
zones is closely linked with the maintenance of peace and security in the respective regions and that the military
denuclearization of vast geographical zones, adopted by the sovereign decision of the States comprised therein, will
exercise a beneficial influence on other regions where similar conditions exist,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria,
Bahamas, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mexico, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay and Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of).
16
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
14
15

214

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Considering that, 52 years following its adoption, the Treaty of Tlatelolco remains a living instrument and a
source of inspiration for the creation of other nuclear-weapon-free zones,
Taking note of the proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone of peace by the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States at its second summit, held in Havana on 28 and 29 January 2014, and the
commitment undertaken in this context by the States of the region to continue to promote nuclear disarmament as a
priority objective,17
Highlighting the fact that the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which is in force for all 33 sovereign States of the region,
consolidated the first nuclear-weapon-free zone established in a densely populated region,
Recognizing the important contribution of the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga,18 Bangkok19 and Pelindaba20
and the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia, as well as the Antarctic Treaty21 and the declaration
by Mongolia of its nuclear-weapon-free status, to the achievement of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament,
Recalling all relevant United Nations resolutions in support of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
Highlighting the value of enhancing cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zones, including through the
holding of joint meetings of States parties, signatories and observers to the treaties establishing such zones,
Welcoming the convening of Conferences of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish NuclearWeapon-Free Zones and Mongolia and their contribution to achieving and maintaining a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Noting with satisfaction the adoption of its resolution 73/71 of 5 December 2018, in which it decided to convene
the fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zones and Mongolia as a one-day conference at United Nations
Headquarters in New York on 24 April 2020, and welcoming the offer by Mongolia to act as coordinator of the fourth
Conference and to conduct preparatory meetings and informal consultations,
Noting that the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, in its final document,22 encouraged the establishment of new nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among States of the region concerned and the fostering of cooperation and enhanced
consultation mechanisms among the existing nuclear-weapon-free zones through the establishment of concrete
measures, in order to fully implement the principles and objectives of the relevant nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties,
and commended the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean for its
leadership in this field,
Reaffirming the importance of the Agency as the appropriate legal and political forum for ensuring full
compliance with and implementation of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as well as cooperation with the entities of other
nuclear-weapon-free zones,
1. Welcomes the fact that the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the
Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco)16 is in force for all sovereign States of the region;
2. Notes with satisfaction that the year 2019 marks the fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force, on 25 April
1969, of the Treaty of Tlatelolco and of the establishment of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean, which will be commemorated during the twenty-sixth session of the General
Conference of the Agency;
3. Encourages once again States parties to Additional Protocols I and II to the Treaty of Tlatelolco16 to review
their interpretative declarations thereto, in accordance with action 9 of the Final Document of the 2010 Review

_______________
See A/68/914, annex.
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
19
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
20
A/50/426, annex.
21
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
22
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I), NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. II) and NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. III)).
17
18

215

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,23 reaffirming and recognizing
the legitimate interests of the States that comprise the nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America and the Caribbean
in receiving full and unequivocal security assurances from the nuclear-weapon States;
4. Encourages the States members of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean to continue the activities and efforts that they conduct jointly with the Agency, inter alia:
(a) To support the efforts that are being undertaken in a multilateral context to identify and seek effective
measures that favour compliance with disarmament and non-proliferation commitments;
(b) To enhance cooperation with States parties and signatories to treaties that establish nuclear-weapon-free
zones and Mongolia;
(c)

To promote activities on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation education;

5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session the item entitled “Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco)”.
RESOLUTION 74/28
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 163 to 10, with 6 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/363, para. 9)24
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Belarus, Cambodia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Myanmar, Palau

74/28.

Advancing responsible State behaviour in cyberspace in the context of international security

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/70 of 4 December 1998, 54/49 of 1 December 1999, 55/28 of 20 November 2000,
56/19 of 29 November 2001, 57/53 of 22 November 2002, 58/32 of 8 December 2003, 59/61 of 3 December 2004,
60/45 of 8 December 2005, 61/54 of 6 December 2006, 62/17 of 5 December 2007, 63/37 of 2 December 2008, 64/25
of 2 December 2009, 65/41 of 8 December 2010, 66/24 of 2 December 2011, 67/27 of 3 December 2012, 68/243 of

_______________
Ibid., vol. I (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow‑on actions, section I, entitled “Nuclear
disarmament”.
24
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
23

216

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

27 December 2013, 69/28 of 2 December 2014, 70/237 of 23 December 2015, 71/28 of 5 December 2016 and 73/266
of 22 December 2018, as well as its decision 72/512 of 4 December 2017,
Noting that considerable progress has been achieved in developing and applying the latest information
technologies and means of telecommunication,
Affirming that it sees in this progress the broadest positive opportunities for the further development of
civilization, the expansion of opportunities for cooperation for the common good of all States, the enhancement of the
creative potential of humankind and additional improvements in the circulation of information in the global
community,
Noting that the dissemination and use of information technologies and means affect the interests of the entire
international community and that optimum effectiveness is enhanced by broad international cooperation,
Confirming that information and communications technologies are dual-use technologies and can be used for
both legitimate and malicious purposes,
Stressing that it is in the interest of all States to promote the use of information and communications technologies
for peaceful purposes and to prevent conflict arising from the use of information and communications technologies,
Expressing concern that these technologies and means can potentially be used for purposes that are inconsistent
with the objectives of maintaining international stability and security and may adversely affect the integrity of the
infrastructure of States, to the detriment of their security in both civil and military fields,
Underscoring the need for enhanced coordination and cooperation among States in combating the criminal
misuse of information technologies,
Underlining the importance of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the use of information
and communications technologies,
Welcoming the effective work of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security and the 2010,25 201326 and 201527
reports transmitted by the Secretary-General,
Stressing the importance of the assessments and recommendations contained in the reports of the Group of
Governmental Experts,
Confirming the conclusions of the Group of Governmental Experts, in its 2013 and 2015 reports, that
international law, and in particular the Charter of the United Nations, is applicable and essential to maintaining
peace and stability and promoting an open, secure, stable, accessible and peaceful information and communications
technology environment, that voluntary and non-binding norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour of
States in the use of information and communications technologies can reduce risks to international peace, security
and stability, and that, given the unique attributes of such technologies, additional norms can be developed over
time,
Confirming also the conclusions of the Group of Governmental Experts that voluntary confidence-building
measures can promote trust and assurance among States and help to reduce the risk of conflict by increasing
predictability and reducing misperception and thereby make an important contribution to addressing the concerns of
States over the use of information and communications technologies by States and could be a significant step towards
greater international security,
Confirming further the conclusions of the Group of Governmental Experts that providing assistance to build
capacity in the area of information and communications technology security is also essential for international security,
by improving the capacity of States for cooperation and collective action and promoting the use of such technologies
for peaceful purposes,

_______________
A/65/201.
A/68/98.
27
A/70/174.
25
26

217

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Stressing that, while States have a primary responsibility for maintaining a secure and peaceful information and
communications technology environment, effective international cooperation would benefit from identifying
mechanisms for the participation, as appropriate, of the private sector, academia and civil society organizations,
1.

Calls upon Member States:

(a) To be guided in their use of information and communications technologies by the 2010,25 201326 and
2015 reports of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International Security;
27

(b) To support the implementation of cooperative measures, as identified in the reports of the Group of
Governmental Experts, to address the threats emerging in this field and ensure an open, interoperable, reliable and
secure information and communications technology environment consistent with the need to preserve the free flow
of information;
2. Invites all Member States, taking into account the assessments and recommendations contained in the
reports of the Group of Governmental Experts, to continue to inform the Secretary-General of their views and
assessments on the following questions:
(a) Efforts taken at the national level to strengthen information security and promote international cooperation
in this field;
(b)

The content of the concepts mentioned in the reports of the Group of Governmental Experts;

3. Welcomes the commencement of the work of the Group of Governmental Experts established by the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 73/266, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, whose mandate
is set out in paragraph 3 of that resolution;
4. Also welcomes the commencement of the work of the Open-ended Working Group on Developments in
the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Developments
in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security”.
RESOLUTION 74/29
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 129 to 6, with 45 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/363, para. 9)28
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Georgia, Israel, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Malawi, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) and Zimbabwe.
28

218

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey

74/29.

Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international
security

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/103 of 9 December 1981, 43/78 H of 7 December 1988, 53/70 of 4 December 1998,
54/49 of 1 December 1999, 55/28 of 20 November 2000, 56/19 of 29 November 2001, 57/53 of 22 November 2002,
58/32 of 8 December 2003, 59/61 of 3 December 2004, 60/45 of 8 December 2005, 61/54 of 6 December 2006, 62/17
of 5 December 2007, 63/37 of 2 December 2008, 64/25 of 2 December 2009, 65/41 of 8 December 2010, 66/24 of
2 December 2011, 67/27 of 3 December 2012, 68/243 of 27 December 2013, 69/28 of 2 December 2014, 70/237 of
23 December 2015, 71/28 of 5 December 2016 and 73/27 of 5 December 2018,
Underscoring the aspirations of the international community to the peaceful use of information and
communications technologies (ICTs) for the common good of humankind and to further the sustainable development
of all countries, irrespective of their scientific and technological development,
Stressing that it is in the interest of States to promote the use of ICTs for peaceful purposes and in preventing
conflict arising from the use of ICTs,
Expressing concern that a number of States are developing ICT capabilities for military purposes and the use of
ICTs in future conflicts between States is becoming more likely,
Considering that it is necessary to prevent the use of information resources or technologies for criminal or
terrorist purposes,
Underlining the importance of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the use of information
and communications technologies,
Noting that capacity-building is essential for cooperation of States and confidence-building in the field of
ICT security,
Recognizing that some States may require assistance in their efforts to bridge the divide in the security of ICTs
and their use,
Affirming that capacity-building measures should seek to promote the use of ICTs for peaceful purposes,
Noting the leading role of the United Nations in promoting dialogue among Member States to develop common
understandings on the security of and in the use of ICTs, as well as in developing common understandings on the
international legal regulation of the activities of States in the ICT field and norms, rules and principles for responsible
State behaviour in this sphere, and that the United Nations should encourage regional efforts, promote confidencebuilding and transparency measures and support capacity-building and the dissemination of best practices,
Recognizing the importance of the efforts made in this direction by the Group of Governmental Experts on
Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security in
previous years,
Stressing the need to ensure the integrity and continuity of the negotiation process on security in the use of ICTs
under United Nations auspices,
1. Welcomes the launch of the negotiation process in the format of the United Nations Open-ended Working
Group on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security,
and also welcomes the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International Security;
2. Underlines that the Open-ended Working Group and the Group of Governmental Experts are important
independent mechanisms under United Nations auspices, which should conduct their work in accordance with their
219

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

mandates in a constructive and pragmatic manner, adding to each other’s efforts, and their results should contribute
to the implementation of the tasks of maintaining international peace and security in the use of ICTs;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Developments
in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security”.
RESOLUTION 74/30
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 175 to 2, with 3 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/364, para. 7)29
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Liberia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/30.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/71 of
10 December 1976, 32/82 of 12 December 1977, 33/64 of 14 December 1978, 34/77 of 11 December 1979, 35/147
of 12 December 1980, 36/87 A and B of 9 December 1981, 37/75 of 9 December 1982, 38/64 of 15 December 1983,
39/54 of 12 December 1984, 40/82 of 12 December 1985, 41/48 of 3 December 1986, 42/28 of 30 November 1987,
43/65 of 7 December 1988, 44/108 of 15 December 1989, 45/52 of 4 December 1990, 46/30 of 6 December 1991, 47/48
of 9 December 1992, 48/71 of 16 December 1993, 49/71 of 15 December 1994, 50/66 of 12 December 1995, 51/41
of 10 December 1996, 52/34 of 9 December 1997, 53/74 of 4 December 1998, 54/51 of 1 December 1999, 55/30 of
20 November 2000, 56/21 of 29 November 2001, 57/55 of 22 November 2002, 58/34 of 8 December 2003, 59/63 of
3 December 2004, 60/52 of 8 December 2005, 61/56 of 6 December 2006, 62/18 of 5 December 2007, 63/38
of 2 December 2008, 64/26 of 2 December 2009, 65/42 of 8 December 2010, 66/25 of 2 December 2011, 67/28 of
3 December 2012, 68/27 of 5 December 2013, 69/29 of 2 December 2014, 70/24 of 7 December 2015, 71/29 of
5 December 2016, 72/24 of 4 December 2017 and 73/28 of 5 December 2018 on the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also the recommendations for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East consistent with paragraphs 60 to 63, and in particular paragraph 63 (d), of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,30
Emphasizing the basic provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions, in which all parties directly concerned
are called upon to consider taking the practical and urgent steps required for the implementation of the proposal to
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East and, pending and during the establishment of

_______________
29
30

220

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Egypt.
Resolution S-10/2.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

such a zone, to declare solemnly that they will refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, acquiring or in any other
way possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices and from permitting the stationing of nuclear weapons
on their territory by any third party, to agree to place their nuclear facilities under International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards and to declare their support for the establishment of the zone and to deposit such declarations with the
Security Council for consideration, as appropriate,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all States to acquire and develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
Emphasizing the need for appropriate measures on the question of the prohibition of military attacks on nuclear
facilities,
Bearing in mind the consensus reached by the General Assembly since its thirty-fifth session that the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East would greatly enhance international
peace and security,
Desirous of building on that consensus so that substantial progress can be made towards establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Welcoming all initiatives leading to general and complete disarmament, including in the region of the Middle East,
and in particular on the establishment therein of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons,
Noting the peace negotiations in the Middle East, which should be of a comprehensive nature and represent an
appropriate framework for the peaceful settlement of contentious issues in the region,
Recognizing the importance of credible regional security, including the establishment of a mutually verifiable
nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Emphasizing the essential role of the United Nations in the establishment of a mutually verifiable nuclearweapon-free zone,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 73/28,31
1. Urges all parties directly concerned seriously to consider taking the practical and urgent steps required for
the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and, as a means of promoting this objective, invites
the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;32
2. Calls upon all countries of the region that have not yet done so, pending the establishment of the zone, to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
3. Takes note of resolution GC(63)/RES/13, adopted on 19 September 2019 by the General Conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency at its sixty-third regular session, concerning the application of Agency
safeguards in the Middle East;
4. Notes the importance of the ongoing bilateral Middle East peace negotiations and the activities of the
multilateral Working Group on Arms Control and Regional Security in promoting mutual confidence and security in
the Middle East, including the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
5. Invites all countries of the region, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region
of the Middle East, to declare their support for establishing such a zone, consistent with paragraph 63 (d) of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,30 and to deposit those declarations with the Security
Council;
6. Also invites those countries, pending the establishment of the zone, not to develop, produce, test or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or permit the stationing on their territories, or territories under their control, of
nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices;
7. Invites the nuclear-weapon States and all other States to render their assistance in the establishment of the
zone and at the same time to refrain from any action that runs counter to both the letter and the spirit of the present
resolution;

_______________
31
32

A/74/157 (Part I).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

221

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 73/28;31

9. Invites all parties to consider the appropriate means that may contribute towards the goal of general and
complete disarmament and the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the region of the
Middle East;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to pursue consultations with the States of the region and other
concerned States, in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 46/30 and taking into account the evolving situation
in the region, and to seek from those States their views on the measures outlined in chapters III and IV of the study
annexed to the report of the Secretary-General of 10 October 199033 or other relevant measures, in order to move
towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East”.
RESOLUTION 74/31
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 122 to none, with 64 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/365, para. 7)34
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Central African Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe

74/31.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non‑nuclear-weapon States against
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the world with regard to ensuring lasting
security for their peoples,
Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest threat to humankind and to the survival of civilization,

_______________
A/45/435.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Colombia, Cuba, Egypt, Eritrea, Honduras, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
33
34

222

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting that the renewed interest in nuclear disarmament should be translated into concrete actions for the
achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove
the danger of nuclear war,
Determined to abide strictly by the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations on the non-use of
force or threat of force,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of non‑nuclear-weapon States need to
be safeguarded against the use or threat of use of force, including the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the international
community to develop effective measures and arrangements to ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures and arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons can contribute positively to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, the
first special session devoted to disarmament,35 in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue efforts to
conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons, and desirous of promoting the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Final Document,
Recalling the relevant parts of the special report of the Committee on Disarmament36 submitted to the General
Assembly at its twelfth special session, the second special session devoted to disarmament,37 and of the special report
of the Conference on Disarmament submitted to the Assembly at its fifteenth special session, the third special session
devoted to disarmament,38 as well as the report of the Conference on its 1992 session,39
Recalling also paragraph 12 of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, contained in
the annex to its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980, in which it is stated, inter alia, that all efforts should be exerted
by the Committee on Disarmament urgently to negotiate with a view to reaching agreement on effective international
arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting the in-depth negotiations undertaken in the Conference on Disarmament and its Ad Hoc Committee on
Effective International Arrangements to Assure Non‑Nuclear-Weapon States against the Use or Threat of Use of
Nuclear Weapons,40 with a view to reaching agreement on this question,
Taking note of the proposals submitted under the item in the Conference on Disarmament, including the drafts
of an international convention,
Taking note also of the relevant decision of the Thirteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Kuala Lumpur on 24 and 25 February 2003,41 which was reiterated at the Seventeenth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held on Margarita Island, Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, from 13 to 18 September 2016, as well as the relevant recommendations of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation,
Taking note further of the unilateral declarations made by all the nuclear-weapon States on their policies of
non-use or non-threat of use of nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear-weapon States,

_______________
Resolution S-10/2.
The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.
37
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/S‑12/2), sect. III.C.
38
Ibid., Fifteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/S-15/2), sect. III.F.
39
Ibid., Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27), sect. III.F.
40
Ibid., Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/48/27), sect. III.E.
41
See A/57/759-S/2003/332, annex I.
35
36

223

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the
elaboration of an international convention to assure non‑nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, as well as the difficulties pointed out in evolving a common approach acceptable to all,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 984 (1995) of 11 April 1995 and the views expressed on it,
Recalling its relevant resolutions adopted in previous years, in particular resolutions 45/54 of 4 December 1990,
46/32 of 6 December 1991, 47/50 of 9 December 1992, 48/73 of 16 December 1993, 49/73 of 15 December 1994,
50/68 of 12 December 1995, 51/43 of 10 December 1996, 52/36 of 9 December 1997, 53/75 of 4 December 1998,
54/52 of 1 December 1999, 55/31 of 20 November 2000, 56/22 of 29 November 2001, 57/56 of 22 November 2002,
58/35 of 8 December 2003, 59/64 of 3 December 2004, 60/53 of 8 December 2005, 61/57 of 6 December 2006, 62/19
of 5 December 2007, 63/39 of 2 December 2008, 64/27 of 2 December 2009, 65/43 of 8 December 2010, 66/26 of
2 December 2011, 67/29 of 3 December 2012, 68/28 of 5 December 2013, 69/30 of 2 December 2014, 70/25 of
7 December 2015, 71/30 of 5 December 2016, 72/25 of 4 December 2017 and 73/29 of 5 December 2018,
1. Reaffirms the urgent need to reach an early agreement on effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Conference on Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the
idea of an international convention to assure non‑nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons, although the difficulties with regard to evolving a common approach acceptable to all have also been
pointed out;
3. Appeals to all States, especially the nuclear-weapon States, to work actively towards an early agreement
on a common approach and, in particular, on a common formula that could be included in an international instrument
of a legally binding character;
4. Recommends that further intensive efforts be devoted to the search for such a common approach or
common formula and that the various alternative approaches, including, in particular, those considered in the
Conference on Disarmament, be further explored in order to overcome the difficulties;
5. Also recommends that the Conference on Disarmament actively continue intensive negotiations with a
view to reaching early agreement and concluding effective international agreements to assure the non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, taking into account the widespread support for the
conclusion of an international convention and giving consideration to any other proposals designed to secure the same
objective;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Conclusion of
effective international arrangements to assure non‑nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons”.
RESOLUTION 74/32
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 183 to 2, with no abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/366, para. 11)42
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mongolia,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
42

224

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South
Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: None

74/32.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the common interest of all humankind in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Reaffirming the will of all States that the exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other
celestial bodies, shall be for peaceful purposes and shall be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all countries,
irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific development,
Reaffirming also the provisions of articles III and IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,43
Recalling the obligation of all States to observe the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations regarding
the use or threat of use of force in their international relations, including in their space activities,
Reaffirming paragraph 80 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,44 in
which it is stated that, in order to prevent an arms race in outer space, further measures should be taken and appropriate
international negotiations held in accordance with the spirit of the Treaty,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this issue, the most recent of which is resolution 73/30 of 5 December
2018, and taking note of the proposals submitted to the General Assembly at its tenth special session and at its regular
sessions and of the recommendations made to the competent organs of the United Nations and to the Conference on
Disarmament,
Recognizing that the prevention of an arms race in outer space would avert a grave danger for international
peace and security,
Emphasizing the paramount importance of strict compliance with existing arms limitation and disarmament
agreements relevant to outer space, including bilateral agreements, and with the existing legal regime concerning the
use of outer space,
Considering that wide participation in the legal regime applicable to outer space could contribute to enhancing
its effectiveness,
Noting that the Ad Hoc Committee on the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, taking into account its
previous efforts since its establishment in 1985 and seeking to enhance its functioning in qualitative terms, continued
the examination and identification of various issues, existing agreements and existing proposals, as well as future
initiatives relevant to the prevention of an arms race in outer space, and that this contributed to a better understanding
of a number of problems and to a clearer perception of the various positions,

_______________
43
44

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution S-10/2.

225

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting also that there were no objections in principle in the Conference on Disarmament to the re-establishment
of the Ad Hoc Committee, subject to re‑examination of the mandate contained in the decision of the Conference on
Disarmament of 13 February 1992,45
Emphasizing the mutually complementary nature of bilateral and multilateral efforts for the prevention of an
arms race in outer space, and hoping that concrete results will emerge from those efforts as soon as possible,
Convinced that further measures should be examined in the search for effective and verifiable bilateral and
multilateral agreements in order to prevent an arms race in outer space, including the weaponization of outer space,
Stressing that the growing use of outer space increases the need for greater transparency and better information
on the part of the international community,
Recalling, in this context, its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 45/55 B of 4 December 1990, 47/51
of 9 December 1992 and 48/74 A of 16 December 1993, in which, inter alia, it reaffirmed the importance of
confidence-building measures as a means conducive to ensuring the attainment of the objective of the prevention of
an arms race in outer space,
Conscious of the benefits of confidence- and security-building measures in the military field,
Recognizing that negotiations for the conclusion of an international agreement or agreements to prevent an arms
race in outer space remain a priority task of the Conference on Disarmament and that the concrete proposals on
confidence-building measures could form an integral part of such agreements,
Noting with satisfaction the constructive, structured and focused debate on the prevention of an arms race in
outer space at the Conference on Disarmament each year from 2009 to 2019,
Noting the introduction by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference on Disarmament of the draft
treaty on the prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of the threat or use of force against outer
space objects in 2008 and the submission of its updated version in 2014,46
Welcoming the comprehensive and substantive discussions of the Group of Governmental Experts that was
convened in 2018 and 2019 pursuant to its resolution 72/250 of 24 December 2017,
Taking note of the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to establish for its 2009 session a working group
to discuss, substantially, without limitation, all issues related to the prevention of an arms race in outer space, and the
decision to establish for its 2018 session a subsidiary body on the prevention of an arms race in outer space,
1. Reaffirms the importance and urgency of preventing an arms race in outer space and the readiness of all
States to contribute to that common objective, in conformity with the provisions of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies;43
2. Reaffirms its recognition, as stated in the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Prevention of an Arms
Race in Outer Space, that the legal regime applicable to outer space by itself does not guarantee the prevention of an
arms race in outer space, that the regime plays a significant role in the prevention of an arms race in that environment,
that there is a need to consolidate and reinforce that regime and enhance its effectiveness and that it is important to
comply strictly with existing agreements, both bilateral and multilateral;
3. Emphasizes the necessity of further measures with appropriate and effective provisions for verification to
prevent an arms race in outer space;
4. Calls upon all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to contribute actively to the
objective of the peaceful use of outer space and of the prevention of an arms race in outer space and to refrain from
actions contrary to that objective and to the relevant existing treaties in the interest of maintaining international peace
and security and promoting international cooperation;

_______________
45
46

226

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27), para. 76.
See CD/1839 and CD/1985.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Reiterates that the Conference on Disarmament, as the sole multilateral disarmament negotiating forum,
has the primary role in the negotiation of a multilateral agreement or agreements, as appropriate, on the prevention of
an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;
6. Invites the Conference on Disarmament to establish a working group under its agenda item entitled
“Prevention of an arms race in outer space” as early as possible;
7. Recognizes, in this respect, the growing convergence of views on the elaboration of measures designed to
strengthen transparency, confidence and security in the peaceful uses of outer space, without prejudice to efforts
towards the conclusion of an effective and verifiable multilateral agreement or agreements on the prevention of an
arms race in outer space;
8. Urges States conducting activities in outer space, as well as States interested in conducting such activities,
to keep the Conference on Disarmament informed of the progress of bilateral and multilateral negotiations on the
matter, if any, so as to facilitate its work;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Prevention of
an arms race in outer space”.
RESOLUTION 74/33
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 128 to 14, with 38 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/366, para. 11)47
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Estonia, France, Georgia, Haiti, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey

74/33.

No first placement of weapons in outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 69/32 of 2 December 2014, 70/27 of 7 December 2015, 71/32 of 5 December 2016,
72/27 of 4 December 2017 and 73/31 of 5 December 2018, and its resolutions 45/55 B of 4 December 1990 and
48/74 B of 16 December 1993, which, inter alia, confirm the importance of transparency and confidence-building
measures as a means conducive to ensuring the attainment of the objective of preventing an arms race in outer space,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burundi, Cambodia, Central African Republic, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Guatemala, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
47

227

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recognizing the common interest of all humankind in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space and of outer space turning into an arena
for military confrontation, and bearing in mind the importance of articles III and IV of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies,48
Conscious that the prevention of an arms race in outer space would avert a grave danger to international peace
and security,
Reaffirming that practical measures should be examined and taken in the search for agreements to prevent an
arms race in outer space in a common effort towards a community of shared future for humankind,
Emphasizing the paramount importance of strict compliance with the existing legal regime providing for the
peaceful use of outer space,
Reaffirming its recognition that the legal regime applicable to outer space by itself does not guarantee prevention
of an arms race in outer space and that there is a need to consolidate and reinforce that regime,
Convinced that such measures could critically improve conditions for efficiently addressing the threat of an arms
race in outer space, including the placement of weapons in outer space,
Welcoming, in this regard, the draft treaty on the prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of
the threat or use of force against outer space objects, introduced by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference
on Disarmament in 2008,49 and the submission of its updated version in 2014,50
Considering that transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities are an integral part of
the draft treaty referred to above,
Stressing the importance of the political statements made by a number of States51 that they would not be the first
to place weapons in outer space,
1. Reaffirms the importance and urgency of the objective of preventing an arms race in outer space and the
willingness of States to contribute to reaching this common goal;
2. Reiterates that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral negotiating forum on this
subject,52 has the primary role in the negotiation of a multilateral agreement, or agreements, as appropriate, on the
prevention of an arms race in outer space in all its aspects;
3. Urges an early commencement of substantive work based on the updated draft treaty on the prevention of
the placement of weapons in outer space and of the threat or use of force against outer space objects,50 introduced by
China and the Russian Federation at the Conference on Disarmament in 2008,49 under the agenda item entitled
“Prevention of an arms race in outer space”;
4. Stresses that, while such an agreement is not yet concluded, other measures may contribute to ensuring
that weapons are not placed in outer space;
5. Encourages all States, especially spacefaring nations, to consider the possibility of upholding, as
appropriate, a political commitment not to be the first to place weapons in outer space;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Prevention of an arms race in outer space”, the sub-item entitled “No first placement of weapons in outer space”.

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
See CD/1839.
50
See CD/1985.
51
Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Cambodia, Cuba, Ecuador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) and Viet Nam.
52
See resolution S-10/2.
48
49

228

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 74/34
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 131 to 6, with 45 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/366, para. 11)53 and as amended in A/74/L.27
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey

74/34.

Further practical measures for the prevention of an arms race in outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 71/31 and 71/32 of 5 December 2016, 71/90 of 6 December 2016, 72/250 of
24 December 2017, 73/6 of 26 October 2018 and 73/91 of 7 December 2018 and its decision 73/512 of 5 December
2018, as well as its other resolutions and decisions on this subject,
Recognizing the catastrophic consequences of the weaponization of outer space or any military conflicts in outer
space and that the prevention of an arms race in outer space would avert a grave danger for international peace and
security,
Emphasizing the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,54
Bearing in mind that all Member States, in particular those with major space capabilities, should contribute
actively to the prevention of an arms race in outer space with a view to promoting and strengthening international
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, with the objective of shaping a community
of shared future for humankind,
Recognizing that, while the existing international treaties related to outer space and the legal regime provided
for therein play a positive role in regulating outer space activities, they are unable to fully prevent the placement of
weapons in outer space and therefore avert an arms race there, and that there is a need to consolidate and reinforce
this regime,
Expressing serious concern over the plans declared by certain States that include the placement of weapons, in
particular strike combat systems, in outer space,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Burundi, Central African Republic, China, Cuba, Egypt, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, South Africa, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
54
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
53

229

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Convinced that further measures should be examined in the search for effective and verifiable bilateral and
multilateral agreements in order to prevent the weaponization of outer space and, as a consequence, an arms race in
outer space,
Welcoming, in this regard, the draft treaty on the prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of
the threat or use of force against outer space objects, introduced by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference
on Disarmament in 2008,55 and the submission of its updated version in 2014,56
Stressing the importance of the political statements made by a number of States57 that they would not be the first
to place weapons in outer space,
Recognizing the primary role and responsibility of the Conference on Disarmament in the negotiation of a
multilateral agreement or agreements on the prevention of an arms race in outer space,
1. Welcomes the deliberations held in 2018 and 2019 by the Group of Governmental Experts on Further
Practical Measures for the Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, which is tasked with considering and making
recommendations on substantial elements of an international legally binding instrument on the prevention of an arms
race in outer space, including, inter alia, on the prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space;
2. Emphasizes that the work of the Group of Governmental Experts has constituted an important contribution
to international efforts to conclude the above-mentioned international legally binding instrument;
3. Recommends that the work of the Group of Governmental Experts be taken into account in the search for
further practical measures for the prevention of an arms race in outer space, in particular in the course of future
negotiations at the Conference on Disarmament on the international legally binding instrument in this regard;
4. Requests the former Chair of the Group of Governmental Experts to report to the relevant multilateral
forums, including the First Committee of the General Assembly, the Conference on Disarmament, the Disarmament
Commission and the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, on the work done by the Group;
5. Urges the international community to continue its efforts aimed at preventing an arms race, including the
placement of weapons, in outer space, with a view to maintaining international peace and strengthening global
security;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Prevention of an arms race in outer space”, the sub-item entitled “Further practical measures for the prevention of an
arms race in outer space”.
RESOLUTION 74/35
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/367, para. 7)58

74/35.

Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that scientific and technological developments can have both civilian and military applications and
that progress in science and technology for civilian applications needs to be maintained and encouraged,

_______________
See CD/1839.
See CD/1985.
57
Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Cambodia, Cuba, Ecuador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) and Viet Nam.
58
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Brazil, Canada, Croatia, Finland, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malta, Mauritius, Netherlands, Norway, Paraguay,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.
55
56

230

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Underlining the keen interest of the international community to keep abreast of the latest developments in
science and technology of relevance to international security and disarmament and to channel scientific and
technological developments for beneficial purposes,
Mindful of the need to regulate the transfer of technologies for peaceful uses, in accordance with relevant
international obligations, to address the risk of proliferation by States or non-State actors,
Acknowledging the need to continue the exchange of technologies for peaceful uses, including in accordance
with relevant international obligations,
Mindful of the rights of States, reflected in relevant international agreements, regarding the development,
production, transfer and use of technologies for peaceful purposes, in accordance with relevant international
obligations, as well as the need for all Member States to fulfil their obligations in relation to arms control and
disarmament and to prevent proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery,
Cognizant of the discussions on developments in science and technology at the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and within the meetings of experts on science
and technology under the 2018–2020 intersessional programme established by the 2017 Meeting of the States Parties
to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction,
Cognizant also of the discussions in the Conference on Disarmament in 2018 under its subsidiary body 5,
Mindful of the discussions in other forums, such as the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, on the
long-term sustainability of outer space activities and on the prevention of an arms race in outer space in the United
Nations disarmament machinery,
Noting the discussions on various dimensions of emerging technologies under the framework of the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects,59 and welcoming the discussions and progress made by the
Group of Governmental Experts on lethal autonomous weapons systems during its 2018 and 2019 sessions,
Noting also the discussions within the United Nations and the specialized agencies on developments in the field
of information and communications technologies, including in the context of international security,
Acknowledging that the accelerating pace of technological change necessitates a system-wide assessment of the
potential impact of developments in science and technology on international security and disarmament, with due
regard to avoiding duplication and complementing efforts already under way in United Nations entities and in the
framework of the relevant international conventions,
Noting the discussions on current developments in science and technology and their potential impact on
international security and disarmament efforts in the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters during its sixty-ninth
and seventieth sessions, in 2018,
1. Invites Member States to continue efforts to apply developments in science and technology for
disarmament-related purposes, including the verification of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation
instruments, and to make disarmament-related technologies available to interested States;
2. Calls upon Member States to remain vigilant in understanding new and emerging developments in science
and technology that could imperil international security, and underlines the importance of Member States engaging
with experts from industry, the research community and civil society in addressing this challenge;
3. Welcomes the convening, from voluntary contributions, of a one-day focused seminar on the role of
science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament, by the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research in Geneva in 2019, as mandated in General Assembly resolution 73/32 of 5 December 2018;

_______________
59

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.

231

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Takes note of the updated report of the Secretary-General on current developments in science and
technology and their potential impact on international security and disarmament efforts,60 with a section containing
submissions from Member States giving their views on the matter;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session an updated
report on the matter;
6. Encourages the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters to continue its discussions on current
developments in science and technology and their potential impact on international security and disarmament efforts;
7. Encourages Member States to organize events such as conferences, seminars, workshops and exhibitions,
at the national, regional and international levels, on the role of science and technology in the context of international
security and disarmament, in order to facilitate multilateral dialogue, as well as dialogue among relevant stakeholders,
on current developments in science and technology and their potential impact on international security and
disarmament efforts;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Role of science
and technology in the context of international security and disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 74/36
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 118 to 43, with 19 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)61
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Armenia, Austria, China, Eswatini, Finland, Georgia, India, Japan, Liechtenstein, Mali, Pakistan,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Switzerland, Tonga, Turkey, Zimbabwe

74/36.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its various resolutions in the field of nuclear disarmament, including resolutions 60/72 of 8 December
2005, 62/24 of 5 December 2007, 64/31 of 2 December 2009, 66/28 of 2 December 2011, 68/35 of 5 December 2013,
69/43 and 69/48 of 2 December 2014, 70/38 of 7 December 2015 and 72/29 of 4 December 2017,

_______________
60
61

232

A/74/122 and A/74/122/Add.1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the Islamic Republic of Iran.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Bearing in mind its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June 1968, the annex to which contains the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,62
Noting the provisions of article VIII, paragraph 3, of the Treaty regarding the convening of review conferences
at five-year intervals,
Recalling its resolution 50/70 Q of 12 December 1995, in which the General Assembly noted that the States
parties to the Treaty affirmed the need to continue to move with determination towards the full realization and effective
implementation of the provisions of the Treaty, and accordingly adopted a set of principles and objectives,
Recalling also that, on 11 May 1995, the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons adopted three decisions on, respectively, strengthening the review process
for the Treaty, principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and extension of the Treaty,63
Reaffirming the resolution on the Middle East adopted on 11 May 1995 by the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference,63 in which the Conference reaffirmed the importance of the early realization of universal adherence to
the Treaty and placement of nuclear facilities under full-scope International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Reaffirming also its resolution 55/33 D of 20 November 2000, in which the General Assembly welcomed the
adoption by consensus on 19 May 2000 of the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,64 including, in particular, the documents entitled “Review of
the operation of the Treaty, taking into account the decisions and the resolution adopted by the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference” and “Improving the effectiveness of the strengthened review process for the Treaty”,65
Taking into consideration the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, in the Final Document of
the 2000 Review Conference, to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear
disarmament, to which all States parties to the Treaty are committed under article VI of the Treaty,
Expressing concern that the ninth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, held from 27 April to 22 May 2015, was not able to reach agreement on a substantive final
document,
1. Recalls that the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons reaffirmed the continued validity of the practical steps agreed to in the Final Document of the 2000 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;66
2. Determines to pursue practical steps for systematic and progressive efforts to implement article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons62 and paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the decision on principles and
objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;63
3. Calls for practical steps, as agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be taken by all nuclear-weapon States, that would lead to nuclear
disarmament in a way that promotes international stability and, based on the principle of undiminished security
for all:
(a)

Further efforts to be made by the nuclear-weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals unilaterally;

(b) Increased transparency by the nuclear-weapon States with regard to nuclear weapons capabilities and the
implementation of agreements pursuant to article VI of the Treaty and as a voluntary confidence-building measure to
support further progress in nuclear disarmament;

_______________
See also United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)/Corr.2), annex.
64
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II), NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part III) and NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part IV)).
65
Ibid., vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I.
66
Ibid., section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
62
63

233

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(c) The further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on unilateral initiatives and as an integral
part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process;
(d)

Concrete agreed measures to reduce further the operational status of nuclear weapons systems;

(e) A diminishing role for nuclear weapons in security policies so as to minimize the risk that these weapons
will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total elimination;
(f) The engagement, as soon as appropriate, of all the nuclear-weapon States in the process leading to the
total elimination of their nuclear weapons;
4. Notes that the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences agreed that legally binding security assurances by the
five nuclear-weapon States to the non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Treaty strengthen the nuclear
non-proliferation regime;
5. Urges the States parties to the Treaty to follow up on the implementation of the nuclear disarmament
obligations under the Treaty agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences within the framework of
review conferences and their preparatory committees;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled
“General and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed
to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons”.
RESOLUTION 74/37
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)67

74/37.

Regional disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/58 P of 4 December 1990, 46/36 I of 6 December 1991, 47/52 J of 9 December
1992, 48/75 I of 16 December 1993, 49/75 N of 15 December 1994, 50/70 K of 12 December 1995, 51/45 K of
10 December 1996, 52/38 P of 9 December 1997, 53/77 O of 4 December 1998, 54/54 N of 1 December 1999,
55/33 O of 20 November 2000, 56/24 H of 29 November 2001, 57/76 of 22 November 2002, 58/38 of 8 December
2003, 59/89 of 3 December 2004, 60/63 of 8 December 2005, 61/80 of 6 December 2006, 62/38 of 5 December 2007,
63/43 of 2 December 2008, 64/41 of 2 December 2009, 65/45 of 8 December 2010, 66/36 of 2 December 2011, 67/57
of 3 December 2012, 68/54 of 5 December 2013, 69/45 of 2 December 2014, 70/43 of 7 December 2015, 71/40 of
5 December 2016, 72/34 of 4 December 2017 and 73/33 of 5 December 2018 on regional disarmament,
Believing that the efforts of the international community to move towards the ideal of general and complete
disarmament are guided by the inherent human desire for genuine peace and security, the elimination of the danger of
war and the release of economic, intellectual and other resources for peaceful pursuits,
Affirming the abiding commitment of all States to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations in the conduct of their international relations,
Noting that essential guidelines for progress towards general and complete disarmament were adopted at the
tenth special session of the General Assembly,68

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Bangladesh, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia and Turkey.
68
Resolution S-10/2.
67

234

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note of the guidelines and recommendations for regional approaches to disarmament within the context
of global security adopted by the Disarmament Commission at its 1993 substantive session,69
Welcoming the prospects of genuine progress in the field of disarmament engendered in recent years as a result
of negotiations between the two super-Powers,
Taking note of the recent proposals for disarmament at the regional and subregional levels,
Recognizing the importance of confidence-building measures for regional and international peace and security,
Convinced that endeavours by countries to promote regional disarmament, taking into account the specific
characteristics of each region and in accordance with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of
armaments, would enhance the security of all States and would thus contribute to international peace and security by
reducing the risk of regional conflicts,
1. Stresses that sustained efforts are needed, within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament and
under the umbrella of the United Nations, to make progress on the entire range of disarmament issues;
2. Affirms that global and regional approaches to disarmament complement each other and should therefore
be pursued simultaneously to promote regional and international peace and security;
3. Calls upon States to conclude agreements, wherever possible, for nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament
and confidence-building measures at the regional and subregional levels;
4. Welcomes the initiatives towards disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and security undertaken by some
countries at the regional and subregional levels;
5. Supports and encourages efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building measures at the regional and
subregional levels to ease regional tensions and to further disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation measures at the
regional and subregional levels;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Regional disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 74/38
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 185 to 1, with 2 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)70
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and

_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Bangladesh, Belarus, Ecuador, Mozambique,
Pakistan, Peru, Syrian Arab Republic and Ukraine.
69
70

235

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: India
Abstaining: Bhutan, Russian Federation

74/38.

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 J of 16 December 1993, 49/75 O of 15 December 1994, 50/70 L of 12 December
1995, 51/45 Q of 10 December 1996, 52/38 Q of 9 December 1997, 53/77 P of 4 December 1998, 54/54 M of
1 December 1999, 55/33 P of 20 November 2000, 56/24 I of 29 November 2001, 57/77 of 22 November 2002, 58/39
of 8 December 2003, 59/88 of 3 December 2004, 60/75 of 8 December 2005, 61/82 of 6 December 2006, 62/44 of
5 December 2007, 63/44 of 2 December 2008, 64/42 of 2 December 2009, 65/46 of 8 December 2010, 66/37
of 2 December 2011, 67/62 of 3 December 2012, 68/56 of 5 December 2013, 69/47 of 2 December 2014, 70/44 of
7 December 2015, 71/41 of 5 December 2016, 72/35 of 4 December 2017 and 73/34 of 5 December 2018,
Recognizing the crucial role of conventional arms control in promoting regional and international peace and
security,
Recognizing also the importance of equitable representation of women in arms control discussions and
negotiations,
Convinced that conventional arms control needs to be pursued primarily in the regional and subregional contexts
since most threats to peace and security in the post‑cold-war era arise mainly among States located in the same region
or subregion,
Aware that the preservation of a balance in the defence capabilities of States at the lowest level of armaments
would contribute to peace and stability and should be a prime objective of conventional arms control,
Desirous of promoting agreements to strengthen regional peace and security at the lowest possible level of
armaments and military forces,
Noting with particular interest the initiatives taken in this regard in different regions of the world, in particular
the commencement of consultations among a number of Latin American countries and the proposals for conventional
arms control made in the context of South Asia, and recognizing, in the context of this subject, the relevance and value
of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe,71 which is a cornerstone of European security,
Believing that militarily significant States and States with larger military capabilities have a special responsibility
in promoting such agreements for regional security,
Believing also that an important objective of conventional arms control in regions of tension should be to prevent
the possibility of military attack launched by surprise and to avoid aggression,
1. Decides to give urgent consideration to the issues involved in conventional arms control at the regional
and subregional levels;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to consider the formulation of principles that can serve as a
framework for regional agreements on conventional arms control, and looks forward to a report of the Conference on
this subject;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in the meantime, to seek the views of Member States on the subject and
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels”.

_______________
71

236

See CD/1064.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 74/39
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)72

74/39.

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 58/43 of 8 December 2003, 59/87 of 3 December 2004, 60/64 of 8 December 2005,
61/81 of 6 December 2006, 62/45 of 5 December 2007, 63/45 of 2 December 2008, 64/43 of 2 December 2009, 65/47
of 8 December 2010, 66/38 of 2 December 2011, 67/61 of 3 December 2012, 68/55 of 5 December 2013, 69/46 of
2 December 2014, 70/42 of 7 December 2015, 71/39 of 5 December 2016, 72/33 of 4 December 2017 and 73/35 of
5 December 2018 on confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context,
Recalling also its resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003 on the prevention of armed conflict, in which the General
Assembly calls upon Member States to settle their disputes by peaceful means, as set out in Chapter VI of the Charter,
inter alia, by any procedures adopted by the parties,
Recalling further the resolutions and guidelines adopted by consensus by the General Assembly and the
Disarmament Commission relating to confidence-building measures and their implementation at the global, regional
and subregional levels,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures taken at the initiative and with
the agreement of all States concerned, and taking into account the specific characteristics of each region, since such
measures can contribute to regional stability,
Convinced that resources released by disarmament, including regional disarmament, can be devoted to
economic and social development and to the protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in particular
those of the developing countries,
Recognizing the need for meaningful dialogue among States concerned to avert conflict,
Welcoming the peace processes already initiated by States concerned to resolve their disputes through peaceful
means bilaterally or through mediation, inter alia, by third parties, regional organizations or the United Nations,
Recognizing that States in some regions have already taken steps towards confidence-building measures at the
bilateral, subregional and regional levels in the political and military fields, including arms control and disarmament,
and noting that such confidence-building measures have improved peace and security in those regions and contributed
to progress in the socioeconomic conditions of their people,
Concerned that the continuation of disputes among States, particularly in the absence of an effective mechanism
to resolve them through peaceful means, may contribute to the arms race and endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security and the efforts of the international community to promote arms control and
disarmament,
1. Calls upon Member States to refrain from the use or threat of use of force in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms its commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter, in
particular Article 33, which provides for a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial
settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements or other peaceful means chosen by the parties;
3. Reaffirms the ways and means regarding confidence- and security-building measures set out in the report
of the Disarmament Commission on its 1993 session;73

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Bangladesh, Egypt, Pakistan, Syrian Arab
Republic and Ukraine.
73
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II, sect. III.A.
72

237

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Calls upon Member States to pursue these ways and means through sustained consultations and dialogue,
while at the same time avoiding actions that may hinder or impair such a dialogue;
5. Urges States to comply strictly with all bilateral, regional and international agreements, including arms
control and disarmament agreements, to which they are party;
6. Emphasizes that the objective of confidence-building measures should be to help to strengthen
international peace and security and to be consistent with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of
armaments;
7. Encourages the promotion of bilateral and regional confidence-building measures, with the consent and
participation of the parties concerned, to avoid conflict and prevent the unintended and accidental outbreak of
hostilities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session
containing the views of Member States on confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional
context”.
RESOLUTION 74/40
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 151 to 8, with 21 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)74
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Cambodia, China, Congo, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi, Cuba, Egypt, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Mali, Mongolia, Myanmar, Rwanda, Suriname, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)

74/40.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject of chemical weapons, in particular resolution 73/45 of
5 December 2018,
Determined to achieve the effective prohibition of the development, production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling
and use of chemical weapons and their destruction,

_______________
74

238

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Poland.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Honouring the memory of and paying tribute to all victims of chemical weapons,
Reaffirming its strong support for the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction75 and for the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and its deep appreciation of the Organisation, which was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 2013
for its extensive efforts to eliminate chemical weapons,
Re-emphasizing its unequivocal support for the decision of the Director General of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to continue the mission to establish the facts surrounding the allegations of the use
of chemical weapons, including toxic chemicals, for hostile purposes in the Syrian Arab Republic, while stressing that
the safety and security of mission personnel remains the top priority, and recalling the work, pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 2235 (2015) of 7 August 2015 and 2319 (2016) of 17 November 2016, of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations, which was
established to identify to the greatest extent feasible individuals, entities, groups or Governments that were
perpetrators, organizers, sponsors or otherwise involved in the use of chemicals as weapons, including chlorine or any
other toxic chemical, in the Syrian Arab Republic, where the fact-finding mission of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons determined that a specific incident in the Syrian Arab Republic involved or likely
involved the use of chemicals as weapons,
Noting the work related to the Fourth Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review the
Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, held in The Hague from 21 to 30 November 2018 (the Fourth
Review Conference),
Reaffirming the importance of the outcome of the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties
to Review the Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, held in The Hague from 8 to 19 April 2013 (the Third
Review Conference), including its consensus final report, in which the Conference addressed all aspects of the
Convention and made important recommendations on its continued implementation,
Emphasizing that the Third Review Conference welcomed the fact that the Convention is a unique multilateral
agreement banning an entire category of weapons of mass destruction in a non-discriminatory and verifiable manner
under strict and effective international control and noted with satisfaction that the Convention continues to be a
remarkable success and an example of effective multilateralism,
Convinced that the Convention, 22 years after its entry into force, has reinforced its role as the international
norm against chemical weapons, and that it constitutes a major contribution to:
(a)

International peace and security,

(b)

Eliminating chemical weapons and preventing their re-emergence,

(c)
control,
(d)

The ultimate objective of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
Excluding completely, for the sake of all mankind, the possibility of the use of chemical weapons,

(e) Promoting international cooperation and exchange in scientific and technical information in the field of
chemical activities among States parties for peaceful purposes in order to enhance the economic and technological
development of all States parties,
1. Reaffirms its condemnation in the strongest possible terms of the use of chemical weapons by anyone
under any circumstances, emphasizing that any use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time, by anyone, under
any circumstances is unacceptable and is and would be a violation of international law and expressing its strong
conviction that those individuals responsible for the use of chemical weapons must and should be held
accountable;
2. Condemns in the strongest possible terms that chemical weapons have since 2012 been used in Iraq,
Malaysia, the Syrian Arab Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, including

_______________
75

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.

239

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

as reported by the Joint Investigative Mechanism of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the United Nations in:
(a) Its reports of 24 August 201676 and 21 October 2016,77 which concluded that there was sufficient
information to determine that the Syrian Arab Armed Forces were responsible for the attacks which released toxic
substances in Talmenes, Syrian Arab Republic, on 21 April 2014, in Sarmin, Syrian Arab Republic, on 16 March
2015, and in Qmenas, Syrian Arab Republic, also on 16 March 2015, and that the so-called “Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant” used sulfur mustard in Marea, Syrian Arab Republic, on 21 August 2015; and
(b) Its report of 26 October 2017,78 which concluded that there was sufficient information to be confident that
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant was responsible for the use of sulfur mustard at Umm Hawsh on 15 and
16 September 2016 and that the Syrian Arab Republic was responsible for the release of sarin at Khan Shaykhun on
4 April 2017;
and demands that the perpetrators immediately desist from any further use of chemical weapons;
3. Takes note with great concern in that regard of the reports of the fact-finding mission of the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons regarding alleged incidents in Ltamenah, Syrian Arab Republic,79 and
regarding an alleged incident in Saraqib, Syrian Arab Republic,80 as well as the final report of the fact-finding mission
of the Organisation regarding the incident of alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Douma, Syrian Arab
Republic, which concluded there were reasonable grounds that the use of a toxic chemical as a weapon took place;81
4. Recalls the adoption of decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 of the Fourth Special Session of the Conference of the
States Parties, entitled “Addressing the threat from chemical weapons use”, of 27 June 2018, and stresses the
importance of its implementation, in accordance with the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction;75
5. Emphasizes that the universality of the Convention is essential to achieving its object and purpose and to
enhancing the security of States parties, as well as to international peace and security, underlines the fact that the
objectives of the Convention will not be fully realized as long as there remains even a single State not party to the
Convention that could possess or acquire such weapons, and calls upon all States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention without delay;
6. Underlines the fact that the full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of all articles of the
Convention makes a major contribution to international peace and security through the elimination of existing
stockpiles of chemical weapons and the prohibition of their acquisition and use, and provides for assistance and
protection in the event of use or threat of use of chemical weapons and for international cooperation for peaceful
purposes in the field of chemical activities;
7. Notes the impact of scientific and technological progress on the effective implementation of the
Convention and the importance for the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its policymaking
organs of taking due account of such developments;
8. Reaffirms that the obligation of the States parties to complete the destruction of chemical weapons
stockpiles and the destruction or conversion of chemical weapons production facilities in accordance with the
provisions of the Convention and the Annex on Implementation and Verification (Verification Annex) and under the
verification of the Technical Secretariat of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is essential for
the realization of the object and purpose of the Convention;

_______________
See S/2016/738/Rev.1.
See S/2016/888.
78
See S/2017/904.
79
See S/2017/931, annex, and S/2018/620, annex.
80
See S/2018/478, annex.
81
See S/2019/208, annex.
76
77

240

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Stresses the importance to the Convention that all possessors of chemical weapons, chemical weapons
production facilities or chemical weapons development facilities, including previously declared possessor States,
should be among the States parties to the Convention, and welcomes progress to that end;
10. Recalls that the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review the Operation of
the Chemical Weapons Convention expressed concern regarding the statement made by the Director General of the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in his report to the Executive Council of the Organisation at
its sixty-eighth session, provided in accordance with paragraph 2 of decision C-16/DEC.11 of 1 December 2011
adopted by the Conference of the States Parties at its sixteenth session, that three possessor States parties, namely,
Libya, the Russian Federation and the United States of America, had been unable to fully meet the final extended
deadline of 29 April 2012 for the destruction of their chemical weapons stockpiles, and also expressed determination
that the destruction of all categories of chemical weapons should be completed in the shortest time possible in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention and the Verification Annex, and with the full application of the
relevant decisions that have been taken;
11. Welcomes the confirmation by the Director General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons expressed in his report of 5 October 2017,82 based upon information received from the Russian Federation
and independent information received from the inspectors of the Organisation, regarding the completion of the full
destruction of chemical weapons declared by the Russian Federation;
12. Also welcomes the completed destruction of Libya’s remaining category 2 chemical weapons, as reported
by the Director General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in his report of 22 December
2017,83 as well as the completed destruction by Iraq of its entire declared stockpile of chemical weapons remnants, as
reported by the Director General in his report of 28 February 2018;84
13. Notes with concern that, along with the threat of the possible production, acquisition and use of chemical
weapons by States, the international community also faces the danger of the production, acquisition and use of
chemical weapons by non‑State actors, including terrorists, concerns which have highlighted the necessity of
achieving universal adherence to the Convention, as well as the high level of readiness of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and stresses that the full and effective implementation of all provisions of the
Convention, including those on national implementation (article VII) and assistance and protection (article X),
constitutes an important contribution to the efforts of the United Nations in the global fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations;
14. Notes that the effective application of the verification system builds confidence in compliance with the
Convention by States parties;
15. Stresses the importance of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in verifying
compliance with the provisions of the Convention as well as in promoting the timely and efficient accomplishment
of all its objectives;
16. Expresses grave concern that, despite the verified destruction of all 27 chemical weapons production
facilities declared by the Syrian Arab Republic, the Technical Secretariat, as reported by the Director General, cannot
fully verify that the Syrian Arab Republic has submitted a declaration that can be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Convention or Executive Council decision EC‑M‑33/DEC.1 as well as with the conclusion of
decision C-SS-4/DEC.3, of the Fourth Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties, that the Syrian Arab
Republic failed to declare and destroy all of its chemical weapons and chemical weapons production facilities, and
underscores the importance of such full verification;
17. Urges all States parties to the Convention to meet in full and on time their obligations under the
Convention and to support the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its implementation activities;
18. Welcomes the progress made in the national implementation of article VII obligations, commends the
States parties and the Technical Secretariat for assisting other States parties, on request, with the implementation of

_______________
EC-86/DG.31.
EC-87/DG.6.
84
EC-87/DG.18.
82
83

241

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

the follow-up to the plan of action regarding article VII obligations, and urges States parties that have not fulfilled
their obligations under article VII to do so without further delay, in accordance with their constitutional processes;
19. Emphasizes the continuing relevance and importance of the provisions of article X of the Convention,
welcomes the activities of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in relation to assistance and
protection against chemical weapons, supports further efforts by both States parties and the Technical Secretariat to
promote a high level of readiness to respond to chemical weapons threats as articulated in article X, and welcomes
the effectiveness and efficiency of the increased focus on making full use of regional and subregional capacities and
expertise, including taking advantage of established training centres;
20. Reaffirms that the provisions of the Convention shall be implemented in a manner that avoids hampering
the economic or technological development of States parties and international cooperation in the field of chemical
activities for purposes not prohibited under the Convention, including the international exchange of scientific and
technical information, and chemicals and equipment for the production, processing or use of chemicals for purposes
not prohibited under the Convention;
21. Emphasizes the importance of the provisions of article XI of the Convention relating to the economic and
technological development of States parties, recalls that the full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of
those provisions contributes to universality, and reaffirms the undertaking of the States parties to foster international
cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities of the States parties and the importance of that
cooperation and its contribution to the promotion of the Convention as a whole;
22. Notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to achieve the object and purpose of the Convention, to ensure the full implementation of its provisions, including
those for international verification of compliance with it, and to provide a forum for consultation and cooperation
among States parties;
23. Welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations and the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons within the framework of the relationship agreement between the United Nations and the
Organisation,85 in accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction”.
RESOLUTION 74/41
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 123 to 41, with 16 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)86
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2160, No. 1240.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Austria,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Thailand, Sudan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zambia.
85
86

242

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark,
Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Finland, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Mali,
Marshall Islands, Rwanda, Serbia, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Ukraine

74/41.

Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 72/31 of 4 December 2017 and 73/48 of 5 December 2018,
1.

Welcomes the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons87 on 7 July 2017;

2. Notes that the Treaty has been open for signature at United Nations Headquarters in New York since
20 September 2017;
3. Welcomes that already 79 States had signed the Treaty and 33 States had ratified or acceded to it as at
1 November 2019;
4. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to sign, ratify, accept, approve or accede to the Treaty at the
earliest possible date;
5. Calls upon those States in a position to do so to promote adherence to the Treaty through bilateral,
subregional, regional and multilateral contacts, outreach and other means;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, as depositary of the Treaty, to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session on the status of signature and ratification, acceptance, approval or accession of the Treaty;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons”.
RESOLUTION 74/42
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 144 to 13, with 28 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)88
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,

_______________
A/CONF.229/2017/8.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Republic of Moldova, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Singapore, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
87
88

243

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Czechia, Estonia, France, Hungary, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Armenia, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Georgia, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, Mali, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine

74/42.

Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 70/47 of 7 December 2015, 71/46 of 5 December 2016, 72/30 of 4 December 2017
and 73/47 of 5 December 2018,
Reiterating the deep concern about the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons,
Stressing that the immense and uncontrollable destructive capability and indiscriminate nature of nuclear
weapons cause unacceptable humanitarian consequences, as has been demonstrated through their past use and testing,
Recalling that concern about the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons has been reflected in numerous
United Nations resolutions, including the first resolution adopted by the General Assembly, on 24 January 1946,
Recalling also that at the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, in 1978, the
Assembly stressed that nuclear weapons posed the greatest danger to mankind and to the survival of civilization,89
Welcoming the renewed interest and resolve of the international community, together with the International
Committee of the Red Cross and international humanitarian organizations, to address the catastrophic consequences
of nuclear weapons,
Recalling that the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons expressed deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons,90
Noting the resolution of 26 November 2011 of the Council of Delegates of the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement entitled “Working towards the elimination of nuclear weapons”,
Recalling the joint statements on the humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons delivered to the General
Assembly and during the 2010–2015 cycle of the review of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,91
Welcoming the facts-based discussions on the effects of a nuclear weapon detonation that were held at the
conferences on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons, convened by Norway, on 4 and 5 March 2013, Mexico,
on 13 and 14 February 2014, and Austria, on 8 and 9 December 2014,
Cognizant that a key message from experts and international organizations at those conferences was that no
State or international body could address the immediate humanitarian emergency caused by a nuclear weapon
detonation or provide adequate assistance to victims,
Firmly believing that it is in the interest of all States to engage in discussions on the humanitarian consequences
of nuclear weapons with the aim of further broadening and deepening the understanding of this matter, and welcoming
civil society’s ongoing engagement,

_______________
See resolution S-10/2.
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.
91
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
89
90

244

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming the role of civil society, in partnership with Governments, in raising awareness about the
unacceptable humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons,
Emphasizing that the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons affect not only Governments but each and
every citizen of our interconnected world and have deep implications for human survival, for the environment, for
socioeconomic development, for our economies and for the health of future generations,
1. Stresses that it is in the interest of the very survival of humanity that nuclear weapons never be used again,
under any circumstances;
2. Emphasizes that the only way to guarantee that nuclear weapons will never be used again is their total
elimination;
3. Stresses that the catastrophic effects of a nuclear weapon detonation, whether by accident, miscalculation
or design, cannot be adequately addressed;
4. Expresses its firm belief that awareness of the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapons must
underpin all approaches and efforts towards nuclear disarmament;
5. Calls upon all States, in their shared responsibility, to prevent the use of nuclear weapons, to prevent their
vertical and horizontal proliferation and to achieve nuclear disarmament;
6.

Urges States to exert all efforts to totally eliminate the threat of these weapons of mass destruction;

7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons”.
RESOLUTION 74/43
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)92

74/43.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/55 of 5 December 2018,
Recognizing the determination of the international community to combat terrorism, as evidenced in relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
Deeply concerned by the growing risk of linkages between terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, and in
particular by the fact that terrorists may seek to acquire weapons of mass destruction,
Cognizant of the steps taken by States to implement Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004
on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 2325 (2016) of 15 December 2016 on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction,
Welcoming the entry into force on 7 July 2007 of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism,93

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
93
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2445, No. 44004.
92

245

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming also the adoption, by consensus, of amendments to strengthen the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material94 by the International Atomic Energy Agency on 8 July 2005, and their entry into force
on 8 May 2016,
Noting the support expressed in the Final Document of the Seventeenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held on Margarita Island, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, from 13 to
18 September 2016, for measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction,
Noting also that the Group of Eight, the European Union, the Regional Forum of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and others have taken into account in their deliberations the dangers posed by the likely acquisition by
terrorists of weapons of mass destruction and the need for international cooperation in combating it, and that the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism has been launched jointly by the Russian Federation and the United
States of America,
Noting further the holding of the Nuclear Security Summit on 12 and 13 April 2010 in Washington, D.C., on
26 and 27 March 2012 in Seoul, on 24 and 25 March 2014 in The Hague and on 31 March and 1 April 2016 in
Washington, D.C.,
Noting the holding of the high-level meeting on countering nuclear terrorism, with a focus on strengthening the
legal framework, in New York on 28 September 2012,
Acknowledging the consideration of issues relating to terrorism and weapons of mass destruction by the
Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters,95
Taking note of the holding by the International Atomic Energy Agency of the International Conference on
Nuclear Security: Commitments and Actions, in Vienna in December 2016, and the first International Conference on
Nuclear Security: Enhancing Global Efforts, in Vienna in July 2013, and the relevant resolutions adopted by the
General Conference of the Agency at its sixty-second regular session,
Taking note also of the Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources, approved by the
Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency on 8 September 2003, and the supplementary
Guidance on the Management of Disused Radioactive Sources, approved by the Board of Governors of the Agency
on 11 September 2017,
Taking note further of the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on 16 September 200596 and the adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy on 8 September 2006,97
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 73/55,98
Mindful of the urgent need for addressing, within the United Nations framework and through international
cooperation, this threat to humanity,
Emphasizing that progress is urgently needed in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation in order to
maintain international peace and security and to contribute to global efforts against terrorism,
1. Calls upon all Member States to support international efforts to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery;
2. Appeals to all Member States to consider early accession to and ratification of the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,93 and encourages States parties to the Convention to
review its implementation;

_______________
Ibid., vol. 1456, No. 24631.
See A/59/361.
96
Resolution 60/1.
97
Resolution 60/288.
98
A/74/140.
94
95

246

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Urges all Member States to take and strengthen national measures, as appropriate, to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery and materials and technologies related to their
manufacture;
4. Encourages cooperation among and between Member States and relevant regional and international
organizations for strengthening national capacities in this regard;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to compile a report on measures already taken by international
organizations on issues relating to the linkage between the fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and to seek the views of Member States on additional relevant measures, including national
measures, for tackling the global threat posed by the acquisition by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction and to
report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction”.
RESOLUTION 74/44
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 123 to 49, with 15 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)99
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Georgia, Japan, Liberia, Mali,
Marshall Islands, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Serbia, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe

74/44.

Reducing nuclear danger

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to humankind and to the survival
of civilization,
Reaffirming that any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would constitute a violation of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects would seriously enhance the danger of
nuclear war,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Cuba, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, India, Indonesia, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Samoa,
Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Togo, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
99

247

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Convinced also that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to
remove the danger of nuclear war,
Considering that, until nuclear weapons cease to exist, it is imperative on the part of the nuclear-weapon States
to adopt measures that assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering also that the hair-trigger alert of nuclear weapons carries unacceptable risks of unintentional or
accidental use of nuclear weapons, which would have catastrophic consequences for all humankind,
Emphasizing the need to adopt measures to avoid accidental, unauthorized or unexplained incidents arising from
computer anomalies or other technical malfunctions,
Conscious that limited steps relating to de-alerting and de-targeting have been taken by the nuclear-weapon
States and that further practical, realistic and mutually reinforcing steps are necessary to contribute to the improvement
in the international climate for negotiations leading to the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful that a diminishing role for nuclear weapons in the security policies of nuclear-weapon States would
have a positive impact on international peace and security and improve the conditions for the further reduction and
the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly100 and by the international community,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear
weapons101 that there exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Recalling also the call, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,102 to seek to eliminate the dangers posed
by weapons of mass destruction and the resolve to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly nuclear weapons, including the possibility of convening an international conference to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers,
1. Calls for a review of nuclear doctrines and, in this context, immediate and urgent steps to reduce the risks
of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear weapons, including through de-alerting and de-targeting nuclear
weapons;
2.
above;

Requests the five nuclear-weapon States to take measures towards the implementation of paragraph 1

3. Calls upon Member States to take the measures necessary to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons
in all its aspects and to promote nuclear disarmament, with the objective of eliminating nuclear weapons;
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 5 of its resolution 73/56
of 5 December 2018;103
5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts and support initiatives that would contribute to the full
implementation of the seven recommendations identified in the report of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters
that would significantly reduce the risk of nuclear war,104 and also to continue to encourage Member States to consider
the convening of an international conference, as proposed in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,102 to identify
ways of eliminating nuclear dangers, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Reducing nuclear danger”.

_______________
Resolution S-10/2.
A/51/218, annex.
102
Resolution 55/2.
103
A/74/158.
104
A/56/400, para. 3.
100
101

248

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 74/45
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 120 to 41, with 22 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)105
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, India, Ireland, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, South Africa,
Sweden, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe

74/45.

Nuclear disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/75 E of 15 December 1994 on a step-by-step reduction of the nuclear threat, and its
resolutions 50/70 P of 12 December 1995, 51/45 O of 10 December 1996, 52/38 L of 9 December 1997, 53/77 X of
4 December 1998, 54/54 P of 1 December 1999, 55/33 T of 20 November 2000, 56/24 R of 29 November 2001,
57/79 of 22 November 2002, 58/56 of 8 December 2003, 59/77 of 3 December 2004, 60/70 of 8 December 2005,
61/78 of 6 December 2006, 62/42 of 5 December 2007, 63/46 of 2 December 2008, 64/53 of 2 December 2009, 65/56
of 8 December 2010, 66/51 of 2 December 2011, 67/60 of 3 December 2012, 68/47 of 5 December 2013, 69/48 of
2 December 2014, 70/52 of 7 December 2015, 71/63 of 5 December 2016, 72/38 of 4 December 2017 and 73/50 of
5 December 2018 on nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world,
Bearing in mind that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction of 1972106 and the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction of
1993107 have already established legal regimes on the complete prohibition of biological and chemical weapons,
respectively, and determined to achieve a comprehensive nuclear weapons convention on the prohibition of the
development, testing, production, stockpiling, loan, transfer, use and threat of use of nuclear weapons and on their
destruction, and to conclude such an international convention at an early date,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Fiji, Honduras, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malawi, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Philippines, Samoa, Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and
Zambia.
106
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
107
Ibid., vol. 1974, No. 33757.
105

249

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recognizing the urgent need to take concrete practical steps towards achieving the establishment of a world free
of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, the
first special session devoted to disarmament,108 calling for the urgent negotiation of agreements for the cessation of
the qualitative improvement and development of nuclear-weapon systems and for a comprehensive and phased
programme with agreed time frames, wherever feasible, for the progressive and balanced reduction of nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery, leading to their ultimate and complete elimination at the earliest possible time,
Reaffirming the conviction of the States parties to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons109
that the Treaty is a cornerstone of nuclear non‑proliferation and nuclear disarmament, and the importance of the
decision on strengthening the review process for the Treaty, the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament, the decision on the extension of the Treaty and the resolution on the Middle East,
adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,110
Stressing the importance of the 13 steps for the systematic and progressive efforts to achieve the objective of
nuclear disarmament leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons, as agreed to by the States parties in the Final
Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,111
Recognizing the important work done at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,112 and affirming its 22‑point action plan on nuclear disarmament as an
impetus to intensify work aimed at beginning negotiations for a nuclear weapons convention,
Expressing deep concern that the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, held from 27 April to 22 May 2015, did not reach agreement on a substantive final document,
Reaffirming the continued validity of agreements reached at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and
the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences until all their objectives are achieved, and calling for their full and immediate
fulfilment, including the action plan on nuclear disarmament adopted at the 2010 Review Conference,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly and by the international community,
Reiterating its call for an early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,113
Noting the new strategic arms reduction treaty between the Russian Federation and the United States of America,
in order to achieve further cuts in their deployed and non-deployed strategic nuclear weapons, and stressing that such
cuts should be irreversible, verifiable and transparent,
Noting also the statements by nuclear-weapon States of their intention to pursue actions in achieving a world
free of nuclear weapons, as well as the steps taken to reduce the role and number of nuclear weapons, and urging
nuclear-weapon States to take further measures for progress on nuclear disarmament within a specified framework
of time,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament,
and that bilateral negotiations can never replace multilateral negotiations in this respect,

_______________
Resolution S-10/2.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
110
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)/Corr.2), annex.
111
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
112
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I), NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. II) and NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. III)).
113
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
108
109

250

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the
elaboration of an international convention to assure non‑nuclear-weapon States, without exception or discrimination,
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances, and the multilateral efforts in the
Conference to reach agreement on such an international convention at an early date,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear
weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,114 and welcoming the unanimous reaffirmation by all judges of the Court that there
exists an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Recalling also paragraph 176 of the Final Document of the Seventeenth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held on Margarita Island, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, from 13 to
18 September 2016, in which the Conference on Disarmament was called upon to agree on a balanced and
comprehensive programme of work by, inter alia, establishing an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament as soon
as possible and as the highest priority, while the necessity was emphasized of starting negotiations in the Conference
on Disarmament, without further delay, on a comprehensive nuclear weapons convention that sets, inter alia, a phased
programme for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified framework of time,
Noting the adoption of the programme of work for the 2009 session by the Conference on Disarmament on
29 May 2009,115 after years of stalemate, and regretting that the Conference did not succeed in reaching consensus on
a programme of work for its 2019 session,
Welcoming the proposals submitted by the States members of the Conference on Disarmament that are members
of the Group of 21 on the follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament,
pursuant to Assembly resolution 68/32 of 5 December 2013, as contained in documents of the Conference,116
Reaffirming the importance and validity of the Conference on Disarmament as the sole multilateral disarmament
negotiating forum, and expressing the need to adopt and implement a balanced and comprehensive programme of
work on the basis of its agenda and dealing with, inter alia, four core issues, in accordance with the rules of
procedure,117 and by taking into consideration the security concerns of all States,
Reaffirming also the specific mandate conferred upon the Disarmament Commission by the General Assembly,
in its decision 52/492 of 8 September 1998, to discuss the subject of nuclear disarmament as one of its main
substantive agenda items,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,118 in which Heads of State and Government resolved to
strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to keep all options open
for achieving that aim, including the possibility of convening an international conference to identify ways of
eliminating nuclear dangers,
Underlining the importance of convening, as a priority, a United Nations high-level international conference on
nuclear disarmament to review the progress made in this regard,
Recalling the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament held on 26 September 2013,
and the strong support for nuclear disarmament expressed therein,
Welcoming the commemoration of 26 September as the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons, devoted to furthering this objective, as declared by the General Assembly in its resolution 68/32 and
subsequently welcomed in its resolutions 69/58 of 2 December 2014, 70/34 of 7 December 2015, 71/71 of
5 December 2016, 72/251 of 24 December 2017 and 73/40 of 5 December 2018,

_______________
A/51/218, annex.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/64/27), para. 18.
116
See CD/1999 and CD/2067.
117
CD/8/Rev.9.
118
Resolution 55/2.
114
115

251

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note of the declaration of the States members of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean on the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, in Mexico
City on 26 September 2019,
Expressing deep concern about the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons,
Noting the successful convening of the first, second and third Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of
Nuclear Weapons, in Oslo on 4 and 5 March 2013, in Nayarit, Mexico, on 13 and 14 February 2014, and in Vienna
on 8 and 9 December 2014, and noting also that 127 nations have formally endorsed the Humanitarian Pledge issued
following the third Conference,119
Welcoming the signing by the nuclear-weapon States, namely, China, France, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, of the Protocol to the Treaty on a
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia, in New York on 6 May 2014,
Welcoming also the proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace on 29 January 2014
during the Second Summit of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, held in Havana on 28 and
29 January 2014,
Welcoming further the successful adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons120 on 7 July 2017,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, States should refrain from the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons in settling their disputes in international relations,
Seized of the danger of the use of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, in terrorist acts
and the urgent need for concerted international efforts to control and overcome it,
1. Urges all nuclear-weapon States to take effective disarmament measures to achieve the total elimination
of all nuclear weapons at the earliest possible time;
2. Reaffirms that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are substantively interrelated and
mutually reinforcing, that the two processes must go hand in hand and that there is a genuine need for a systematic
and progressive process of nuclear disarmament;
3. Welcomes and encourages the efforts to establish new nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of the
world, including the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons, on the basis of agreements or
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the regions concerned, which is an effective measure for limiting
the further spread of nuclear weapons geographically and contributes to the cause of nuclear disarmament;
4. Encourages States parties to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone121 and the
nuclear-weapon States to intensify ongoing efforts to resolve all outstanding issues, in accordance with the objectives
and principles of the Treaty;
5. Recognizes that there is a genuine need to diminish the role of nuclear weapons in strategic doctrines and
security policies to minimize the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total
elimination;
6. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to stop immediately the qualitative improvement, development,
production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and their delivery systems;
7. Also urges the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to de-alert and deactivate immediately their
nuclear weapons and to take other concrete measures to reduce further the operational status of their nuclear-weapon
systems, while stressing that reductions in deployments and in operational status cannot substitute for irreversible cuts
in and the total elimination of nuclear weapons;

_______________
See CD/2039.
A/CONF.229/2017/8.
121
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
119
120

252

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8. Reiterates its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to carry out effective nuclear disarmament measures
with a view to achieving the total elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified framework of time;
9. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, pending the achievement of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, to agree on an internationally and legally binding instrument on a joint undertaking not to be the first to use
nuclear weapons;
10. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to commence plurilateral negotiations among themselves at an
appropriate stage on further deep reductions of their nuclear weapons, in an irreversible, verifiable and transparent
manner, as an effective measure of nuclear disarmament;
11. Underlines the importance of applying the principles of transparency, irreversibility and verifiability to the
process of nuclear disarmament;
12. Also underlines the importance of the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, in the Final
Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties
are committed under article VI of the Treaty,111 and the reaffirmation by the States parties that the total elimination of
nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;122
13. Calls for the full and effective implementation of the 13 practical steps for nuclear disarmament contained
in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference;111
14. Also calls for the full implementation of the action plan as set out in the conclusions and recommendations
for follow-on actions of the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, particularly the 22-point action plan on nuclear disarmament;112
15. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to carry out further reductions of non‑strategic nuclear weapons,
including on unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process;
16. Calls for the immediate commencement of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament, in the context
of an agreed, comprehensive and balanced programme of work, on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and
internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices on the basis of the report of the Special Coordinator123 and the mandate contained therein;
17. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to commence as early as possible its substantive work during its
2020 session, on the basis of a comprehensive and balanced programme of work that takes into consideration all the
real and existing priorities in the field of disarmament and arms control, including the immediate commencement of
negotiations on a comprehensive nuclear weapons convention;
18. Calls for the conclusion of an international legal instrument on unconditional security assurances to
non-nuclear-weapon States against the threat or use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances;
19. Also calls for the early entry into force, universalization and strict observance of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty113 as a contribution to nuclear disarmament, while welcoming the latest signatory to the
Treaty, Tuvalu, on 25 September 2018, and its latest ratification, by Zimbabwe, on 13 February 2019;
20. Reiterates its call upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, as soon as possible and as the highest
priority, an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament in 2020 and to commence negotiations on a phased programme
of nuclear disarmament leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified framework of time;
21. Calls for the convening, as soon as possible, of a United Nations high-level international conference on
nuclear disarmament to review the progress made in this regard;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;

_______________
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VII and the security of non-nuclear-weapon States”, para. 2.
123
CD/1299.
122

253

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Nuclear disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 74/46
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 137 to 33, with 16 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)124
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic
of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
India, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cameroon, Canada, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Finland, Georgia, Iceland, Japan, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Serbia,
Ukraine

74/46.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear
disarmament commitments

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1 (I) of 24 January 1946, 71/54 of 5 December 2016, 72/39 of 4 December 2017 and
73/70 of 5 December 2018,
Noting the twenty-first anniversary of the launch of the New Agenda Coalition and the joint declaration outlining
a new agenda for disarmament, adopted in Dublin on 9 June 1998,125
Recalling the political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit on 24 September 2018,126 in
which Summit attendees recalled the firm plea made by Nelson Mandela in favour of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons, and underscoring commitments towards that goal,
Welcoming the Secretary-General’s disarmament agenda, Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for
Disarmament, and its implementation plan,
Reiterating its grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by nuclear weapons, which should inform all
deliberations, decisions and actions relating to nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Austria, Brazil, Costa Rica, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mexico, New Zealand, Philippines, Samoa, Seychelles, South
Africa, Thailand and Vanuatu.
125
A/53/138, annex.
126
Resolution 73/1.
124

254

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling the expression of deep concern by the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons,
and its resolve to seek a safer world for all and to achieve the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons,127
Noting with satisfaction the renewed attention to the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risks
associated with nuclear weapons that has been generated by the international community since 2010 and the growing
awareness that these concerns should underpin the need for nuclear disarmament and the urgency of achieving and
maintaining a nuclear-weapon-free world, and noting with satisfaction also the prominence accorded to the
humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons in multilateral disarmament forums,
Recalling the discussions held at the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons, hosted by
Norway, on 4 and 5 March 2013, Mexico, on 13 and 14 February 2014, and Austria, on 8 and 9 December 2014,
aimed at understanding and developing a greater awareness of the catastrophic consequences of nuclear weapon
detonations which further reinforce the urgency of nuclear disarmament,
Emphasizing the compelling evidence, including that presented at the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact
of Nuclear Weapons, that has detailed the catastrophic consequences that would result from any nuclear weapon
detonation, reaching well beyond national borders and also imperilling the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals,128 the lack of capacity of States and international organizations to deal with the aftermath and
the risk of an occurrence, including an occurrence due to an accident, systems failure or human error,
Noting the strongly disproportionate and gendered impact of exposure to ionizing radiation for women and girls,
Welcoming the commemoration and promotion of 26 September as the International Day for the Total
Elimination of Nuclear Weapons,
Welcoming also the adoption on 7 July 2017 of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, negotiated
by the United Nations conference to negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading
towards their total elimination, pursuant to resolution 71/258 of 23 December 2016,129
Underlining the importance of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation education,
Reaffirming that transparency, verifiability and irreversibility are cardinal principles applying to nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, which are mutually reinforcing processes,
Recalling the decisions and the resolution adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,130 the basis upon which the Treaty was indefinitely
extended, and the Final Documents of the 2000131 and the 2010132 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and in particular the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon
States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear disarmament, in accordance
with commitments made under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,133
Reaffirming the commitment of all States parties to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to
applying the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and transparency in relation to the implementation of their treaty
obligations,

_______________
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.
128
See resolution 70/1.
129
A/CONF.229/2017/8.
130
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)/Corr.2), annex.
131
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II), NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part III) and NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part IV)).
132
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I), NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. II) and NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. III)).
133
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
127

255

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recognizing the continued vital importance of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty134 to the advancement of nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation objectives,
Recalling that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons and the legitimate interest of non-nuclear-weapon States in receiving unequivocal and
legally binding negative security assurances from nuclear-weapon States pending the total elimination of nuclear
weapons,
Reaffirming the conviction that, pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons, the establishment and
maintenance of nuclear-weapon-free zones enhances global and regional peace and security, strengthens the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and contributes towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament, and welcoming the
Conferences of States Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia,
Urging States to continue to make real progress towards strengthening all existing nuclear-weapon-free zones,
inter alia, through the ratification of existing treaties and relevant protocols and the withdrawal or revision of any
reservations or interpretative declarations contrary to the object and purpose of the treaties establishing such zones,
Recalling the encouragement expressed at the 2010 Review Conference for the establishment of further nuclearweapon-free zones, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned,
reaffirming the expectation that this will be followed by concerted international efforts to create such zones in areas
where they do not currently exist, especially in the Middle East, in this context noting with deep disappointment the
non-fulfilment of the agreement at the 2010 Review Conference on practical steps to fully implement the 1995
resolution on the Middle East,130 and disappointed that no agreement could be reached at the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons on this issue,
Acknowledging its decision 73/546 of 22 December 2018, in which it decided to entrust to the Secretary-General
the convening of a conference aimed at elaborating a treaty on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by the States of the
region,
Deeply disappointed at the continued absence of progress towards multilateral nuclear disarmament at the
Conference on Disarmament, which has been unable for the past 23 years to agree upon and implement a programme
of work, and disappointed that the Disarmament Commission has not produced a substantive outcome on nuclear
disarmament since 1999,
Deeply regretting the lack of any substantive outcome of the 2015 Review Conference,
Disappointed that the 2015 Review Conference missed an opportunity to strengthen the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, enhance progress towards its full implementation and universality and
monitor the implementation of commitments made and actions agreed upon at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences, and deeply concerned about the impact of this failure on the Treaty and the balance between its three
pillars,
Noting with serious concern the rising tensions in international relations and the increased prominence being
given by some States to nuclear weapons in their security doctrines, as well as the extensive modernization
programmes under way, all of which contribute to the erosion of the disarmament and non-proliferation regime,
Noting the third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held in New York from 29 April to 10 May 2019,
Emphasizing the importance of holding a constructive meeting that results in a substantive outcome at the 2020
Review Conference, urging all Member States to step up their efforts in this regard, and emphasizing also the vital
importance of ensuring that the 2020 Review Conference contributes to the strengthening of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and making progress towards achieving its full implementation and
universality, and monitors the implementation of commitments made and actions agreed upon at the 1995, 2000 and
2010 Review Conferences,

_______________
134

256

See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming that the Russian Federation and the United States of America have completed the nuclear weapon
reductions agreed under the Treaty on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive
Arms, while re‑emphasizing the encouragement of the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences to both States to continue
discussions on follow-on measures in order to achieve deeper reductions in their nuclear arsenals, and urging in this
regard both States to extend this Treaty and conclude negotiations on a successor agreement as soon as possible,
Underlining the importance of multilateralism in relation to nuclear disarmament, while recognizing the value
of unilateral, bilateral and regional initiatives and the importance of compliance with the terms of these initiatives,
1. Reiterates that each article of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons133 is binding on the
States parties at all times and in all circumstances and that all States parties should be held fully accountable with
respect to strict compliance with their obligations under the Treaty, and calls upon all States parties to comply fully
with all decisions, resolutions and commitments made at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences;
2. Also reiterates the deep concern expressed by the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons, and the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law;127
3. Acknowledges the evidence presented at the Conferences on the Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear
Weapons, and calls upon Member States, in their relevant decisions and actions, to give due prominence to the
humanitarian imperatives that underpin nuclear disarmament and to the urgency of achieving this goal;
4. Recalls the reaffirmation of the continued validity of the practical steps agreed to in the Final Document
of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,135 including
the specific reaffirmation of the unequivocal undertaking of the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties are committed under
article VI of the Treaty, recalls the commitment of the nuclear-weapon States to accelerating concrete progress on the
steps leading to nuclear disarmament, and calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to take all steps necessary to accelerate
the fulfilment of their commitments;
5. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their commitment to undertaking further efforts to reduce
and ultimately eliminate all types of nuclear weapons, deployed and non-deployed, including through unilateral,
bilateral, regional and multilateral measures;
6. Urges all States possessing nuclear weapons to decrease the operational readiness of nuclear-weapon
systems in a verifiable and transparent manner with a view to ensuring that all nuclear weapons are removed from
high alert status;
7. Encourages the nuclear-weapon States to make concrete reductions in the role and significance of nuclear
weapons in all military and security concepts, doctrines and policies, pending their total elimination;
8. Encourages all States that are part of regional alliances that include nuclear-weapon States to diminish the
role of nuclear weapons in their collective security doctrines, pending their total elimination;
9. Underlines the recognition by States parties to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of
the legitimate interest of non-nuclear-weapon States in the constraining by the nuclear-weapon States of the
development and qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons and their ending the development of advanced new
types of nuclear weapons, and calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to take steps in this regard;
10. Notes with concern recent policy statements by nuclear-weapon States relating to the modernization of
their nuclear weapon programmes, which undermine their commitments to nuclear disarmament and increase the risk
of the use of nuclear weapons and the potential for a new arms race;

_______________
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
135

257

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

11. Encourages further steps by all nuclear-weapon States, in accordance with the previous obligations and
commitments on nuclear disarmament, to ensure the irreversible removal of all fissile material designated by each
nuclear-weapon State as no longer required for military purposes, and calls upon all States to support, within the
context of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the development of appropriate nuclear disarmament verification
capabilities and legally binding verification arrangements, thereby ensuring that such material remains permanently
outside military programmes in a verifiable manner;
12. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to work towards
the full implementation of the resolution on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,130 which is inextricably linked to the
indefinite extension of the Treaty, and expresses disappointment and deep concern at the lack of a substantive outcome
of the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, including
on the process to establish a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction as
contained in the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, which remains valid until fully implemented;
13. Urges the co-sponsors of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East to exert their utmost efforts with a view
to ensuring the early establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction as contained in the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, including through support for the convening of
the conference on the establishment of such a zone;
14. Stresses the fundamental role of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in achieving
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, and looks forward to the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to be held in New York from 27 April to 22 May 2020;
15. Calls upon all States parties to spare no effort to achieve the universality of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and in this regard urges India, Israel and Pakistan to accede to the Treaty as
non-nuclear-weapon States promptly and without conditions, and to place all their nuclear facilities under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
16. Notes with encouragement the dialogue and discussions held with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, including the recent inter-Korean summits, and the summit between the United States of America and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to fulfil its commitments,
to abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes, to return, at an early date, to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to adhere to its International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards
agreement,136 with a view to achieving the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula in a peaceful manner;
17. Urges all States to work together to overcome obstacles within the international disarmament machinery
that are inhibiting efforts to advance the cause of nuclear disarmament in a multilateral context, and once again urges
the Conference on Disarmament to commence immediately substantive work that advances the agenda of nuclear
disarmament, particularly through multilateral negotiations;
18. Urges all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to fully implement
without delay their obligations and commitments under the Treaty and as agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences;
19. Also urges all State parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to move forward
with urgency in implementing their article VI obligations in order to ensure the good standing of the Treaty and its
review process;
20. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to implement their nuclear disarmament obligations and commitments,
both qualitative and quantitative, in a manner that enables all States parties to regularly monitor progress, including
through a standard detailed reporting format, thereby enhancing confidence and trust not only among the nuclearweapon States but also between the nuclear-weapon States and the non‑nuclear-weapon States and contributing to
nuclear disarmament;

_______________
136

258

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1677, No. 28986.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

21. Also urges the nuclear-weapon States to include in their reports to be submitted during the 2020 review
cycle of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons concrete and detailed information concerning the
implementation of their obligations and commitments on nuclear disarmament;
22. Encourages States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to improve the
measurability of the implementation of nuclear disarmament obligations and commitments, including through tools
such as a set of benchmarks, timelines and/or similar criteria, in order to ensure and facilitate the objective evaluation
of progress;137
23. Urges Member States to pursue multilateral negotiations without delay in good faith on effective measures
for the achievement and maintenance of a nuclear-weapon-free world, in keeping with the spirit and purpose of
General Assembly resolution 1 (I) and article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;
24. Calls upon Member States to continue to support efforts to identify, elaborate, negotiate and implement
further effective legally binding measures for nuclear disarmament, and welcomes in this regard the adoption on 7 July
2017 of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons;129
25. Recommends that measures be taken to increase awareness among civil society of the risks and
catastrophic impact of any nuclear detonation, including through disarmament education;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments” and to review the implementation of the present resolution at
that session.
RESOLUTION 74/47
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 135 to 37, with 13 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)138
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cameroon, China, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Georgia, India, Japan, Pakistan, Serbia, Sweden, Switzerland

_______________
See NPT/CONF.2020/PC.I/WP.13.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Austria, Benin, Brazil, Chile, Costa
Rica, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini, Ghana,
Guatemala, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Lesotho, Malawi, Mexico, Namibia, Nigeria, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Samoa,
Seychelles, South Africa, Thailand, Togo, Uganda, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
137
138

259

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

74/47.

Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 70/50 of 7 December 2015, adopted on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, which was established to save succeeding generations from the untold suffering of the scourge of
war, and its resolution 73/68 of 5 December 2018,
Recalling also that the United Nations emerged at the time of the immense trail of death and destruction resulting
from the Second World War, 74 years ago,
Recalling further the noble principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which enjoin the international
community, individually and collectively, to spare no effort in promoting the ethical imperative of “in larger freedom”,
so that all peoples may enjoy freedom from want, freedom from fear and the freedom to live in dignity,
Convinced that, given the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risks associated with a nuclear weapon
detonation, Member States have long envisaged nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation as urgent and
interlinked ethical imperatives in achieving the objectives of the Charter, which is reflected in the first resolution,
resolution 1 (I), adopted by the General Assembly on 24 January 1946, aimed at the elimination from national
armaments of atomic weapons and of all other major weapons adaptable to mass destruction,
Acknowledging, in this connection, the ethical imperatives outlined in the provisions of its resolutions and
reports and those of other related international initiatives on the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risks
posed by a nuclear weapon detonation, including the declaration that the use of nuclear weapons would cause
indiscriminate suffering and as such is a violation of the Charter and the laws of humanity and international law,139
the condemnation of nuclear war as contrary to human conscience and a violation of the fundamental right to life,140
the threat to the very survival of humankind posed by the existence of nuclear weapons,141 the detrimental
environmental effects of the use of nuclear weapons,142 and the disquiet that was expressed at the continued spending
on the development and maintenance of nuclear arsenals,143
Acknowledging also the preamble to and article VI of the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons144
and the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons,145
in which the Court unanimously concluded that there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international
control,
Acknowledging further the United Nations Millennium Declaration,146 in which Heads of State and
Government resolved to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, and
to keep all options open for achieving that aim, including the possibility of convening an international conference to
identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Concerned that, despite the long-standing recognition that it has accorded to these ethical imperatives and while
much effort has been directed to addressing nuclear non-proliferation, limited progress has been made in meeting the
nuclear disarmament obligations required to achieve and maintain the nuclear-weapon-free world that the
international community demands,
Disappointed at the continued absence of progress towards multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament in
the Conference on Disarmament, despite unrelenting efforts of Member States towards this end,

_______________
See resolution 1653 (XVI).
See resolution 38/75.
141
See resolution S‑10/2.
142
See resolution 50/70 M.
143
See A/59/119.
144
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
145
A/51/218, annex.
146
Resolution 55/2.
139
140

260

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting with satisfaction the increasing awareness, renewed attention and growing momentum that has been
generated by Member States and the international community since 2010 regarding the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences and risks associated with nuclear weapons, which underpin the ethical imperatives for nuclear
disarmament and the urgency of achieving and maintaining a nuclear-weapon-free world, together with all related
international initiatives,
Recalling the adoption on 7 July 2017 of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,147 in which the
ethical imperatives for nuclear disarmament are acknowledged,
Conscious of the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in relation to nuclear disarmament, and determined
to promote multilateralism as essential to nuclear disarmament negotiations,
1. Calls upon all States to acknowledge the catastrophic humanitarian consequences and risks posed by a
nuclear weapon detonation, whether by accident, miscalculation or design;
2. Acknowledges the ethical imperatives for nuclear disarmament and the urgency of achieving and
maintaining a nuclear-weapon-free world, which is a “global public good of the highest order”, serving both national
and collective security interests;
3.

Declares that:

(a)

The global threat posed by nuclear weapons must urgently be eliminated;

(b) Discussions, decisions and actions on nuclear weapons must focus on the effects of these weapons on
human beings and the environment and must be guided by the unspeakable suffering and unacceptable harm that they
cause;
(c) Greater attention must be given to the impact of a nuclear weapon detonation on women and the
importance of their participation in discussions, decisions and actions on nuclear weapons;
(d) Nuclear weapons serve to undermine collective security, heighten the risk of nuclear catastrophe,
aggravate international tension and make conflict more dangerous;
(e) Arguments in favour of the retention of nuclear weapons have a negative impact on the credibility of the
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime;
(f) The long-term plans for the modernization of nuclear weapons arsenals run contrary to commitments and
obligations to nuclear disarmament and engender perceptions of the indefinite possession of these weapons;
(g) In a world where basic human needs have not yet been met, the vast resources allocated to the
modernization of nuclear weapons arsenals could instead be redirected to meeting the Sustainable Development
Goals;148
(h) Given the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons, it is inconceivable that any use of nuclear weapons,
irrespective of the cause, would be compatible with the requirements of international humanitarian law or international
law, or the laws of morality, or the dictates of public conscience;
(i) Given their indiscriminate nature and potential to annihilate humanity, nuclear weapons are inherently
immoral;
4. Notes that all responsible States have a solemn duty to take decisions that serve to protect their people and
each other from the ravages of a nuclear weapon detonation, and that the only way for States to do so is through the
total elimination of nuclear weapons;
5. Stresses that all States share an ethical responsibility to act with urgency and determination, with the
support of all relevant stakeholders, to take the effective measures, including legally binding measures, necessary to
eliminate and prohibit all nuclear weapons, given their catastrophic humanitarian consequences and associated risks;

_______________
147
148

A/CONF.229/2017/8.
See resolution 70/1.

261

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world”.
RESOLUTION 74/48
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 148 to 5, with 30 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)149
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: France, Israel, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining: Albania, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine

74/48.

Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 B of 10 December 1996, 52/38 N of 9 December 1997, 53/77 Q of 4 December
1998, 54/54 L of 1 December 1999, 55/33 I of 20 November 2000, 56/24 G of 29 November 2001, 57/73 of
22 November 2002, 58/49 of 8 December 2003, 59/85 of 3 December 2004, 60/58 of 8 December 2005, 61/69 of
6 December 2006, 62/35 of 5 December 2007, 63/65 of 2 December 2008, 64/44 of 2 December 2009, 65/58
of 8 December 2010, 67/55 of 3 December 2012, 69/35 of 2 December 2014, 70/45 of 7 December 2015, 71/51 of
5 December 2016 and 72/45 of 4 December 2017,
Recalling also the provisions on nuclear-weapon-free zones of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly, the first special session devoted to disarmament,150
Recalling further the adoption by the Disarmament Commission at its 1999 substantive session of a text entitled
“Establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the
region concerned”,151
Determined to pursue the total elimination of nuclear weapons,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Fiji, Indonesia, Ireland, Jamaica, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Samoa, Singapore, South Africa, Suriname,
Thailand, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
150
Resolution S-10/2.
151
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex I.
149

262

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Determined also to continue to contribute to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its
aspects and to the process of general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control, in
particular in the field of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, with a view to strengthening
international peace and security, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Welcoming the adoption on 7 July 2017 of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons152 and its
reaffirmation of the conviction that the establishment of the internationally recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones on
the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned enhances global and regional
peace and security, strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation regime and contributes towards realizing the objective
of nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,153 which reaffirmed the conviction that the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones contributes towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament,
Stressing the importance of the treaties of Tlatelolco,154 Rarotonga,155 Bangkok156 and Pelindaba157 establishing
nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as the Antarctic Treaty,158 inter alia, for achieving a world entirely free of nuclear
weapons,
Welcoming the preparations for the fourth Conference of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, to be held
in New York on 24 April 2020,
Noting that 115 States are currently parties and signatories to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties,
Underlining the value of enhancing cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty members by means
of mechanisms such as joint meetings of States parties, signatories and observers to those treaties, and welcoming in
this regard the seminar on fostering cooperation and enhancing consultation mechanisms among the existing nuclearweapon-free zones, held in Kazakhstan on 28 and 29 August 2019,
Reaffirming the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to the freedom of the high seas and
the rights of passage through maritime space, including those of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea,159
1. Reaffirms its conviction of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones in strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and in extending the areas of the world that are nuclear-weapon-free, and calls for greater
progress towards the total elimination of all nuclear weapons;
2. Welcomes the continued contribution that the Antarctic Treaty158 and the treaties of Tlatelolco,154
Rarotonga,155 Bangkok156 and Pelindaba157 are making towards freeing the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas
covered by those treaties from nuclear weapons;
3. Notes with satisfaction that all nuclear-weapon-free zones in the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas
are now in force;
4. Calls upon all States concerned to continue to work together in order to facilitate adherence to the
protocols to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties by all relevant States that have not yet done so, in this regard welcomes
the ratification by China, France, the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern

_______________
A/CONF.229/2017/8.
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I), NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. II) and NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. III)).
154
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
155
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
156
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
157
A/50/426, annex.
158
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
159
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.
152
153

263

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Ireland of the Protocol to the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia and the steps taken by the United
States of America towards the ratification of the protocols to the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central
Asia, to the Treaty of Pelindaba and to the Treaty of Rarotonga, and encourages progress with a view to concluding
consultations between the nuclear-weapon States and the parties to the Bangkok Treaty on the Protocol to that Treaty;
5. Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to withdraw any reservations or interpretive declarations contrary
to the object and purpose of the treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones;
6. Welcomes the steps taken to conclude further nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region concerned, including the steps taken towards the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East;
7. Congratulates the States parties and signatories to the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and
Pelindaba, as well as of Central Asia and Mongolia, for their efforts to pursue the common goals envisaged in those
treaties and to promote the nuclear-weapon-free status of the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas, and calls upon
them to explore and implement further ways and means of cooperation among themselves and their treaty agencies;
8.

Encourages efforts to reinforce coordination among nuclear-weapon-free zones;

9. Encourages the competent authorities of the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties to provide assistance to
the States parties and signatories to those treaties so as to facilitate the accomplishment of the goals of the treaties;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas”.
RESOLUTION 74/49
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 153 to 1, with 28 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)160
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Against: United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Oman, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Uganda,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zimbabwe

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia,
Eswatini, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
160

264

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

74/49.

The Arms Trade Treaty

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 61/89 of 6 December 2006, 63/240 of 24 December 2008, 64/48 of 2 December 2009,
67/234 A of 24 December 2012, 67/234 B of 2 April 2013, 68/31 of 5 December 2013, 69/49 of 2 December 2014,
70/58 of 7 December 2015, 71/50 of 5 December 2016, 72/44 of 4 December 2017 and 73/36 of 5 December 2018
and its decision 66/518 of 2 December 2011,
Recognizing that disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security,
Recognizing also the security, social, economic and humanitarian consequences of the illicit and unregulated
trade in conventional arms,
Recognizing further the legitimate political, security, economic and commercial interests of States in the
international trade in conventional arms,
Underlining the urgent need to prevent and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional arms and to prevent their
diversion to the illicit market, or for unauthorized end use and end users, including the commission of terrorist acts,
thereby preventing the exacerbation of armed violence and the violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law,
Emphasizing the responsibility of all States, in accordance with their respective international obligations, to
effectively regulate the international trade in conventional arms,
Recalling the contribution made by the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,161 as well as the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of
and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,162 and the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons,163
Highlighting the relevance of the Arms Trade Treaty,164 including its links and synergies with other relevant
instruments on conventional arms, to efforts to meet Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,165 and specifically target 16.4, which aims at significantly reducing illicit arms flows
by 2030,
Recalling the Secretary-General’s disarmament agenda, Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for
Disarmament, in particular the section of the agenda entitled “Disarmament that saves lives”,
Recognizing the negative impact of the illicit and unregulated trade in conventional arms and related
ammunition on the lives of women, men, girls and boys, and that the Arms Trade Treaty was the first international
agreement to identify and call upon States to address the link between conventional arms transfers and the risk of
serious acts of gender-based violence and serious acts of violence against women and children,
Recognizing also the important role that civil society organizations, including non-governmental organizations,
and industry play, by raising awareness, in efforts to prevent and eradicate the illicit and unregulated trade in
conventional arms, including in preventing their diversion, and in supporting the implementation of the Treaty,
Recalling the adoption by the General Assembly and the entry into force of the Treaty on 2 April 2013 and
24 December 2014, respectively, and noting that the Treaty remains open for accession by any State that has not
signed it,

_______________
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
162
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2326, No. 39574.
163
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and A/60/88/Corr.2, annex.
164
See resolution 67/234 B.
165
Resolution 70/1.
161

265

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the latest ratifications of and accessions to the Treaty, bearing in mind that the universalization of
the Treaty is essential to achieving its object and purpose,
Noting the efforts by the States parties to the Treaty to continue to explore ways and means to enhance national
implementation of the Treaty through the working group on effective treaty implementation and the voluntary trust
fund for the implementation of the Treaty,
1. Welcomes the decisions taken at the Fifth Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty, held in
Geneva from 26 to 30 August 2019, and notes that the Sixth Conference of States Parties will be held in Geneva from
17 to 21 August 2020;
2. Also welcomes the progress made by the standing working groups on effective treaty implementation,
on transparency and reporting, and on universalization in advancing the object and purpose of the Arms Trade
Treaty;164
3. Recognizes that the consolidation of the institutional structure of the Treaty provides a framework for
supporting further work under the Treaty, in particular its effective implementation, in this regard welcomes the efforts
undertaken at the Fifth Conference of States Parties to address the Treaty’s financial situation, expresses concern about
the unpaid assessed contributions of States and the potential adverse implications that this has for the Treaty processes,
and calls upon States that have not yet done so to address their financial obligations under the Treaty in a prompt and
timely manner;
4. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to ratify, accept, approve or accede to the Treaty, in
accordance with their respective constitutional processes, in order to achieve its universalization;
5. Calls upon all States parties to submit and encourages them to make available, in a timely manner, and to
update, as appropriate, their initial reports, as well as their annual reports for the preceding calendar year, as required
under article 13 of the Treaty, thereby enhancing confidence, transparency, trust and accountability, and notes the
endorsement by the Second Conference of States Parties of templates that may facilitate the reporting;
6. Calls upon those States parties in a position to do so to provide assistance, including legal or legislative
assistance, institutional capacity-building and technical, material or financial assistance, to requesting States in order
to promote the implementation and universalization of the Treaty;
7. Stresses the vital importance of the full and effective implementation of and compliance with all provisions
of the Treaty by States parties, and urges States parties to meet their obligations under the Treaty, thereby contributing
to international and regional peace, security and stability, to the reduction of human suffering and to the promotion of
cooperation, transparency and responsible action;
8. Recognizes the complementarity among all relevant international instruments on conventional arms and
the Treaty, and to this end urges all States to implement effective national measures to prevent, combat and eradicate
the illicit and unregulated trade in conventional arms and ammunition in fulfilment of their respective international
obligations and commitments;
9. Also recognizes the added value of the adoption in June 2018 of the report of the third United Nations
Conference to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,166 including the outcome document
annexed thereto, and acknowledges synergies between the Programme of Action and the Treaty;
10. Encourages further steps to enable States to increasingly prevent and tackle the diversion of conventional
arms and ammunition to unauthorized end uses and end users, and recognizes that enhancing reporting rates,
transparency and information-sharing, in line with Treaty obligations, is fundamental to achieving this goal;
11. Welcomes the adoption of action-oriented decisions on gender and gender-based violence and the fact
that States parties agreed to review progress on these two aspects on an ongoing basis, and in that respect

_______________
166

266

A/CONF.192/2018/RC/3.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

encourages States parties and signatory States to ensure the full and equal participation of women and men in
pursuing the object and purpose of the Treaty;
12. Also welcomes the successful operationalization of the voluntary trust fund for the implementation of the
Treaty, encourages eligible States to make best use of the voluntary trust fund, and encourages all States parties in a
position to do so to contribute to the voluntary trust fund;
13. Encourages States parties and signatory States in a position to do so to provide funding to the Treaty
sponsorship programme to support participation in meetings under the Treaty for those States that would otherwise
be unable to attend;
14. Encourages States parties to strengthen their cooperation with civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, industry and relevant international organizations and to work with other States parties at the national
and regional levels, and invites those stakeholders, in particular those that are underrepresented in Treaty processes,
to engage further with States parties with the aim of ensuring the effective implementation and universalization of the
Treaty;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “The Arms Trade Treaty”, and to review the implementation of the
present resolution at that session.
RESOLUTION 74/50
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 178 to 1, with 5 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)167
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Russian Federation
Abstaining: Cameroon, China, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe

74/50.

Nuclear disarmament verification

The General Assembly,
Recalling the fundamental principles for disarmament negotiations set forth in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly, the first special session devoted to disarmament,168 and the general

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia,
Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
168
Resolution S-10/2.
167

267

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

principles of verification set forth in the United Nations Disarmament Commission principles of verification of
1988,169 without prejudice to the mandate of the Conference on Disarmament,
Recalling also its resolution 71/67 of 5 December 2016, in which it, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General
to seek the views of Member States and to establish a group of governmental experts to consider the role of verification
in advancing nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the shared commitment to further progress in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation,
Convinced that, while verification is not an aim in itself, further development of the multilateral disarmament
verification capabilities will be required to provide assurance of compliance with multilateral nuclear disarmament
agreements for the achievement and maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General,170
Recognizing the pioneering nature of the work of the Group of Governmental Experts on Nuclear Disarmament
Verification, as this represents the first time that the General Assembly established a body specifically to discuss
nuclear disarmament verification, and recognizing also the need for further work related to the role of verification in
advancing nuclear disarmament, taking into account the report of the Group,171
Noting that a credible multilateral verification regime in which all States have confidence will also be essential
for achieving and maintaining a world without nuclear weapons,
Noting also that capacity-building on nuclear disarmament verification is a valuable component in the nuclear
disarmament process and also one of the fundamental factors determining whether the goal of verification could be
effectively upheld, and noting further that building capacity on nuclear disarmament verification in a sustainable
manner is not only of great significance, but also faced with practical challenges,
Recognizing that nuclear disarmament verification must be balanced against legitimate sovereignty-, security-,
safety- and proliferation-related concerns of the parties to or participants in an agreement or arrangement in this area,
Noting the contribution of representatives of civil society from the non‑governmental, academic and research
communities,
1. Welcomes the adoption by consensus of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Nuclear
Disarmament Verification, mandated in resolution 71/67;171
2. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the substantive views of Member States on the report of the Group
of Governmental Experts on Nuclear Disarmament Verification and to report back to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session;
3. Encourages the Conference on Disarmament and the Disarmament Commission to address nuclear
disarmament verification, including through substantive consideration of the report of the Group of Governmental
Experts on Nuclear Disarmament Verification;
4.

Welcomes efforts for capacity-building on nuclear disarmament verification;

5. Encourages further work on nuclear disarmament verification, taking into account the report of the Group
of Governmental Experts on Nuclear Disarmament Verification;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a group of governmental experts of up to 25 participants,
chosen on the basis of equitable geographical representation and equitable representation of women and men, which
will meet in Geneva for four sessions of one week each in 2021 and 2022, to further consider nuclear disarmament

_______________
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Special Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/S‑15/3), para. 60 (para. 6, sect. I, of the
quoted text).
170
A/72/304.
171
A/74/90.
169

268

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

verification issues, including, inter alia, the concept of a Group of Scientific and Technical Experts, building on the
report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Nuclear Disarmament Verification171 and the views of Member
States referred to in paragraph 2 above;
7. Requests the Chair of the group of governmental experts to organize, in New York, two informal
intersessional consultative meetings, open-ended so that all Member States can engage in interactive discussions and
share their views, which the Chair shall convey to the group of governmental experts for its consideration;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to render all necessary assistance to the group of governmental experts
and its Chair, including the provision of relevant documents;
9. Calls upon the Secretary-General to transmit the report of the group of governmental experts to the
General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session and to the Conference on Disarmament;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Nuclear disarmament verification”.
RESOLUTION 74/51
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)172

74/51.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/52 of 5 December 2018,
Deeply concerned by the magnitude of human casualty and suffering, especially among children, caused by the
illicit proliferation and use of small arms and light weapons,
Concerned by the negative impact that the illicit proliferation and use of those weapons continue to have on the
efforts of States in the Sahelo-Saharan subregion in the areas of poverty eradication, sustainable development and the
maintenance of peace, security and stability,
Bearing in mind the Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation
and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light Weapons, adopted in Bamako on 1 December 2000,173
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General entitled “In larger freedom: towards development, security and
human rights for all”,174 in which he emphasized that States must strive just as hard to eliminate the threat of small
arms and light weapons as they do to eliminate the threat of weapons of mass destruction,
Recalling also the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, adopted on 8 December 2005,175

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Economic Community of West African States), Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay.
173
A/CONF.192/PC/23, annex.
174
A/59/2005.
175
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and A/60/88/Corr.2, annex.
172

269

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling further the expression of support in the 2005 World Summit Outcome for the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects,176
Recalling the adoption, on 14 June 2006 in Abuja at the thirtieth ordinary summit of the Economic Community
of West African States, of the Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials, in replacement of the moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms and light
weapons in West Africa,
Recalling also the entry into force of the Convention on 29 September 2009,
Recalling further the decision taken by the Economic Community to establish the Small Arms Unit, responsible
for advocating appropriate policies and developing and implementing programmes, as well as the establishment of
the Economic Community’s Small Arms Control Programme, launched on 6 June 2006 in Bamako, in replacement
of the Programme for Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development,
Taking note of the latest report of the Secretary-General on the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
all its aspects and assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting
them,177
Recalling, in that regard, the decision of the European Union to significantly support the Economic Community
in its efforts to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
Recognizing the important role that civil society organizations play, by raising public awareness, in efforts to
curb the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons,
Recalling the report of the sixth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held
in New York from 6 to 10 June 2016,178
Recalling also the report of the third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York from 18 to 29 June 2018,179
Welcoming the inclusion of small arms and light weapons in the scope of the Arms Trade Treaty,180 as well as
the inclusion of international assistance in its provisions,
1. Commends the United Nations and international, regional and other organizations for their assistance to
States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;
2. Encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts in the context of the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 49/75 G of 15 December 1994 and the recommendations of the United Nations advisory
missions aimed at curbing the illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons and collecting them in the affected
States that so request, with the support of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa
and in close cooperation with the African Union;
3. Encourages the international community to support the implementation of the Economic Community of
West African States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials;
4. Encourages the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan subregion to facilitate the effective functioning of national
commissions to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and in that regard invites the
international community to lend its support wherever possible;

_______________
Resolution 60/1, para. 94.
A/74/187.
178
A/CONF.192/BMS/2016/2.
179
A/CONF.192/2018/RC/3.
180
See resolution 67/234 B.
176
177

270

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Encourages the collaboration of civil society organizations and associations in the efforts of the national
commissions to combat the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and in the implementation of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects;181
6. Encourages cooperation among State organs, international organizations and civil society in support of
programmes and projects aimed at combating the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;
7. Calls upon the international community to provide technical and financial support to strengthen the
capacity of civil society organizations to take action to help to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons;
8. Invites the Secretary-General and those States and organizations that are in a position to do so to continue
to provide assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider the matter and to report to the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and
light weapons and collecting them”.
RESOLUTION 74/52
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)182

74/52.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements on
disarmament and arms control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/70 M of 12 December 1995, 51/45 E of 10 December 1996, 52/38 E of 9 December
1997, 53/77 J of 4 December 1998, 54/54 S of 1 December 1999, 55/33 K of 20 November 2000, 56/24 F of
29 November 2001, 57/64 of 22 November 2002, 58/45 of 8 December 2003, 59/68 of 3 December 2004, 60/60 of
8 December 2005, 61/63 of 6 December 2006, 62/28 of 5 December 2007, 63/51 of 2 December 2008, 64/33
of 2 December 2009, 65/53 of 8 December 2010, 66/31 of 2 December 2011, 67/37 of 3 December 2012, 68/36 of
5 December 2013, 69/55 of 2 December 2014, 70/30 of 7 December 2015, 71/60 of 5 December 2016, 72/47 of
4 December 2017 and 73/39 of 5 December 2018,
Emphasizing the importance of the observance of environmental norms in the preparation and implementation
of disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
Recognizing that it is necessary to take duly into account the agreements adopted at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, as well as prior relevant agreements, in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms limitation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 73/39,183
Noting that the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, held in Caracas on 20 and 21 July 2019, welcomed the adoption by the General Assembly, without

_______________
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
182
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
183
A/74/99.
181

271

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

a vote, of resolution 73/39 on the observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of
agreements on disarmament and arms control,
Mindful of the detrimental environmental effects of the use of nuclear weapons,
1. Reaffirms that international disarmament forums should take fully into account the relevant environmental
norms in negotiating treaties and agreements on disarmament and arms limitation and that all States, through their
actions, should contribute fully to ensuring compliance with the aforementioned norms in the implementation of
treaties and conventions to which they are parties;
2. Calls upon States to adopt unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral measures so as to contribute to
ensuring the application of scientific and technological progress within the framework of international security,
disarmament and other related spheres, without detriment to the environment or to its effective contribution to
attaining sustainable development;
3. Welcomes the information provided by Member States on the implementation of the measures that they
have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution;183
4. Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General information on the measures that they
have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged in the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a report containing that information to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control”.
RESOLUTION 74/53
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 157 to none, with 23 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)184
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, Ukraine and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
184

272

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

74/53.

Transparency in armaments

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/36 L of 9 December 1991, 47/52 L of 15 December 1992, 48/75 E of 16 December
1993, 49/75 C of 15 December 1994, 50/70 D of 12 December 1995, 51/45 H of 10 December 1996, 52/38 R of
9 December 1997, 53/77 V of 4 December 1998, 54/54 O of 1 December 1999, 55/33 U of 20 November 2000, 56/24
Q of 29 November 2001, 57/75 of 22 November 2002, 58/54 of 8 December 2003, 60/226 of 23 December 2005,
61/77 of 6 December 2006, 63/69 of 2 December 2008, 64/54 of 2 December 2009, 66/39 of 2 December 2011, 68/43
of 5 December 2013 and 71/44 of 5 December 2016, entitled “Transparency in armaments”,
Continuing to take the view that an enhanced level of transparency in armaments contributes greatly to
confidence-building and security among States and that the establishment of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms constitutes an important step forward in the promotion of transparency in military matters,
Welcoming the consolidated reports of the Secretary-General on the Register, which include the returns of
Member States for 2015,185 2016186 and 2017,187
Welcoming also the 2019 report of the Secretary-General on the continuing operation of the Register and its
further development, prepared with the assistance of the group of governmental experts,188 including the
recommendation that those Member States in a position to do so, using the seven-plus-one formula, provide
information on exports and imports of small arms and light weapons, as appropriate, through the online reporting tool
or the optional standardized form for reporting international transfers of small arms and light weapons,
Welcoming further the response of Member States to the request contained in paragraphs 9 and 10 of resolution
46/36 L to provide data on their imports and exports of arms, as well as available background information regarding
their military holdings, procurement through national production and relevant policies,
Welcoming the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty189 on 24 December 2014, as it enhances transparency
through reporting on arms transfers, as well as through other mechanisms, and noting that the Treaty remains open
for accession by any State that has not signed it,
Expressing its concern at the low number of reports that have been submitted to the Register by the Member
States,
Noting the concern expressed in the report of the 2019 group of governmental experts188 that the current level
of resources of the Secretariat in the field of database management is insufficient to carry out the effective operation
of the Register,
Stressing that the continuing operation of the Register and its further development should be reviewed in order
to secure a Register that is capable of attracting the widest possible participation,
1. Reaffirms its determination to ensure the effective operation of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, as provided for in paragraphs 7 to 10 of resolution 46/36 L;
2. Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the continuing operation of the Register and its further
development and the recommendations contained in the consensus report of the 2019 group of governmental
experts;188
3. Emphasizes that it is important for those Member States in a position to do so, using the seven-plus-one
formula, to provide information on exports and imports of small arms and light weapons, and decides to adapt the
scope of the Register in conformity with the recommendations contained in the 2019 report of the SecretaryGeneral;188

_______________
A/71/138 and A/71/138/Add.1.
A/72/331.
187
A/73/185.
188
See A/74/211.
189
See resolution 67/234 B.
185
186

273

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Calls upon Member States, with a view to achieving universal participation, to provide the SecretaryGeneral, by 31 May annually, with the requested data and information for the Register, including nil reports if
appropriate, using the online reporting tool, on the basis of resolutions 46/36 L and 47/52 L and the recommendations
contained in the respective reports of the Secretary-General on the continuing operation of the Register and its further
development;
5. Invites Member States in a position to do so, pending further development of the Register, to provide
additional information on procurement through national production and military holdings as part of their background
information and to make use of the de facto reporting form, or any other method they deem appropriate, for the
respective elements;
6. Reaffirms its decision, with a view to further development of the Register, to keep the scope of,
participation in and use of the Register under review, and to that end requests the Secretary-General, with the
assistance of a group of governmental experts to be convened for a week each at the end of 2021 and at the beginning
and in the middle of 2022, within existing resources, with the broadest possible participation, and on the basis of
equitable geographical representation, to prepare a report on the continuing operation and relevance of the Register,
including by exploring the relationship between the participation in, scope of and use of the Register, and its further
development, taking into account the work of the Conference on Disarmament, relevant deliberations within the
United Nations, the views expressed by Member States and the reports of the Secretary-General on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development, with a view to taking a decision at its seventy-seventh session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to implement the recommendations contained in his 2000, 2003, 2006,
2009, 2013, 2016 and 2019 reports on the continuing operation of the Register and its further development, in
particular the recommendations contained in paragraphs 122 (a) to (n) of the consensus report of the 2019 group of
governmental experts that are specifically addressed to the Secretariat;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General in that regard to ensure that sufficient resources are made available
by the United Nations, within existing resources, to enable the Secretariat to effectively implement its core functions
for the effective operation of the Register, as outlined in paragraphs 122 (a) to (n) of the 2019 report, including in
relation to the recommendation in paragraph 122 (e) pertaining to the translation of the online reporting tool and the
Register database website into all six official languages of the United Nations, and to ensure that sufficient resources
at the appropriate levels are provided in that regard;
9. Invites the Conference on Disarmament to consider continuing its work undertaken in the field of
transparency in armaments;
10. Reiterates its call upon all Member States to cooperate at the regional and subregional levels, taking fully
into account the specific conditions prevailing in the region or subregion, with a view to enhancing and coordinating
international and regional efforts aimed at increased openness and transparency in armaments;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session on
progress made in implementing the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session, under the item entitled
“General and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Transparency in armaments”.
RESOLUTION 74/54
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 142 to 34, with 10 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)190
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
190

274

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Finland, Georgia, Japan, Liberia, Serbia, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine

74/54.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 67/39 of 3 December 2012, 68/32 of 5 December 2013, 69/58 of 2 December 2014,
70/34 of 7 December 2015, 71/71 of 5 December 2016, 72/251 of 24 December 2017 and 73/40 of 5 December 2018,
Welcoming the convening of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament, on
26 September 2013, and recognizing its contribution to furthering the objective of the total elimination of nuclear
weapons,
Emphasizing the importance of seeking a safer world for all and achieving peace and security in a world without
nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that effective measures of nuclear disarmament have the highest priority, as affirmed at the first
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the total elimination of nuclear weapons are the only absolute
guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Acknowledging the significant contribution made by a number of countries towards realizing the objective of
nuclear disarmament by the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as by the voluntary renunciation of
nuclear weapon programmes or withdrawal of all nuclear weapons from their territories, and strongly supporting the
speedy establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East,
Recalling the resolve of the Heads of State and Government, as contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration,191 to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, and to keep
all options open for achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening an international conference to identify
ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Reaffirming the central role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament, and reaffirming also the continued
importance and relevance of multilateral disarmament machinery as mandated by the General Assembly at its first
special session devoted to disarmament,
Acknowledging the important role of civil society, including non-governmental organizations, academia,
parliamentarians and the mass media, in advancing the objective of nuclear disarmament,
Sharing the deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and in
this context reaffirming the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law,

_______________
191

Resolution 55/2.

275

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 73/40,192 and welcoming the
fact that a large number of Member States contributed their views to this report,
Noting the adoption, with a vote, of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons193 on 7 July 2017 at the
United Nations conference to negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading towards
their total elimination,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,194 particularly to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures
relating to the cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Expressing its concern that improvements in existing nuclear weapons and the development of new types of
nuclear weapons, as provided for in the military doctrines of some nuclear-weapon States, violate their legal
obligations on nuclear disarmament, as well as the commitments made to diminish the role of nuclear weapons in
their military and security policies, and contravene the negative security assurances provided by the nuclear-weapon
States,
Expressing its deep concern that the negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament for the conclusion of a
comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons have not yet commenced,
Determined to work collectively towards the realization of nuclear disarmament,
1. Underlines the strong support, expressed at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear
disarmament, held on 26 September 2013, for taking urgent and effective measures to achieve the total elimination of
nuclear weapons;
2. Calls for urgent compliance with the legal obligations and the fulfilment of the commitments undertaken
on nuclear disarmament;
3. Endorses the wide support expressed at the high-level meeting for a comprehensive convention on nuclear
weapons;
4. Calls for the urgent commencement of negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on effective
nuclear disarmament measures to achieve the total elimination of nuclear weapons, including, in particular, on a
comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons;
5. Decides to convene, in New York, on a date to be decided later, a United Nations high-level international
conference on nuclear disarmament to review the progress made in this regard;
6. Takes note of the views provided by Member States with regard to achieving the objective of the total
elimination of nuclear weapons, in particular on the elements of a comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons, as
reflected in the report submitted by the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 73/40,192 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to forward this report to the Conference on Disarmament and the Disarmament Commission for their early
consideration;
7. Welcomes the commemoration and promotion of 26 September as the International Day for the Total
Elimination of Nuclear Weapons devoted to furthering this objective;
8. Expresses its appreciation to Member States, the United Nations system and civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, academia, parliamentarians, the mass media and individuals that developed
activities in promotion of the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons;
9. Reiterates its request to the President of the General Assembly to organize, on 26 September every year,
a one-day high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly to commemorate and promote the International Day for the
Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons;

_______________
A/74/141.
A/CONF.229/2017/8.
194
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
192
193

276

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

10. Decides that the aforementioned high-level plenary meeting shall be held with the participation of
Member and observer States, represented at the highest possible level, as well as with the participation of the President
of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to update the platform for the promotion of these activities and
to undertake all the arrangements, providing all the necessary resources and services, including webcasts, to
commemorate and promote the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, including through
the United Nations Offices at Geneva and Vienna, as well as the United Nations regional centres for peace and
disarmament;
12. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, academia, parliamentarians, the mass media and individuals, to commemorate and promote the
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons through all means of educational and public
awareness-raising activities about the threat posed to humanity by nuclear weapons and the necessity for their total
elimination in order to mobilize international efforts towards achieving the common goal of a nuclear-weapon-free
world;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States with regard to achieving the objective
of the total elimination of nuclear weapons, in particular on effective nuclear disarmament measures, including
elements of a comprehensive convention on nuclear weapons, and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session, and also to transmit the report to the Conference on Disarmament;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on nuclear disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 74/55
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 127 to 5, with 51 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)195
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
195

277

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

74/55.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non‑proliferation

The General Assembly,
Determined to foster strict respect for the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 56/24 T of 29 November 2001 on multilateral cooperation in the area of disarmament
and non-proliferation and global efforts against terrorism and other relevant resolutions, as well as its resolutions 57/63
of 22 November 2002, 58/44 of 8 December 2003, 59/69 of 3 December 2004, 60/59 of 8 December 2005, 61/62 of
6 December 2006, 62/27 of 5 December 2007, 63/50 of 2 December 2008, 64/34 of 2 December 2009, 65/54 of
8 December 2010, 66/32 of 2 December 2011, 67/38 of 3 December 2012, 68/38 of 5 December 2013, 69/54
of 2 December 2014, 70/31 of 7 December 2015, 71/61 of 5 December 2016, 72/48 of 4 December 2017 and 73/41
of 5 December 2018 on the promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation,
Recalling also the purpose of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security and, to that end,
to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace and for the suppression of
acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might
lead to a breach of the peace, as enshrined in the Charter,
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration,196 in which it is stated, inter alia, that the
responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social development, as well as threats to international peace
and security, must be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally and that, as the
most universal and most representative organization in the world, the United Nations must play the central role,
Convinced that, in the globalization era and with the information revolution, arms regulation, non-proliferation
and disarmament problems are more than ever the concern of all countries in the world, which are affected in one way
or another by these problems and therefore should have the possibility to participate in the negotiations that arise to
tackle them,
Bearing in mind the existence of a broad structure of disarmament and arms regulation agreements resulting
from non-discriminatory and transparent multilateral negotiations with the participation of a large number of
countries, regardless of their size and power,
Aware of the need to advance further in the field of arms regulation, non‑proliferation and disarmament on the
basis of universal, multilateral, non‑discriminatory and transparent negotiations with the goal of reaching general and
complete disarmament under strict international control,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral negotiations on disarmament,
Recognizing also that the proliferation and development of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons, are among the most immediate threats to international peace and security which need to be dealt with, with
the highest priority,
Considering that the multilateral disarmament agreements provide the mechanism for States parties to consult
one another and to cooperate in solving any problems which may arise in relation to the objective of, or in the
application of, the provisions of the agreements and that such consultations and cooperation may also be undertaken
through appropriate international procedures within the framework of the United Nations and in accordance with the
Charter,
Stressing that international cooperation, the peaceful settlement of disputes, dialogue and confidence-building
measures would make an essential contribution to the creation of multilateral and bilateral friendly relations among
peoples and nations,
Being gravely concerned at the continuous and progressive erosion of multilateralism in the field of arms
regulation, non-proliferation and disarmament, and recognizing that the abrogation of major instruments of the arms

_______________
196

278

Resolution 55/2.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

control and non‑proliferation architecture as a result of unilateral actions by Member States in resolving their security
concerns would jeopardize international peace and security and undermine confidence in the international security
system as well as the foundations of the United Nations itself,
Noting that the Eighteenth Midterm Ministerial Meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Baku from 3 to 6 April 2018, welcomed the adoption of resolution 72/48 on the promotion of multilateralism in the
area of disarmament and non-proliferation and underlined the fact that multilateralism and multilaterally agreed
solutions, in accordance with the Charter, provide the only sustainable method of addressing disarmament and
international security issues,
Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
and determined to promote multilateralism as an essential way to develop arms regulation and disarmament
negotiations,
1. Reaffirms multilateralism as the core principle in negotiations in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation with a view to maintaining and strengthening universal norms and enlarging their scope;
2. Also reaffirms multilateralism as the core principle in resolving disarmament and non-proliferation
concerns;
3. Urges the participation of all interested States in multilateral negotiations on arms regulation,
non-proliferation and disarmament in a non-discriminatory and transparent manner;
4. Underlines the importance of preserving the existing agreements on arms regulation and disarmament and
the multilateral disarmament forums, which constitute an expression of the results of international cooperation and
multilateral negotiations in response to the challenges facing humankind;
5. Calls once again upon all Member States to renew and fulfil their individual and collective commitments
to multilateral cooperation as an important means of pursuing and achieving their common objectives in the area of
disarmament and non-proliferation;
6. Requests the States parties to the relevant instruments on weapons of mass destruction to consult and
cooperate among themselves in resolving their concerns with regard to cases of non-compliance as well as on
implementation, in accordance with the procedures defined in those instruments, and to refrain from resorting or
threatening to resort to unilateral actions or directing unverified non-compliance accusations against one another to
resolve their concerns;
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General containing the replies of Member States on the promotion
of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation, submitted pursuant to resolution 73/41;197
8. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on the issue of the promotion of
multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non‑proliferation and to submit a report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation”.
RESOLUTION 74/56
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 179 to none, with 4 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)198
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,

_______________
A/74/96.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
197
198

279

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: France, Israel, Liberia, United States of America

74/56.

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 I of 15 December 1994, 50/70 F of 12 December 1995, 51/45 C of 10 December
1996, 52/38 F of 9 December 1997, 53/77 AA of 4 December 1998, 54/54 U of 1 December 1999, 55/33 M of
20 November 2000, 56/24 D of 29 November 2001, 57/61 of 22 November 2002, 59/71 of 3 December 2004, 61/60
of 6 December 2006, 62/29 of 5 December 2007, 65/66 of 8 December 2010, 72/49 of 4 December 2017 and 73/42
of 5 December 2018, as well as its decisions 58/521 of 8 December 2003, 60/518 of 8 December 2005, 60/559 of
6 June 2006, 63/519 of 2 December 2008, 64/515 of 2 December 2009 and 70/551 of 23 December 2015,
Recalling also that, there being a consensus to do so in each case, three special sessions of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament were held in 1978, 1982 and 1988, respectively,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, adopted by
consensus at the first special session devoted to disarmament,199
Bearing in mind also the ultimate objective of general and complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Reiterating its conviction that a special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament can set the
future course of action in the fields of disarmament, arms control, non-proliferation and related international security
matters,
Emphasizing the importance of multilateralism in the process of disarmament, arms control, non-proliferation
and related international security matters,
Recalling the conclusion of the work of the Open-ended Working Group on the fourth special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament to consider the objectives and agenda of the fourth special session, and to
adopt its report and substantive recommendations by consensus,200
Recalling also the report of the Open-ended Working Group and the recommendations contained therein,
1. Recalls the adoption by consensus of the recommendations on the objectives and agenda of the fourth
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament by the Open-ended Working Group on the fourth
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, which was established by the Assembly by its
resolution 65/66 and its decision 70/551 and which met in New York in 2016 and 2017;

_______________
199
200

280

Resolution S‑10/2.
A/AC.268/2017/2.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Also recalls the report of the Open-ended Working Group and the substantive recommendations contained
therein;200
3. Reiterates its appreciation to the participants of the Open-ended Working Group for their constructive
contribution to its work;
4. Encourages Member States to continue consultations on the next steps for the convening of the fourth
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 74/57
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)201

74/57.

Relationship between disarmament and development

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Charter of the United Nations envisages the establishment and maintenance of international
peace and security with the least diversion for armaments of the world’s human and economic resources,
Recalling also the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly
concerning the relationship between disarmament and development,202 as well as the adoption on 11 September 1987 of
the Final Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development,203
Recalling further its resolutions 49/75 J of 15 December 1994, 50/70 G of 12 December 1995, 51/45 D of
10 December 1996, 52/38 D of 9 December 1997, 53/77 K of 4 December 1998, 54/54 T of 1 December 1999,
55/33 L of 20 November 2000, 56/24 E of 29 November 2001, 57/65 of 22 November 2002, 59/78 of 3 December
2004, 60/61 of 8 December 2005, 61/64 of 6 December 2006, 62/48 of 5 December 2007, 63/52 of 2 December 2008,
64/32 of 2 December 2009, 65/52 of 8 December 2010, 66/30 of 2 December 2011, 67/40 of 3 December 2012, 68/37
of 5 December 2013, 69/56 of 2 December 2014, 70/32 of 7 December 2015, 71/62 of 5 December 2016, 72/46 of
4 December 2017 and 73/37 of 5 December 2018 and its decision 58/520 of 8 December 2003,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Eighteenth Midterm Ministerial Meeting of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Baku from 3 to 6 April 2018,
Mindful of the changes in international relations that have taken place since the adoption in 1987 of the Final
Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, including
the development agenda that has emerged over the past decade,
Bearing in mind the new challenges for the international community in the fields of development, poverty
eradication and the elimination of the diseases that afflict humanity,
Stressing the importance of the symbiotic relationship between disarmament and development and the important
role of security in this connection, and concerned at increasing global military expenditure, which could otherwise be
spent on development needs,
Recalling the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the relationship between disarmament and
development204 and its reappraisal of this significant issue in the current international context,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
202
See resolution S-10/2.
203
See Report of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, New York, 24 August–11 September
1987 (A/CONF.130/39).
204
See A/59/119.
201

281

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Bearing in mind the importance of following up on the implementation of the action programme adopted at the
1987 International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development,203
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 73/37,205
1. Stresses the central role of the United Nations in the relationship between disarmament and development,
and requests the Secretary-General to strengthen further the role of the Organization in this field, in particular the highlevel Steering Group on Disarmament and Development, in order to ensure continued and effective coordination and
close cooperation between the relevant United Nations departments, agencies and subagencies;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action, through appropriate organs and within available
resources, for the implementation of the action programme adopted on 11 September 1987 at the International
Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development;203
3. Urges the international community to devote part of the resources made available by the implementation
of disarmament and arms limitation agreements to economic and social development, with a view to reducing the
ever-widening gap between developed and developing countries;
4. Encourages the international community to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals206 and to make
reference to the contribution that disarmament could provide in meeting them when it reviews its progress towards
this purpose, as well as to make greater efforts to integrate disarmament, humanitarian and development activities;
5. Encourages the relevant regional and subregional organizations and institutions, non-governmental
organizations and research institutes to incorporate issues related to the relationship between disarmament and
development into their agendas and, in this regard, to take into account the report of the Group of Governmental
Experts on the relationship between disarmament and development;204
6. Reiterates its invitation to Member States to provide the Secretary-General with information regarding
measures and efforts to devote part of the resources made available by the implementation of disarmament and arms
limitation agreements to economic and social development, with a view to reducing the ever-widening gap between
developed and developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including the information provided by Member States pursuant to
paragraph 6 above;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Relationship between disarmament and development”.
RESOLUTION 74/58
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)207

74/58.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind resolutions CM/Res.1153 (XLVIII) of 1988208 and CM/Res.1225 (L) of 1989,209 adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, concerning the dumping of nuclear and industrial
wastes in Africa,

_______________
A/74/116.
See resolution 70/1.
207
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Nigeria (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of African States).
208
See A/43/398, annex I.
209
See A/44/603, annex I.
205
206

282

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/530 establishing the Code of Practice on the International Transboundary
Movement of Radioactive Waste, adopted on 21 September 1990 by the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency at its thirty-fourth regular session,
Taking note of the commitment made by the participants in the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security, held in
Moscow on 19 and 20 April 1996, to ban the dumping at sea of radioactive wastes,210
Considering its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which the General Assembly requested the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,211 inter alia, to consider effective methods of control against the use
of radiological methods of warfare,
Aware of the potential hazards underlying any use of radioactive wastes that would constitute radiological
warfare and its implications for regional and international security, in particular for the security of developing
countries,
Recalling all its resolutions on the matter since its forty-third session in 1988, including its resolution 51/45 J of
10 December 1996,
Recalling also resolution GC(45)/RES/10, adopted by consensus on 21 September 2001 by the General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its forty-fifth regular session, in which States shipping
radioactive materials are invited to provide, as appropriate, assurances to concerned States, upon their request, that the
national regulations of the shipping State take into account the Agency’s transport regulations and to provide them
with relevant information relating to the shipment of such materials, with the information provided being in no case
contradictory to the measures of physical security and safety,
Recalling further the adoption, in Vienna on 5 September 1997, of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management,212 as recommended by the participants in
the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security,
Recalling the convening by the International Atomic Energy Agency of the Ministerial Conference on Nuclear
Safety, in Vienna from 20 to 24 June 2011, and its outcome, the Declaration of the International Atomic Energy
Agency Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety, as well as the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety, endorsed by the
General Conference of the Agency at its fifty-fifth regular session,
Noting the convening by the Secretary-General of the high-level meeting on nuclear safety and security, in New
York on 22 September 2011,
Noting with satisfaction that the Joint Convention entered into force on 18 June 2001,
Noting that the first Review Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management was convened in Vienna from
3 to 14 November 2003,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly, the first special session devoted to disarmament,213
1.

Takes note of the part of the report of the Conference on Disarmament relating to radiological weapons;214

2. Also takes note of the Declaration of the International Atomic Energy Agency Ministerial Conference on
Nuclear Safety, the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety and the high-level meeting on nuclear safety and security convened
by the Secretary-General;

_______________
A/51/131, annex I, para. 20.
The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament became the Committee on Disarmament as from the tenth special session of the
General Assembly. The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.
212
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2153, No. 37605.
213
Resolution S-10/2.
214
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/74/27), sect. III.E.
210
211

283

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Expresses grave concern regarding any use of nuclear wastes that would constitute radiological warfare
and have grave implications for the national security of all States;
4. Calls upon all States to take appropriate measures with a view to preventing any dumping of nuclear or
radioactive wastes that would infringe upon the sovereignty of States;
5. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to take into account, in any negotiations for a convention on
the prohibition of radiological weapons, radioactive wastes as part of the scope of such a convention;
6. Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to continue to consider such a convention and to include
in its report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session the progress recorded in the negotiations on this
subject;
7. Takes note of resolution CM/Res.1356 (LIV) of 1991, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity,215 on the Bamako Convention on the Ban of the Import into Africa and the Control of
Transboundary Movement and Management of Hazardous Wastes within Africa;216
8. Expresses the hope that the effective implementation of the International Atomic Energy Agency Code of
Practice on the International Transboundary Movement of Radioactive Waste will enhance the protection of all States
from the dumping of radioactive wastes on their territories;
9. Appeals to all Member States that have not yet taken the steps necessary to become party to the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management212 to do
so as soon as possible;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes”.
RESOLUTION 74/59
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 138 to 33, with 15 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)217
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic
of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal,

_______________
See A/46/390, annex I.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2101, No. 36508.
217
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belize,
Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Philippines, Samoa, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Tunisia, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
215
216

284

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Finland,
Georgia, Iceland, India, Japan, Liberia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Serbia, Ukraine

74/59.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat
or use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 K of 15 December 1994, 51/45 M of 10 December 1996, 52/38 O of 9 December
1997, 53/77 W of 4 December 1998, 54/54 Q of 1 December 1999, 55/33 X of 20 November 2000, 56/24 S of
29 November 2001, 57/85 of 22 November 2002, 58/46 of 8 December 2003, 59/83 of 3 December 2004, 60/76 of
8 December 2005, 61/83 of 6 December 2006, 62/39 of 5 December 2007, 63/49 of 2 December 2008, 64/55
of 2 December 2009, 65/76 of 8 December 2010, 66/46 of 2 December 2011, 67/33 of 3 December 2012, 68/42 of
5 December 2013, 69/43 of 2 December 2014, 70/56 of 7 December 2015, 71/58 of 5 December 2016, 72/58 of
4 December 2017 and 73/64 of 5 December 2018,
Convinced that the continuing existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to humanity and all life on Earth, and
recognizing that the only defence against a nuclear catastrophe is the total elimination of nuclear weapons and the
certainty that they will never be produced again,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the realization of the goal of a nuclear-weaponfree world through the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, in particular the obligations undertaken in article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,218 to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures
relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament adopted at the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,219 the
unequivocal commitment of nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals
leading to nuclear disarmament, agreed at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,220 and the action points agreed at the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as part of the conclusions and recommendations for
follow-on actions on nuclear disarmament,221
Sharing the deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and in
this context reaffirming the need for all States at all times to comply with applicable international law, including
international humanitarian law,
Calling upon all nuclear-weapon States to undertake concrete disarmament efforts, and stressing that all States
need to make special efforts to achieve and maintain a world without nuclear weapons,
Recalling the five-point proposal for nuclear disarmament of the Secretary-General, in which he proposes, inter
alia, the consideration of negotiations on a nuclear weapons convention or agreement on a framework of separate
mutually reinforcing instruments, backed by a strong system of verification,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)/Corr.2), annex, decision 2.
220
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
221
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I.
218
219

285

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting continued efforts towards realizing nuclear disarmament, including through the Secretary-General’s
disarmament agenda, Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament,
Recalling the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in its resolution 50/245 of 10 September
1996, and expressing its satisfaction at the increasing number of States that have signed and ratified the Treaty,
Recognizing with satisfaction that the Antarctic Treaty,222 the treaties of Tlatelolco,223 Rarotonga,224 Bangkok225
and Pelindaba226 and the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia, as well as Mongolia’s nuclearweapon-free status, are gradually freeing the entire southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered by those treaties
from nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the need for a multilaterally negotiated and legally binding instrument to assure non-nuclearweapon States against the threat or use of nuclear weapons pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming the central role of the Conference on Disarmament as the sole multilateral disarmament negotiating
forum,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence negotiations on a phased programme
for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of time,
Stressing the urgent need for the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate concrete progress on the 13 practical steps
to implement article VI of the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons leading to nuclear disarmament,
contained in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference,
Recalling the Model Nuclear Weapons Convention submitted to the Secretary-General by Costa Rica and
Malaysia in 2007 and circulated by the Secretary-General,227
Welcoming the adoption on 7 July 2017 of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,228 which has
contributed to achieving the objective of a legally binding prohibition of the development, production, testing,
deployment, stockpiling, threat or use of nuclear weapons and their destruction under effective international control,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear
weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,229
1. Underlines once again the unanimous conclusion of the International Court of Justice that there exists an
obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control;
2. Calls once again upon all States to immediately engage in multilateral negotiations leading to nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control, including under the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons;228
3. Requests all States to inform the Secretary-General of the efforts and measures which they have taken
with respect to the implementation of the present resolution and nuclear disarmament, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to apprise the General Assembly of that information at its seventy-fifth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons”.

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
Ibid., vol. 634, No. 9068.
224
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
225
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
226
A/50/426, annex.
227
A/62/650, annex.
228
A/CONF.229/2017/8.
229
A/51/218, annex.
222
223

286

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 74/60
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)230

74/60.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/69 of 5 December 2018, as well as all previous resolutions on the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects, including resolution 56/24 V of 24 December 2001,
Emphasizing the importance of the continued and full implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,231 and recognizing its
important contribution to international efforts on this matter,
Emphasizing also the importance of the continued and full implementation of the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons (the
International Tracing Instrument),232
Recalling the commitment of States to the Programme of Action as the main framework for measures within
the activities of the international community to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects,
Underlining the need for States to enhance their efforts to build national capacity for the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument,
Mindful of the implementation of the outcomes adopted by the follow-up meetings on the Programme of Action,
Welcoming the successful conclusion of the third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects (the third Review Conference), held in New York from 18 to 29 June 2018,
Recognizing the need for the strengthened participation of women in decision-making and implementation
processes relating to the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument, and reaffirming the need for
States to mainstream gender dimensions into their implementation efforts,
Noting that web-based tools developed by the Secretariat, including its searchable database and the Modular
Small-arms-control Implementation Compendium, and the tools developed by Member States could be used to assess
progress made in the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Reaffirming the acknowledgement, by the third Review Conference in its outcome document,233 of the proposal
on the establishment of a dedicated fellowship training programme on small arms and light weapons in order to
strengthen technical knowledge and expertise in areas relating to the implementation of the Programme of Action and
the International Tracing Instrument, in particular in developing countries,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Netherlands, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay and Zambia.
231
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
232
See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and A/60/88/Corr.2, annex.
233
A/CONF.192/2018/RC/3, annex.
230

287

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the early designation of Kenya as the Chair of the Seventh Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, to be held in 2020,
Noting that voluntary national reports on the implementation of the Programme of Action can serve, inter alia,
to provide a baseline for measuring progress in its implementation, build confidence and promote transparency,
provide a basis for information exchange and action and serve to identify needs and opportunities for international
assistance and cooperation, including the matching of needs with available resources and expertise,
Noting with satisfaction regional and subregional efforts being undertaken in support of the implementation of
the Programme of Action, and commending the progress that has already been made in this regard, including the
tackling of both supply and demand factors that are relevant to addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons,
Recognizing that sharing and applying best practices, on a voluntary basis, at the regional, subregional and
national levels support the full and effective implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument and should therefore be an ongoing effort, in order to address ongoing challenges associated with the
diversion of and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
Reaffirming that international cooperation and assistance are an essential aspect of the full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument,
Recognizing the efforts undertaken by civil society in the provision of assistance to States for the implementation
of the Programme of Action,
Recalling that Governments bear the primary responsibility for preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects, in accordance with the sovereignty of States and their relevant
international obligations,
Reiterating that illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons is a serious problem that the international
community should address urgently,
Highlighting new challenges and potential opportunities with regard to effective marking, record-keeping and
tracing resulting from developments in the manufacturing, technology and design of small arms and light weapons,
and bearing in mind the different situations, capacities and priorities of States and regions,
Recognizing that the opportunities and challenges associated with these developments in the manufacturing,
technology and design of small arms and light weapons, including polymer and modular weapons, must be addressed
in a timely manner,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,234 which includes an overview of the implementation of
resolution 73/69 and recommendations on how to strengthen the implementation of the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument, including by addressing challenges associated with, inter alia, polymer and modular
weapons,
Welcoming the inclusion of small arms and light weapons in the scope of the Arms Trade Treaty,235
Acknowledging that effective national control systems for the transfer of conventional arms contribute to the
prevention and eradication of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects,
1. Underlines the fact that the issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects
requires concerted efforts at the national, regional and international levels to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
manufacture, transfer and circulation of small arms and light weapons, and that their uncontrolled spread in many
regions of the world has a wide range of humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences and poses a serious threat to
peace, reconciliation, safety, security, stability and sustainable development at the individual, local, national, regional
and international levels;

_______________
234
235

288

A/74/187.
See resolution 67/234 B.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Recognizes the urgent need to maintain and enhance national controls, in accordance with the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,231
to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, including their diversion to illicit
trade, illegal armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients, taking into account, inter alia, their adverse
humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences for the affected States;
3. Calls upon all States to implement the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons (the International Tracing Instrument)232 by,
inter alia, including in their national reports the name and contact information of the national points of contact and
information on national marking practices used to indicate country of manufacture and/or country of import, as
applicable;
4. Encourages all relevant initiatives, including those of the United Nations, other international
organizations, regional and subregional organizations and civil society, for the successful implementation of the
Programme of Action, and calls upon all Member States to contribute towards the continued implementation of the
Programme of Action at the national, regional and global levels;
5. Encourages States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 60/81 of 8 December 2005 to consider further steps to
enhance international cooperation in preventing, combating and eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light
weapons;236
6. Endorses the outcome of the third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York from 18 to 29 June 2018 (the third Review Conference);233
7. Decides, pursuant to the schedule of meetings for the period from 2018 to 2024 agreed upon at the third
Review Conference, to convene a one-week biennial meeting of States from 15 to 19 June 2020 to consider key
challenges and opportunities relating to the implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument at the national, regional and global levels for the purposes of preventing and combating the diversion and
the illicit international transfer of small arms and light weapons to unauthorized recipients, as well as a one-week
biennial meeting of States in 2022;
8. Also decides to convene the fourth United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in 2024, to be preceded by a preparatory committee meeting in early 2024 of not
more than five days;
9. Underlines the importance of the full and effective implementation of the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument for attaining Goal 16 and target 16.4 of the Sustainable Development Goals;237
10. Emphasizes that international cooperation and assistance remain essential to the full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument, while being mindful of the
need to ensure the adequacy, effectiveness and sustainability of international cooperation and assistance;
11. Also emphasizes the fact that initiatives by the international community with respect to international
cooperation and assistance remain essential and complementary to national implementation efforts, as well as to those
at the regional and global levels;
12. Recognizes the necessity for interested States to develop effective coordination mechanisms, where they
do not exist, in order to match the needs of States with existing resources to enhance the implementation of the
Programme of Action and to make international cooperation and assistance more effective, and in this regard
encourages States to make use, as appropriate, of the Programme of Action Implementation Support System;

_______________
236
237

See A/62/163 and A/62/163/Corr.1.
See resolution 70/1.

289

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

13. Encourages States to consider, among other mechanisms, the coherent identification of needs, priorities,
national plans and programmes that may require international cooperation and assistance from States and regional
and international organizations in a position to do so;
14. Also encourages States, on a voluntary basis, to make increasing use of their national reports as a tool for
communicating assistance needs and information on the resources and mechanisms available to address such needs,
and encourages States in a position to render such assistance to make use of those national reports;
15. Encourages States, relevant international and regional organizations and civil society with the capacity to
do so to cooperate with and provide assistance to other States, upon request, in the preparation of comprehensive
national reports on their implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument;
16. Encourages States to reinforce, as necessary, cross-border cooperation at the national, subregional and
regional levels in addressing the common problem of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects,
with full respect for each State’s sovereignty over its own borders;
17. Also encourages States to take full advantage of the benefits of cooperation with the United Nations
regional centres for peace and disarmament, the World Customs Organization, the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in accordance with their mandates
and consistent with national priorities;
18. Encourages all efforts to build national capacity for the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action, including those highlighted in the outcome document of the third Review Conference;
19. Encourages States to submit, on a voluntary basis, national reports on their implementation of the
Programme of Action, notes that States will submit national reports on their implementation of the International
Tracing Instrument, encourages those States in a position to do so to use the reporting template made available by the
Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, and reaffirms the utility of synchronizing such reports with biennial
meetings of States and review conferences as a means of increasing the submission rate and improving the utility of
reports, as well as contributing substantively to meeting discussions;
20. Encourages States in a position to do so to provide financial assistance, through a voluntary sponsorship
fund, that could be distributed, upon request, to States otherwise unable to participate in meetings on the Programme
of Action;
21. Welcomes the establishment of the Saving Lives Entity fund to ensure sustained financing for coordinated,
integrated small arms control measures in countries most affected by the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
and encourages States in a position to do so to make voluntary financial contributions to the fund;
22. Encourages interested States and relevant international and regional organizations in a position to do so
to convene regional meetings to consider and advance the implementation of the Programme of Action, as well as the
International Tracing Instrument, including in preparation for the meetings on the Programme of Action;
23. Encourages civil society and relevant organizations to strengthen their cooperation and work with States
at the respective national and regional levels to achieve the implementation of the Programme of Action;
24. Reaffirms the importance of States undertaking to identify, where applicable, groups and individuals
engaged in the illegal manufacture, trade, stockpiling, transfer, possession, as well as financing for acquisition, of
illicit small arms and light weapons, and take action under appropriate national law against such groups and
individuals;238
25. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on best practices, lessons learned
and new recommendations on preventing and combating the diversion and illicit international transfer of small arms
and light weapons to unauthorized recipients and to include them, along with views from the United Nations system,

_______________
Report of the United Nations Conference on Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001
(A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para 24, sect. II, para. 6.
238

290

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

in particular those agencies participating in the small arms coordination mechanism, as well as input from INTERPOL
and the World Customs Organization, in a report for consideration at the Seventh Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, in 2020;
27. Requests the Secretariat, within existing resources, to present an analysis of implementation trends,
challenges and opportunities relating to the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument, including
needs for cooperation and assistance, based on information submitted by States, at the Seventh Biennial Meeting on
the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument;
28. Also requests the Secretariat to report on support provided by the United Nations system for the
implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument, including experiences, best
practices and lessons learned regarding the efficient use of available resources, for presentation at upcoming meetings
on the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects”.
RESOLUTION 74/61
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 169 to none, with 18 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)239
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Myanmar, Nepal,
Pakistan, Palau, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, United States of America,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

74/61.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/54 B of 1 December 1999, 55/33 V of 20 November 2000, 56/24 M of 29 November
2001, 57/74 of 22 November 2002, 58/53 of 8 December 2003, 59/84 of 3 December 2004, 60/80 of 8 December
2005, 61/84 of 6 December 2006, 62/41 of 5 December 2007, 63/42 of 2 December 2008, 64/56 of 2 December 2009,
65/48 of 8 December 2010, 66/29 of 2 December 2011, 67/32 of 3 December 2012, 68/30 of 5 December 2013, 69/34
of 2 December 2014, 70/55 of 7 December 2015, 71/34 of 5 December 2016, 72/53 of 4 December 2017 and 73/61
of 5 December 2018,

_______________
239

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Norway and Sudan.

291

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming its determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties caused by anti-personnel mines, which
kill or injure thousands of people – women, girls, boys and men – every year, and which place people living in affected
areas at risk and hinder the development of their communities,
Believing it necessary to do the utmost to contribute in an efficient and coordinated manner to facing the
challenge of removing anti-personnel mines placed throughout the world and to assure their destruction,
Wishing to do the utmost to ensure assistance for the care and rehabilitation, including the social and economic
reintegration, of mine victims,
Noting with satisfaction the work undertaken to implement the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction240 and the substantial
progress made towards addressing the global anti-personnel landmine problem,
Recalling the first to seventeenth meetings of the States parties to the Convention, held in Maputo (1999),
Geneva (2000), Managua (2001), Geneva (2002), Bangkok (2003), Zagreb (2005), Geneva (2006), the Dead Sea
(2007), Geneva (2008 and 2010), Phnom Penh (2011), Geneva (2012, 2013 and 2015), Santiago (2016), Vienna
(2017) and Geneva (2018), and the First, Second and Third Review Conferences of the States Parties to the
Convention, held in Nairobi (2004), Cartagena, Colombia (2009), and Maputo (2014),
Recalling also that, at the Third Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention, the international
community reviewed the implementation of the Convention and the States parties adopted a declaration and an action
plan for the period 2014–2019 to support the enhanced implementation and promotion of the Convention,
Underlining the importance of cooperation and assistance in the implementation of the Convention, including
through the so-called individualized approach, which offers mine-affected countries a platform for presenting their
challenges,
Stressing the need to take into account gender aspects in mine action,
Noting with satisfaction that 164 States have ratified or acceded to the Convention and have formally accepted
the obligations of the Convention,
Emphasizing the desirability of attracting the adherence of all States to the Convention, and determined to work
strenuously towards the promotion of its universalization and norms,
Noting with regret that anti-personnel mines continue to be used in some conflicts around the world, causing
human suffering and impeding post-conflict development,
1. Invites all States that have not signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction240 to accede to it without delay;
2.

Urges the one remaining State that has signed but has not ratified the Convention to ratify it without delay;

3. Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of and compliance with the Convention,
including through the continued implementation of the action plans under the Convention;
4. Expresses strong concern regarding the use of anti-personnel mines in various parts of the world, including
use highlighted in recent allegations, reports and documented evidence;
5. Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete and timely information as required
under article 7 of the Convention in order to promote transparency and compliance with the Convention;
6. Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to provide, on a voluntary basis,
information to make global mine action efforts more effective;

_______________
240

292

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

7. Renews its call upon all States and other relevant parties to work together to promote, support and advance
the care, rehabilitation and social and economic reintegration of mine victims, mine risk education programmes and
the removal and destruction of anti-personnel mines placed or stockpiled throughout the world;
8. Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political level and, where in a position to do
so, to promote adherence to the Convention through bilateral, subregional, regional and multilateral contacts, outreach,
seminars and other means;
9. Invites and encourages all interested States, the United Nations, other relevant international organizations
or institutions, regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental
organizations to attend the Fourth Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention, to be held in Oslo from
25 to 29 November 2019, and to participate in the future programme of meetings of the States parties to the
Convention;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with article 12, paragraph 1, of the Convention, to
undertake the preparations necessary to convene the Eighteenth Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention and,
on behalf of the States parties and in accordance with article 12, paragraph 3, of the Convention, to invite States not
parties to the Convention, as well as the United Nations, other relevant international organizations or institutions,
regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental organizations,
to attend the Eighteenth Meeting of the States Parties as observers;
11. Calls upon States parties and States participating in meetings to address issues arising from outstanding
dues and to proceed promptly with the payment of their share of the estimated costs;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction”.
RESOLUTION 74/62
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 144 to 1, with 38 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)241
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia
Against: Russian Federation
Abstaining: Argentina, Armenia, Bahrain, Belarus, Brazil, China, Cyprus, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, India,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Kuwait, Latvia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Poland, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United States
of America, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Australia, Austria, Chile, Iraq, Mexico,
Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Philippines, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and Zambia.
241

293

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

74/62.

Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 63/71 of 2 December 2008 on the Convention on Cluster Munitions and 70/54 of
7 December 2015, 71/45 of 5 December 2016, 72/54 of 4 December 2017 and 73/54 of 5 December 2018 on the
implementation of the Convention,
Reaffirming its determination to put an end for all time to the suffering and casualties caused by cluster
munitions at the time of their use, when they fail to function as intended or when they are abandoned,
Deploring the recent cases of cluster munitions use and related civilian casualties, and calling upon those who
continue to use cluster munitions to cease any such activity immediately,
Conscious that cluster munition remnants kill or maim civilians, including women and children, obstruct
economic and social development, including through the loss of livelihood, impede post-conflict rehabilitation and
reconstruction, delay or prevent the return of refugees and internally displaced persons, can have a negative impact
on national and international peacebuilding and humanitarian assistance efforts, and have other severe consequences
for many years after use,
Concerned about the dangers presented by the large national stockpiles of cluster munitions retained for
operational use, and determined to ensure their rapid destruction,
Recognizing the impact of cluster munitions on women, men, girls and boys and the importance of relevant
States providing adequate, gender- and age-sensitive assistance to victims of cluster munitions,
Believing it necessary to contribute effectively in an efficient, coordinated manner to resolving the challenge of
removing cluster munition remnants located throughout the world, and to ensure their destruction,
Mindful of the need to adequately coordinate efforts undertaken in various forums, including through the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,242 to address the rights and needs of victims of various types
of weapons, and resolved to avoid discrimination among victims of various types of weapons,
Reaffirming that in cases not covered by the Convention on Cluster Munitions243 or by other international
agreements, civilians and combatants remain under the protection and authority of the principles of international law,
derived from established custom, from the principles of humanity and from the dictates of public conscience,
Welcoming the steps taken nationally, regionally and globally in recent years aimed at prohibiting, restricting or
suspending the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of cluster munitions, and welcoming also in this regard that,
since 2014, all Central American States have joined the Convention, thus fulfilling their aspiration to become the first
cluster munitions-free region in the world,
Stressing the role of public conscience in furthering the principles of humanity, as evidenced by the global call
for an end to civilian suffering caused by cluster munitions, and recognizing the efforts to that end undertaken by the
United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Cluster Munition Coalition and numerous other
non-governmental organizations around the world,
Noting that a total of 121 States have joined the Convention, 107 as States parties and 14 as signatories,
Noting also that 2020 will mark the tenth anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention, and emphasizing
the need to make further efforts in accelerating the universalization process,
Taking note of the initiative of the Secretary-General, Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for
Disarmament, in particular part III entitled “Disarmament that saves lives”,

_______________
242
243

294

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
Ibid., vol. 2688, No. 47713.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note also of the 2015 Dubrovnik Declaration244 and the Dubrovnik Action Plan245 adopted at the first
Review Conference of States Parties to the Convention on Cluster Munitions, held in Dubrovnik, Croatia, from
7 to 11 September 2015,
Taking note further of the political declaration establishing 2030 as a target date to implement all individual and
collective outstanding obligations under the Convention as adopted by consensus under the presidency of the
Netherlands at the sixth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention on Cluster Munitions, held in Geneva from
5 to 7 September 2016,246
Welcoming the dialogue undertaken by the German presidency of the seventh Meeting of States Parties with
States not parties to the Convention, including the military-to-military dialogue, in support of universal adherence to
the Convention, and recognizing the assistance that the country coalition concept can provide to affected countries in
the implementation of their obligations under the Convention,
Noting with satisfaction the progress made in the full and effective implementation of the Convention, while
being mindful of the important challenges remaining in the fulfilment of this goal,
Recognizing the importance of full involvement and equal opportunities for the meaningful participation of
women and men in disarmament processes, policy and programming decisions related to the Convention,
1. Urges all States outside the Convention on Cluster Munitions243 to join as soon as possible, whether by
ratifying or acceding to it, and all States parties that are in a position to do so to promote adherence to the Convention
through bilateral, subregional and multilateral contacts, outreach and other means;
2. Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of and compliance with the Convention,
including through the implementation of the Dubrovnik Action Plan;245
3. Expresses strong concern regarding the number of allegations, reports or documented evidence of the use
of cluster munitions in different parts of the world, related civilian casualties and other consequences that impede the
achievement of sustainable development;
4. Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete and timely information as required
under article 7 of the Convention in order to promote transparency and compliance with the Convention;
5. Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to provide, on a voluntary basis,
information that could make the clearance and destruction of cluster munition remnants and related activities more
effective;
6. Reiterates the invitation to States not parties to participate in a continued dialogue on issues relevant to the
Convention in order to enhance its humanitarian impact and to promote its universalization, as well as to engage in a
military-to-military dialogue in order to address specific security issues related to cluster munitions;
7. Reiterates its invitation and encouragement to all States parties, interested States, the United Nations,
other relevant international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Cluster Munition Coalition and other relevant non-governmental organizations to participate in the
upcoming formal meetings under the Convention;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the second Review Conference of States Parties to the
Convention on Cluster Munitions and to continue to render the necessary assistance and to provide such services as
may be necessary to fulfil the tasks entrusted to him under the Convention and in the relevant decisions of the Meetings
of States Parties and the first Review Conference;

_______________
CCM/CONF/2015/7 and CCM/CONF/2015/7/Corr.1, annex I.
Ibid., annex III.
246
CCM/MSP/2016/9, annex I.
244
245

295

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Calls upon States parties and participating States to address issues arising from outstanding dues, including
options to ensure sustainable financing for all formal meetings and prompt payment of respective shares of the
estimated costs;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions”.
RESOLUTION 74/63
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 160 to 4, with 21 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)247
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining: Algeria, Austria, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Liechtenstein,
Mexico, Myanmar, New Zealand, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, South Africa, Sri Lanka, United States of America, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe

74/63.

Joint courses of action and future-oriented dialogue towards a world without nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that achieving a world without nuclear weapons is a common goal for the international community,
Reaffirming also that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons248 is the essential foundation to
realize the common goal, stressing that nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy are mutually reinforcing and are essential for maintaining and strengthening the regime of the Treaty,
and reaffirming its determination to further enhance the universality of the Treaty,
Emphasizing the importance of a successful outcome of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to be held in 2020, on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Treaty, and seventy-five years since the use of nuclear weapons in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, stressing
that since that time no nuclear weapons have been used, and emphasizing the necessity for all States to comply with
their obligations regarding nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation under the Treaty,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Australia, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Comoros, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
248
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
247

296

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reaffirming the importance of implementing agreed steps contained in the Final Documents of the 1995249
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and of
the 2000250 and 2010251 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,
Bearing in mind that various approaches exist towards the realization of a world without nuclear weapons and
that confidence-building among all States is essential to this end,
Emphasizing the importance for all States of taking further practical steps and effective measures towards the
total elimination of nuclear weapons, in a way that promotes international stability, peace and security, and based on
the principle of undiminished and increased security for all,
Encouraging the establishment of further nuclear-weapon-free zones, where appropriate, on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among States of the region concerned, and in accordance with the 1999 guidelines of
the Disarmament Commission,252
Stressing the importance of the immediate commencement and early conclusion of negotiations on a treaty
banning the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices in the
Conference on Disarmament, and supporting the commencement of such negotiations in accordance with document
CD/1299 and the mandate contained therein,
Stressing also the importance of the signing and ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty253
without delay by all States, in particular the eight remaining States in annex 2 thereof,
Recognizing the importance of reducing the risk of nuclear weapons being used either by miscalculation or by
misunderstanding,
Recalling the indispensable role of effective and credible nuclear disarmament verification in assuring
compliance, in the course of achieving and then maintaining the elimination of nuclear weapons, and welcoming the
substantive work of the Group of Governmental Experts to consider the role of verification in advancing nuclear
disarmament, as contained in its report,254
Recognizing the value of cooperative work across the existing multilateral disarmament machinery to support
work towards disarmament objectives,
Noting the importance of considering the possible impacts of developments in science and technology on arms
control, disarmament, non-proliferation and international security,
Stressing that effective nuclear disarmament and the enhancement of international security are mutually
reinforcing,
Reaffirming that further strengthening of the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation is essential to
international peace and security,
Welcoming recent diplomatic efforts to achieve the complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement of all
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles of all ranges of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including through
the meetings between the President of the United States of America and the Chairman of the Workers’ Party of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,

_______________
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)/Corr.2).
250
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II), NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part III) and NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part IV)).
251
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I), NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. II) and NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. III)).
252
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex I, sect. C.
253
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
254
See A/74/90.
249

297

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting that efforts to encompass different generations, areas of the world and genders in disarmament and
non-proliferation education underscore efforts and create momentum towards achieving a world without nuclear
weapons,
Recognizing the catastrophic humanitarian consequences that would result from the use of nuclear weapons,
Welcoming the visits of leaders, youth and others to Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
Reaffirming that the international community needs to take immediate actions together and to conduct futureoriented dialogues in order to further facilitate the implementation of concrete nuclear disarmament measures through
confidence-building,
1. Reaffirms that all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons248 are
committed to the ultimate goal of eliminating nuclear weapons, including through the easing of international tension,
as well as the strengthening of trust between States and of the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation, and
to the full and steady implementation of the Treaty in all its aspects, including article VI of the Treaty, towards the
realization of a world without nuclear weapons;
2. Calls upon all States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to identify concrete
measures to put the commitments into practice towards the 2020 Review Conference;
3.

Encourages the following, inter alia, as joint courses of action:

(a) All States, in particular the nuclear-weapon States, to immediately take concrete measures to enhance
transparency and mutual confidence, including, inter alia, by providing frequent and detailed reporting on the
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and opportunities for discussion of these
reports;
(b) All States possessing nuclear weapons to take actions to reduce the risks of nuclear detonation occurring
either by miscalculation or by misunderstanding;
(c) All States to immediately make every effort, including declaring and maintaining moratoriums on the
production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, as well as deepening
substantive discussions in the Conference on Disarmament, to start negotiations on a treaty banning the production of
fissile material for use in nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices;
(d) All States, including the eight remaining States in annex 2 to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty,253 to immediately make every effort, including maintaining all existing moratoriums on nuclear-weapon test
explosions or any other nuclear explosions and declaring their political will to do so, as well as through continued
support for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, to sign and ratify the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty;
(e) All States to continue to make practical contributions to nuclear disarmament verification, including
through concrete exercises, at the United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament, and in the framework of the
International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification;
(f) All States to facilitate efforts on nuclear disarmament and non‑proliferation education, inter alia, efforts in
which the young generation can actively engage, as well as to raise awareness of the realities of the use of nuclear
weapons, including through, among others, visits by leaders, youth and others to and interactions with communities
and people, including the hibakusha (those who have suffered the use of nuclear weapons) who pass on their
experiences to future generations;
4. Also encourages, for the purpose of facilitating future-oriented dialogues in order to advance nuclear
disarmament, the following:
(a) Nuclear-weapon States to clearly set out their nuclear policies and doctrines at international forums,
including the Review Conference and Preparatory Committees of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Conference on Disarmament and the First Committee of the General Assembly, and all States to conduct
interactive discussions, based on such nuclear policies and doctrines;
(b) All States to conduct dialogue regarding the possible impacts of developments in science and technology
on arms control, disarmament and non‑proliferation;
298

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(c)

All States to conduct candid dialogue on the relationship between nuclear disarmament and security;

5. Reaffirms the commitment to strengthening the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation and to
achieving the complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement of all nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles of all
ranges and related nuclear and ballistic missile programmes of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions, and the responsibility of all States for the full implementation
of all relevant Security Council resolutions, and calls upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to return at an
early date to full compliance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, including that of the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Joint courses of action and future-oriented dialogue towards a world
without nuclear weapons”.
RESOLUTION 74/64
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)255

74/64.

Youth, disarmament and non-proliferation

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that young people in all countries are key agents for social change, economic development and
technological innovation,
Reaffirming the important and positive contribution that young people can make to the promotion and
attainment of sustainable peace and security,
Noting that engagement with young people can provide opportunities to benefit from their views, insights and
ideas,
Bearing in mind its resolution 73/59 of 5 December 2018, which highlights the need for disarmament and
non-proliferation education, particularly among youth,
Recalling its resolution 73/46 of 5 December 2018, in which it reaffirms that the equal, full and effective
participation of both women and men is one of the essential factors for the promotion and attainment of sustainable
peace and security,
Recalling also relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions on the issue of youth, peace and
security,
Noting the launch on 24 September 2018 of Youth 2030: The United Nations Youth Strategy, which includes
peace and security as a thematic priority area,
Noting also Action 38 of the disarmament agenda put forward by the Secretary-General, in which he describes
the young generation as the ultimate force for change and proposes actions to promote youth engagement,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan and
Viet Nam.
255

299

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Mindful of the initiatives and activities undertaken by Member States, the United Nations entities and relevant
civil society organizations for the implementation of the World Programme of Action for Youth256 and the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,257
Recognizing the role of civil society in promoting the engagement of young people in the field of disarmament
and non-proliferation,
1. Encourages Member States, the United Nations, relevant specialized agencies and regional and
subregional organizations to promote the meaningful and inclusive participation of young people in discussions in the
field of disarmament and non-proliferation, including through dialogue platforms, mentoring, internships,
fellowships, scholarships, model events and youth group activities;
2. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations, relevant specialized agencies and regional and subregional
organizations to consider developing and implementing policies and programmes for young people to increase and
facilitate their constructive engagement in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation;
3. Stresses the importance of realizing the full potential of young people through education and capacitybuilding, bearing in mind the ongoing efforts and the need to promote the sustainable entry of young people into the
field of disarmament and non-proliferation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to seek specific measures to promote the meaningful and inclusive
participation and empowerment of youth on disarmament and non-proliferation issues;
5. Encourages Member States to continue efforts to raise awareness and strengthen coordination within the
United Nations system and beyond on ongoing efforts to promote the role of youth;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Youth, disarmament and non-proliferation”.
RESOLUTION 74/65
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/368, para. 89)258

74/65.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the dangers posed by unplanned explosions at munitions sites and the diversion of materials from
conventional ammunition stockpiles to the illicit market, including for the manufacture of improvised explosive
devices,
Emphasizing that thousands of people have died and the livelihoods of entire communities have been disrupted
as a result of accidental ammunition depot explosions and that diversion from ammunition stockpiles has contributed
to the intensity and duration of armed conflict and sustained armed violence around the world,259
Recognizing the need to encourage the full involvement of both women and men in ammunition management
practice and policy,

_______________
Resolution 50/81, annex, and resolution 62/126, annex.
See resolution 70/1.
258
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
259
See S/2011/255.
256
257

300

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting that conventional weapons and their ammunition are items for which, in principle, action can be taken
to improve the regulation of transfers and prevent their diversion to illicit trafficking,
Recognizing the urgency of addressing the security and safety risks emanating from ineffective stockpile
management around the world,260
Bearing in mind a whole-life management approach to tackle problems related to ammunition in a
comprehensive manner, including those related to diversion,
Noting the requirement of the Arms Trade Treaty261 that States parties thereto establish and maintain a national
control system to regulate the export of relevant ammunition and munitions,
Taking note of the report of the Group of Experts on the problem of ammunition and explosives262 and the report
of the Group of Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 61/72 to consider further steps to enhance
cooperation with regard to the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus,263
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development264 and its recognition of the relevance
for development of a significant reduction in illicit arms flows and of strengthened institutions for building capacity
at all levels, in particular in developing countries, to prevent violence and combat terrorism and crime,
Recalling the recommendation contained in paragraph 27 of the report of the Open-ended Working Group to
Negotiate an International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons,265 namely, to address the issue of small arms and light weapons ammunition in a
comprehensive manner as part of a separate process conducted within the framework of the United Nations,
Taking note of the discussions on munitions management practice in the framework of Protocol V266 to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects,267
Noting with satisfaction the work and measures pursued at the regional and subregional levels with regard to
the issue of conventional ammunition,
Recalling its decision 59/515 of 3 December 2004 and its resolutions 60/74 of 8 December 2005 and 61/72 of
6 December 2006, its resolution 63/61 of 2 December 2008, by which it welcomed the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 61/72 to consider further steps to enhance cooperation with
regard to the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus, its resolution 64/51 of 2 December 2009, its
resolution 66/42 of 2 December 2011, its resolution 68/52 of 5 December 2013, its resolution 70/35 of 7 December
2015 and its resolution 72/55 of 4 December 2017,
Taking note of the recommendations of the Group of Governmental Experts, and encouraging the use, as
appropriate, of the voluntary International Ammunition Technical Guidelines to improve the safety and security of
ammunition storage sites,
Taking note also of the recommendations of the Group on improving knowledge resource management on
technical ammunition issues within the United Nations system, and noting the subsequent establishment, within the
Secretariat, of the SaferGuard knowledge resource management programme,268 including its online implementation
support tools,

_______________
See S/2015/289.
See resolution 67/234 B.
262
See A/54/155.
263
See A/63/182.
264
Resolution 70/1.
265
A/60/88 and A/60/88/Corr.2.
266
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2399, No. 22495.
267
Ibid., vol. 1342, No. 22495.
268
A/63/182, paras. 72–73.
260
261

301

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Noting that the voluntary International Ammunition Technical Guidelines are used by national authorities and
an expanding network of partners from international and regional organizations, non-governmental organizations and
the private sector in an increasing number of States to support ammunition stockpile management efforts,
Emphasizing the need to consider integrating ammunition management measures in accordance with the
International Ammunition Technical Guidelines, where relevant, in mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions,
Recognizing the importance of appropriate national ammunition management structures and procedures,
including laws and regulations, training and doctrine, equipment and maintenance, personnel management and
finances and infrastructure in order to ensure sustainability in ammunition management, and emphasizing in this
regard the central role of the provision of technical assistance and capacity-building to Member States, upon their
request,
Taking note of the establishment of the Ammunition Management Advisory Team to support interested States
in the safe and secure management of ammunition through the provision of technical advice and services,
1. Encourages all interested States to assess, on a voluntary basis, whether, in conformity with their
legitimate security needs, parts of their stockpiles of conventional ammunition should be considered to be in surplus,
and recognizes that the security of such stockpiles must be taken into consideration and that appropriate controls with
regard to the security and safety of stockpiles of conventional ammunition are indispensable at the national level in
order to eliminate the risk of explosion, pollution or diversion;
2. Appeals to all interested States to determine the size and nature of their surplus stockpiles of conventional
ammunition, whether they represent a security or safety risk, their preferred means of destruction, if appropriate, and
whether external assistance is needed to eliminate this risk;
3. Encourages States in a position to do so to assist interested States within a bilateral framework or through
international or regional organizations, including through activities conducted under the umbrella of the SaferGuard
knowledge resource management programme, on a voluntary and transparent basis, in elaborating and implementing
programmes to eliminate surplus stockpiles or to improve stockpile management;
4. Encourages all Member States to examine the possibility of developing and implementing, within a
national, regional or subregional framework, measures to address accordingly the illicit trafficking related to the
accumulation of such stockpiles;
5. Continues to encourage States to implement the recommendations contained in the report of the Group
of Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 61/72 to consider further steps to enhance cooperation
with regard to the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus;263
6. Notes with appreciation initiatives at the international, regional and national levels that shed light on
improving the sustainable management of ammunition, including through the implementation of the International
Ammunition Technical Guidelines, recognizing the relevance of continued discussions and coordination in this
regard;
7. Recalls the release of the updated version of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines in 2015
and the intention to update the Guidelines on a regular basis, as well as the continued implementation of the
SaferGuard programme, managed by the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat;
8. Welcomes the continued application of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines in the field,
including the online implementation support tools and training materials, takes note of the support guides and the
availability of translations of the Guidelines in various languages, which encourages States in a position to do so to
offer support to the SaferGuard programme, and calls upon all United Nations entities to make full use of the
Guidelines when supporting national authorities;
9. Encourages consideration of the integration of ammunition management measures, where relevant, in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, including through the training of personnel of national authorities and
peacekeepers, utilizing the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines;

302

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

10. Welcomes the ongoing work carried out by the SaferGuard programme to establish its quick-response
mechanism, which allows ammunition experts to be deployed to assist States, upon request, in the management of
ammunition stockpiles, and encourages States in a position to do so to provide technical expertise or financial support
to the mechanism;
11. Encourages States wishing to improve their national ammunition stockpile management capacity, wishing
to prevent the growth of conventional ammunition surpluses and wishing to implement wider risk mitigation to
contact the SaferGuard programme, as well as potential national donors, regional organizations or other organizations,
as appropriate;
12. Encourages States, as appropriate, to consider ammunition management as an intrinsic part of their actions
for achieving relevant targets of the Sustainable Development Goals264 related to the reduction of illicit arms flows
and the prevention of violence through strengthened institutions, and to consider, where relevant, developing national,
regional and subregional indicators based on this understanding;
13. Also encourages States, where relevant, to develop voluntary national action plans on the safe and secure
management of conventional ammunition, and acknowledges the utility of information-sharing and the benefit of
good practices among States, as appropriate;
14. Takes note with appreciation of the series of informal consultations convened within the framework of its
resolution 72/55 throughout 2018 and 2019 that focused on matters of conventional ammunition management within
the United Nations system and beyond and that sought to identify urgent issues pertaining to the accumulation of
conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus on which progress can be made and that may constitute a basis for
convening a group of governmental experts;
15. Takes note of the informal paper presented by Germany on the informal consultative process undertaken
within the framework of its resolution 72/55, as well as the inputs, both written and oral, received from Member States
on the same matter;
16. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to convene a group of governmental experts in 2020 on
problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus, taking into account the
exchanges in the open, informal consultations;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on the work of the group upon its
completion;
18. Reiterates its decision to address the issue of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus in a
comprehensive manner;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus”.
RESOLUTION 74/66
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 179 to none, with 3 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)269
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Kazakhstan, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
269

303

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Georgia, Palau, Ukraine

74/66.

Strengthening and developing the system of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation
treaties and agreements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions,
Recognizing the common interest of all humankind in strengthening and developing the system of arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements,
Stressing the vital importance of efforts in arms control, disarmament and non‑proliferation for providing
international peace and strengthening global security,
Stressing also the paramount importance of full and strict implementation, strengthening and development of
arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements providing enhanced security to individual
nations and the international community,
Underlining that any weakening of confidence in and compliance with such treaties and agreements diminishes
their contribution to global or regional stability and undermines the credibility and effectiveness of the international
legal system and regime applicable to arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation,
Recognizing in this context that full implementation by Member States of existing treaties and agreements to
which they are parties and resolving implementation concerns effectively by means consistent with such treaties and
agreements and international law facilitate the conclusion of additional arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties and agreements, and thereby contribute to better relations among States and the
strengthening of the existing system of such treaties and agreements, as well as international peace and security,
Believing that supporting and developing the system of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation
through the strengthening of appropriate treaties and agreements and their regimes is a matter of interest and concern
to all members of the international community, and noting the role that the United Nations has played and should
continue to play in that regard,
Stressing the importance of appropriate and sustainable financial support for the effectiveness and efficiency of
the relevant international arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation instruments and proper functioning of their
regimes,
Emphasizing the importance of appropriate technical assistance and capacity-building efforts for the
implementation of arms control, disarmament and non‑proliferation treaties and agreements by Member States,
Concerned that any actions that undermine the existing system of arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties and agreements affect the interests of the international community,
Mindful that it is the responsibility and obligation of all Member States to contribute to the process of easing
international tension and to strengthening international peace and security and, in this connection, to refrain from steps
that negatively affect the security environment and to make efforts to advance along the path of nuclear disarmament,
as well as general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control,

304

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1. Urges all States parties to arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements to
implement all provisions of such treaties and agreements in their entirety;
2. Calls for continued efforts to strengthen the system of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation
treaties and agreements and to preserve its integrity and validity for maintaining global stability and international
peace and security;
3. Calls upon all Member States to give serious consideration to the negative implications of undermining
arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements and their regimes for international security
and stability, as well as for progress in the field of disarmament;
4. Urges all Member States to support efforts aimed at the resolution of implementation issues by means
consistent with arms control, disarmament and non‑proliferation treaties and agreements and international law, with
a view to encouraging strict observance by all States parties of the provisions of such treaties and agreements,
maintaining or restoring the integrity of such treaties and agreements and strengthening and developing their regimes;
5. Considers that any actions that undermine the system of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation
treaties and agreements also undermine global stability and international peace and security;
6. Supports efforts by the international community, in the light of emerging developments, towards
safeguarding the integrity of the existing arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements,
which is in the strongest interest of humankind;
7. Welcomes the role that the United Nations has played and continues to play in fostering negotiations on
arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements;
8. Expresses the need to maintain the effectiveness and efficiency as well as the consensus-based nature of
the relevant multilateral instruments in the field of disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide assistance that may be necessary in protecting the
integrity of arms control, disarmament and non‑proliferation treaties and agreements, and in strengthening the system
of such treaties and agreements;
10. Encourages States in a position to do so to provide, upon request, technical assistance and capacitybuilding in support of national implementation of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and
agreements by Member States;
11. Encourages efforts by all States parties to elaborate additional cooperative measures, as appropriate, that
can increase confidence in existing arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements and
facilitate the conclusion of additional treaties and agreements of that kind;
12. Notes the importance of effective verification provisions for arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties and agreements;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled “Strengthening and developing the system of arms control,
disarmament and non‑proliferation treaties and agreements”.
RESOLUTION 74/67
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 173 to 2, with 6 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/368, para. 89)270
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Burundi, China, Cuba, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Malawi, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, South Africa, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
270

305

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South
Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Georgia, Liberia, Palau, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/67.

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/66 of 8 December 2005, 61/75 of 6 December 2006, 62/43 of 5 December 2007,
63/68 of 2 December 2008, 64/49 of 2 December 2009, 65/68 of 8 December 2010, 68/50 of 5 December 2013, 69/38
of 2 December 2014, 70/53 of 7 December 2015, 71/42 of 5 December 2016, 71/90 of 6 December 2016, 72/56 of
4 December 2017 and 73/72 of 5 December 2018, as well as its decision 66/517 of 2 December 2011,
Recalling also the report of the Secretary-General of 15 October 1993 to the General Assembly at its fortyeighth session, the annex to which contains the study by governmental experts on the application of confidencebuilding measures in outer space,271
Reaffirming the right of all countries to explore and use outer space in accordance with international law,
Reaffirming also that preventing an arms race in outer space is in the interest of maintaining international peace
and security and is an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international cooperation in the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Recalling, in this context, its resolutions 45/55 B of 4 December 1990 and 48/74 B of 16 December 1993, in
which, inter alia, it recognized the need for increased transparency and confirmed the importance of confidencebuilding measures as a means of reinforcing the objective of preventing an arms race in outer space,
Noting the constructive debates that the Conference on Disarmament has held on this subject and the views
expressed by Member States,
Recalling the introduction by China and the Russian Federation at the Conference on Disarmament of the draft
treaty on prevention of the placement of weapons in outer space and of the threat or use of force against outer space
objects,272 and the submission of its updated version273 in 2014,
Noting that, since 2004, several States274 have introduced a policy of not being the first State to place weapons
in outer space,

_______________
A/48/305 and A/48/305/Corr.1.
See CD/1839.
273
See CD/1985.
274
Argentina, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Cambodia, Cuba, Ecuador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) and Viet Nam.
271
272

306

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Expressing regret that, due to unresolved organizational problems within the Disarmament Commission, its
working group tasked with preparing recommendations relating to the practical implementation of transparency and
confidence-building measures in outer space activities with the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space was not
in a position to conduct its work, and stressing the importance of resuming its deliberations,
Recognizing that the work within the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, its Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee and its Legal Subcommittee, including the promotion of the long-term sustainability of outer
space activities, has a fundamental role to play in enhancing transparency and confidence-building among States and
in ensuring that outer space is maintained for peaceful purposes,
Noting the contribution of Member States that have submitted to the Secretary-General concrete proposals on
international outer space transparency and confidence-building measures pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 61/75,
paragraph 2 of resolution 62/43, paragraph 2 of resolution 63/68 and paragraph 2 of resolution 64/49,
Recalling the work done in 2012 and 2013 by the Group of Governmental Experts on Transparency and
Confidence-building Measures in Outer Space Activities, which was convened by the Secretary-General, on the basis
of equitable geographical distribution, to conduct a study on outer space transparency and confidence-building
measures,
Recalling also the consideration of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts,275 as well as views on the
modalities of making practical use of the recommendations contained therein, as set out in the report of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on its fifty-eighth session, held in 2015,276 at which it found that the Committee
had a fundamental role to play in enhancing transparency and confidence-building among States, as well as in
ensuring that outer space is maintained for peaceful purposes,
Noting that, in its report, the Group of Governmental Experts recognized the value of the work of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in developing a set of voluntary, non-legally binding guidelines for the long-term
sustainability of outer space activities, some of which could be considered as potential transparency and confidencebuilding measures, while others could enhance the safety of outer space activities and thereby provide the technical
basis for the further implementation of additional transparency and confidence-building measures,
Taking note of the special report by the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space) on the
implementation of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts, and the recommendations contained therein, as
submitted to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its fifty-ninth session, in 2016,277
Welcoming International Telecommunication Union resolution 186 of 7 November 2014 on strengthening the
role of the Union with regard to transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities, adopted
by the 2014 Plenipotentiary Conference of the Union, held in Busan, Republic of Korea, from 20 October to
7 November 2014,
1. Stresses the importance of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Transparency and
Confidence-building Measures in Outer Space Activities,275 considered by the General Assembly on 5 December 2013;
2. Encourages Member States to continue to review and implement, to the greatest extent practicable, the
proposed transparency and confidence-building measures contained in the report, through the relevant national
mechanisms, on a voluntary basis and in a manner consistent with the national interests of Member States;
3. Also encourages Member States, in accordance with the recommendations contained in the report, with a
view to promoting the practical implementation of transparency and confidence-building measures, to hold regular
discussions in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, the Disarmament Commission and the Conference
on Disarmament on the prospects for their implementation;

_______________
A/68/189.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/70/20).
277
A/AC.105/1116.
275
276

307

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Requests the relevant entities and organizations of the United Nations system, to which, in accordance
with its resolution 68/50, the report was circulated, to assist in effectively implementing the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein, as appropriate;
5. Encourages the relevant entities and organizations of the United Nations system to coordinate, as
appropriate, on matters related to the recommendations contained in the report;
6. Emphasizes the importance of undertaking further work at the Disarmament Commission on preparing
recommendations relating to the practical implementation of transparency and confidence-building measures in outer
space activities with the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space;
7. Welcomes the joint ad hoc meetings of the First and Fourth Committees, held on 22 October 2015 and
12 October 2017, on possible challenges to space security and sustainability, convened in accordance with the report
and its resolutions 69/38 and 71/90, and the substantive exchanges of opinions on various aspects of security in outer
space that took place during the meetings;
8. Also welcomes the convening of a joint half-day panel discussion of the First and Fourth Committees to
address possible challenges to space security and sustainability during the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly;
9. Calls upon Member States and the relevant entities and organizations of the United Nations system to
support the implementation of the full range of conclusions and recommendations contained in the report;
10. Recalls the report of the Secretary-General on transparency and confidence-building measures in outer
space activities in the United Nations system, which contains summaries of the submissions received from Member
States giving their views on transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities;278
11. Invites Member States to continue to submit, within the relevant forums, information on the specific
unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space
activities implemented in accordance with the recommendations contained in the report of the Group of
Governmental Experts;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “General
and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled “Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space
activities”.
RESOLUTION 74/68
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 118 to 50, with 15 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/369, para. 19)279
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia

_______________
A/72/65 and A/72/65/Add.1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cuba, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malawi, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Samoa, Sri Lanka, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
278
279

308

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Belarus, Brazil, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Guyana, Japan, Liberia, Mali, Marshall
Islands, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe

74/68.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to the survival of humankind,
Bearing in mind the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 8 July 1996 on the legality of the
threat or use of nuclear weapons,280
Convinced that a multilateral, universal and binding agreement prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons would contribute to the elimination of the nuclear threat and to the climate for negotiations leading to the
ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons, thereby strengthening international peace and security,
Conscious that some steps have been taken by the Russian Federation and the United States of America towards
a reduction of their nuclear weapons and that further steps – in all relevant formats – on nuclear arms control and
disarmament can contribute to the improvement of the international climate and the goal of the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons,
Recalling that in paragraph 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly281
it is stated that all States should actively participate in efforts to bring about conditions in international relations among
States in which a code of peaceful conduct of nations in international affairs could be agreed upon and which would
preclude the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that any use of nuclear weapons would be a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and a
crime against humanity, as declared in its resolutions 1653 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 33/71 B of 14 December
1978, 34/83 G of 11 December 1979, 35/152 D of 12 December 1980 and 36/92 I of 9 December 1981,
Recognizing that a legally binding prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons is not contrary to but in
fact contributes to international efforts for the achievement and maintenance of a world free of nuclear
weapons,
Stressing that an international convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would be an
important step in a phased programme towards the complete elimination of nuclear weapons, with a specified
framework of time,
Noting with regret that the Conference on Disarmament, during its 2019 session, was unable to undertake
negotiations on this subject as called for in General Assembly resolution 73/74 of 5 December 2018,
1. Reiterates its request to the Conference on Disarmament to commence negotiations in order to reach
agreement on an international convention prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any
circumstances;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report to the General Assembly on the results of those
negotiations.

_______________
280
281

A/51/218, annex.
Resolution S-10/2.

309

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 74/69
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/369, para. 19)282

74/69.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 42/39 D of 30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of 15 December 1989, by which it
established the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and renamed it the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, with headquarters in Kathmandu,
Recalling also the mandate of the Regional Centre to provide, on request, substantive support for the initiatives
and other activities mutually agreed upon by the Member States of the Asia-Pacific region for the implementation of
measures for peace and disarmament, through appropriate utilization of available resources,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,283 and expressing its appreciation to the Regional Centre
for its important work in promoting confidence-building measures through the organization of meetings,
conferences and workshops in the region, including national and subregional workshops on the control of small
arms and light weapons; the seventeenth United Nations-Republic of Korea Joint Conference on Disarmament and
Non-Proliferation Issues, held on Jeju Island, Republic of Korea, on 5 and 6 December 2018; subregional training
courses for States of South and South-East Asia and Mongolia on conventional ammunition stockpile management
in line with the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines and the SaferGuard programme; a project to build
capacity towards ratification of the Arms Trade Treaty284 for States of Central Asia and Mongolia; and a capacitybuilding project for States of South and South-East Asia on gun violence and illicit small arms trafficking from a
gender perspective,
Expressing appreciation for the timely execution by Nepal of its host country commitments for the physical
operation of the Regional Centre,
Welcoming the work by the Regional Centre in support of the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals,285 in particular Goal 16 on peace, justice and strong institutions, as well as target 16.4, which addresses the
reduction of illicit arms flows,
Welcoming also the efforts by the Regional Centre to promote the role and representation of women in
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control activities,
Welcoming further the youth-focused outreach activities undertaken by the Regional Centre,
1. Expresses its satisfaction at the activities carried out over the past year by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, and invites all States of the region to continue to support
the activities of the Regional Centre, including by continuing to take part in them, where possible, and by proposing
items for inclusion in the programme of activities of the Centre, in order to contribute to the implementation of
measures for peace and disarmament;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Nepal for its cooperation and financial support, which has
enabled the Regional Centre to operate from Kathmandu;

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China,
India, Indonesia, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Maldives, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Samoa, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam.
283
A/74/112.
284
See resolution 67/234 B.
285
See resolution 70/1.
282

310

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat for providing the necessary support with a view to ensuring the smooth operation of the Regional Centre
and to enabling the Centre to function effectively;
4. Appeals to Member States, in particular those within the Asia-Pacific region, as well as to international
governmental and non-governmental organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions, the only
resources of the Regional Centre, to strengthen its programme of activities and the implementation thereof;
5. Reaffirms its strong support for the role of the Regional Centre in the promotion of activities of the United
Nations at the regional level to strengthen peace, stability and security among its Member States;
6. Underlines the importance of the Kathmandu process for the development of the practice of region-wide
security and disarmament dialogues;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific”.
RESOLUTION 74/70
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/369, para. 19)286

74/70.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/83 of 8 December 2005, 61/90 of 6 December 2006, 62/50 of 5 December 2007,
63/76 of 2 December 2008, 64/58 of 2 December 2009, 65/78 of 8 December 2010, 66/53 of 2 December 2011, 67/63
of 3 December 2012, 68/57 of 5 December 2013, 69/70 of 2 December 2014, 70/61 of 7 December 2015, 71/80 of
5 December 2016, 72/64 of 4 December 2017 and 73/80 of 5 December 2018 regarding the maintenance and
revitalization of the three United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament,
Recalling also the reports of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa,287 the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific288
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean,289
Reaffirming its decision, taken in 1982 at its twelfth special session, to establish the United Nations
Disarmament Information Programme, the purpose of which is to inform, educate and generate public understanding
and support for the objectives of the United Nations in the field of arms control and disarmament,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 J of 3 December 1986, 42/39 D of
30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of 15 December 1989 on the regional centres for peace and disarmament in Nepal,
Peru and Togo,
Recalling that the thirtieth anniversary of the establishment by the General Assembly of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean was celebrated in 2016 and in 2017,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Indonesia (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries).
287
A/74/118.
288
A/74/112.
289
A/74/115.
286

311

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recognizing that the changes that have taken place in the world have created new opportunities and posed new
challenges for the pursuit of disarmament, and bearing in mind in this regard that the regional centres for peace and
disarmament can contribute substantially to understanding and cooperation among States in each particular region in
the areas of peace, disarmament and development,
Noting that, in paragraph 240 of the Final Document of the Eighteenth Midterm Ministerial Meeting of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Baku from 3 to 6 April 2018, the Ministers emphasized the importance
of United Nations activities at the regional level to increase the stability and security of its Member States, which
could be promoted in a substantive manner by the maintenance and revitalization of the three regional centres for
peace and disarmament,
1. Reiterates the importance of United Nations activities at the regional level to advance disarmament and
to increase the stability and security of its Member States, which could be promoted in a substantive manner by the
maintenance and further strengthening of the three regional centres for peace and disarmament;
2. Commends the three regional centres for peace and disarmament for their sustained support provided to
Member States for over 30 years in implementing disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation activities through
seminars and conferences, capacity-building and training, policy and technical expertise, and information and
advocacy at the global, regional and national levels;
3. Reaffirms that, in order to achieve positive results, it is useful for the three regional centres to carry out
dissemination and educational programmes that promote regional peace and security and that are aimed at changing
basic attitudes with respect to peace and security and disarmament so as to support the achievement of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations;
4. Appeals to Member States in each region that are able to do so, as well as to international governmental
and non-governmental organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions to the regional centres in their
respective regions in order to strengthen their activities and initiatives;
5. Emphasizes the importance of the activities of the Regional Disarmament Branch of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all support necessary, within existing resources, to the regional
centres in carrying out their programmes of activities;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 74/71
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/369, para. 19)290

74/71.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the provisions of Article 11, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations, in which it is stipulated
that a function of the General Assembly is to consider the general principles of cooperation in the maintenance of
international peace and security, including the principles governing disarmament and arms limitation,
Recalling its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 D of 3 December 1986, 42/39 J of 30 November
1987 and 43/76 D of 7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa
and its resolutions 46/36 F of 6 December 1991 and 47/52 G of 9 December 1992 on regional disarmament, including
confidence-building measures,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Austria, Georgia, Germany, Nigeria (on behalf of
the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States) and Portugal.
290

312

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the Regional Centre, the most recent of which is resolution 73/75
of 5 December 2018,
Recalling further its resolution 73/46 of 5 December 2018, in which it recognized the role of women in
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control,
Reaffirming the role of the Regional Centre in promoting disarmament, peace and security at the regional level,
Welcoming the continuing and deepening cooperation between the Regional Centre, the African Union and
African subregional organizations in the context of the adoption of Agenda 2063 by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, and in particular the objective of silencing the guns in Africa by 2020,
Welcoming also the work of the Regional Centre in support of the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals,291 in particular Goal 16 on peace, justice and strong institutions, and target 16.4, which addresses the reduction
of illicit arms flows,
Recalling the decision taken by the Executive Council of the African Union at its eighth ordinary session, held
in Khartoum from 16 to 21 January 2006,292 in which the Council called upon member States to make voluntary
contributions to the Regional Centre to maintain its operations,
Recalling also the call by the Secretary-General for continued financial and in‑kind support from Member
States, which would enable the Regional Centre to discharge its mandate in full and to respond more effectively to
requests for assistance from African States,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;293

2. Commends the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa for its sustained
support to Member States in implementing disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation activities through
seminars and conferences, capacity-building and training, policy and technical expertise, and information and
advocacy at the regional and national levels;
3. Welcomes the continental dimension of the activities of the Regional Centre in response to the evolving
needs of African Member States and the region’s new and emerging challenges in the areas of disarmament, peace
and security, including maritime security;
4. Recalls the undertaking by the Regional Centre to deepen its partnership with the African Union
Commission in the context of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, signed on 19 April 2017, as well as with African subregional organizations, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to facilitate close cooperation between the Regional Centre and the African Union, in particular
in the areas of disarmament, peace and security;
5. Welcomes the contribution of the Regional Centre to continental disarmament, peace and security, in
particular its contribution to the implementation of Agenda 2063 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, the objective of silencing the guns in Africa and its master road map of practical
steps to silence the guns in Africa by the year 2020, as well as its assistance to the African Commission on Nuclear
Energy in its implementation of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba);294
6. Also welcomes efforts by the Regional Centre to promote the role and representation of women in
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control activities;
7. Notes with appreciation the tangible achievements of the Regional Centre and the impact of the assistance
that it provides to African States to control small arms and light weapons through capacity-building for national
commissions on small arms and light weapons, defence and security forces, and United Nations peacekeeping mission

_______________
See resolution 70/1.
A/60/693, annex II, decision EX.CL/Dec.263 (VIII).
293
A/74/118.
294
A/50/426, annex.
291
292

313

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

personnel, as well as the support that the Centre provided to States in preventing the diversion of such weapons, in
particular to non-State armed groups and terrorist groups,295 and also notes with appreciation the assistance provided
by the Centre in the implementation of the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and
Assembly (Kinshasa Convention),296 which entered into force on 8 March 2017, and its substantive support to the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, in the implementation of the
Economic Community of West African States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials and on security sector reform initiatives, and to East Africa on programmes to control
brokering of small arms and light weapons, including the additional assistance provided by the Centre to African
Member States in the implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004 and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction;297
8. Commends the Regional Centre for the support and assistance that it provided to African States, upon
request, on the Arms Trade Treaty,298 including through the organization of subregional and regional seminars and
workshops;
9. Urges all States, as well as international, governmental and non‑governmental organizations and
foundations, to make voluntary contributions to enable the Regional Centre to carry out its programmes and activities
and meet the needs of African States;
10. Urges, in particular, States members of the African Union to make voluntary contributions to the trust fund
for the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, in conformity with the decision taken
by the Executive Council of the African Union in Khartoum in January 2006;292
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Regional Centre with the support necessary for
greater achievements and results;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa”.
RESOLUTION 74/72
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/369, para. 19)299

74/72.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 41/60 J of 3 December 1986, 42/39 K of 30 November 1987 and 43/76 H of
7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean, with headquarters in Lima,
Recalling also its resolution 73/76 of 5 December 2018 and all previous resolutions on the Regional Centre,

_______________
Security Council resolution 2370 (2017).
See A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.
297
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
298
See resolution 67/234 B.
299
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Peru (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States).
295
296

314

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recognizing that the Regional Centre has continued to provide substantive support for the implementation
of regional and subregional initiatives and has intensified its contribution to the coordination of United Nations
efforts towards peace and disarmament and for the promotion of economic and social development, and
emphasizing the role of the Centre in providing support for the realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,300
Reaffirming the mandate of the Regional Centre to provide, on request, substantive support for the initiatives
and other activities of the Member States of the region for the implementation of measures for peace and disarmament
and for the promotion of economic and social development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,301 and expressing its appreciation for the important assistance
provided, upon request, by the Regional Centre to several countries in the region, including through capacity-building
and technical assistance activities for the implementation of disarmament, non‑proliferation and arms control
instruments,
Welcoming the support provided by the Regional Centre to Member States in the implementation of
disarmament and non-proliferation instruments,
Emphasizing the need for the Regional Centre to develop and strengthen its activities and programmes in a
comprehensive and balanced manner, in accordance with its mandate and in line with the requests for assistance by
Member States,
Welcoming the ongoing support provided by the Regional Centre to Member States in the implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects,302
Welcoming also the assistance provided by the Regional Centre to some States, upon request, in the management
and securing of national weapons stockpiles and in the identification and destruction of surplus, obsolete or seized
weapons and ammunition, as declared by competent national authorities, in particular the establishment of a regional
training centre in Port of Spain to manage weapons stockpiles,
Welcoming further the initiative of the Regional Centre to continue to conduct activities in line with efforts to
promote the equitable representation of women in all decision-making processes with regard to matters related to
disarmament, non‑proliferation and arms control, as encouraged in its resolution 65/69 of 8 December 2010 and
subsequent resolutions, including resolution 73/46 of 5 December 2018,
Recalling the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the relationship between disarmament and
development,303 referred to in General Assembly resolution 59/78 of 3 December 2004, which is of utmost interest
with regard to the role that the Regional Centre plays in promoting the issue in the region in pursuit of its mandate to
promote economic and social development related to peace and disarmament,
Noting that security, disarmament and development issues have always been recognized as significant topics
in Latin America and the Caribbean, the first inhabited region in the world to be declared a nuclear-weapon-free
zone,
Recognizing the cooperation between the Regional Centre and the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean on strengthening the nuclear-weapon-free zone established by the

_______________
Resolution 70/1.
A/74/115.
302
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
303
See A/59/119.
300
301

315

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco),304 as well
as its efforts in promoting peace and disarmament education, especially among youth,
Bearing in mind the important role of the Regional Centre in promoting confidence-building measures, arms
control and limitation, disarmament and development at the regional level,
Recognizing the importance of information, research, education and training for peace, disarmament and
development in order to achieve understanding and cooperation among States,
1. Reiterates its strong support for the role of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean in the promotion of activities of the United Nations at the
regional and subregional levels to strengthen peace, disarmament, stability, security and development among its
Member States;
2. Welcomes the activities carried out in the past year by the Regional Centre, and requests the Centre to
continue to take into account the proposals to be submitted by the countries of the region for the implementation of
the mandate of the Centre in the areas of peace, disarmament and development and for the promotion of, inter alia,
nuclear disarmament, the prevention, combating and eradication of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
ammunition and explosives, the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, confidence-building measures,
arms control and limitation, transparency and the reduction and prevention of armed violence at the regional and
subregional levels;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the political support provided by Member States, as well as for the financial
contributions made by Member States and international governmental and non-governmental organizations, to
strengthen the Regional Centre, its programme of activities and the implementation thereof, and encourages them to
continue to make and to increase voluntary contributions;
4. Invites all States of the region to continue to take part in the activities of the Regional Centre, proposing
items for inclusion in its programme of activities and maximizing the potential of the Centre to meet the current
challenges facing the international community with a view to fulfilling the aims of the Charter of the United Nations
in the areas of peace, disarmament and development;
5. Recognizes that the Regional Centre has an important role in the promotion and development of regional
and subregional initiatives agreed upon by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean in the field of weapons
of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and conventional arms, including small arms and light weapons,
in the relationship between disarmament and development, including the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals,300 in the promotion of the participation of women in this field and in strengthening voluntary
confidence-building measures among the countries of the region;
6. Encourages the Regional Centre to further develop activities in all countries of the region in the important
areas of peace, disarmament and development and to provide, upon request and in accordance with its mandate,
support to Member States of the region in the national implementation of relevant instruments, inter alia, the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects302 and the Arms Trade Treaty,305 as well as in the implementation of the 1540 programme on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean”.

_______________
304
305

316

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
See resolution 67/234 B.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

RESOLUTION 74/73
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/369, para. 19)306

74/73.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 73/78 of 5 December 2018,
Recalling also the guidelines for general and complete disarmament adopted at its tenth special session, the first
special session devoted to disarmament,
Bearing in mind the establishment by the Secretary-General on 28 May 1992 of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, the purpose of which is to encourage arms limitation,
disarmament, non‑proliferation and development in the Central Africa subregion,
Recalling that the purpose of the Standing Advisory Committee is to conduct reconstruction and confidencebuilding activities in Central Africa among its member States, including through confidence-building and arms
limitation measures,
Reaffirming the importance and relevance of the Standing Advisory Committee as an instrument of preventive
diplomacy in the subregional architecture for the promotion of peace and security in Central Africa,
Bearing in mind the revitalization of the activities of the Standing Advisory Committee decided upon at the
forty-fourth ministerial meeting of the Committee, held in Yaoundé from 29 May to 2 June 2017, with a view to
enhancing its contribution to the achievement of the objectives of peace, security and development in Central Africa,
Noting the entry into force of the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly
(Kinshasa Convention) on 8 March 2017307 and the third Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty, held
in Geneva from 11 to 15 September 2017,
Convinced that the resources released by disarmament, including regional disarmament, can be devoted to
economic and social development and to the protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in particular
those of developing countries,
Welcoming the Libreville Declaration on the Adoption and Implementation of the Regional Strategy and Plan
of Action for Combating Terrorism and the Trafficking in Small Arms and Light Weapons in Central Africa, adopted
by the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee on 26 November 2015 at their forty-first ministerial
meeting, held in Libreville from 23 to 27 November 2015,308
Welcoming also the adoption, at the forty-fourth ministerial meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee, of
the plan of action and schedule for the implementation of the regional strategy under the auspices of the Economic
Community of Central African States,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures taken on the initiative and with
the participation of all States concerned and taking into account the specific characteristics of each region, since such
measures can contribute to regional stability and to international peace and security,
Convinced that development can be achieved only in a climate of peace, security and mutual confidence both
within and among States,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the Democratic Republic of the Congo (on behalf
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa).
307
See A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.
308
See A/70/682-S/2016/39, annex 3.
306

317

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling the communiqué of the forty-eighth ministerial meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee, held in
Kinshasa from 27 to 31 May 2019,309 the Brazzaville Declaration on Cooperation for Peace and Security in Central
Africa,310 the Bata Declaration for the Promotion of Lasting Democracy, Peace and Development in Central Africa311
and the Yaoundé Declaration on Peace, Security and Stability in Central Africa,312
Bearing in mind resolutions 1196 (1998) and 1197 (1998), adopted by the Security Council on 16 and
18 September 1998, respectively, following its consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,313
Welcoming the successful conclusion of the Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety and
Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé on 24 and 25 June 2013, the inauguration in Yaoundé, on
11 September 2014, of the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea, the
effective commencement of its activities with the installation of its statutory officials in Yaoundé on 22 February 2017,
the inauguration of new offices of the Regional Centre for Maritime Security in Central Africa in Pointe Noire, Congo,
on 20 October 2014, and the launch of the Multinational Maritime Coordination Centre in Cotonou, Benin, in March
2015, and also the conclusion of the African Union Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government on
Maritime Security and Safety and Development in Africa, held in Lomé on 15 October 2016,
Recalling its resolution 69/314 of 30 July 2015, the first such resolution on tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife,
and also its resolutions 70/301 of 9 September 2016, 71/326 of 11 September 2017 and 73/343 of 16 September 2019,
and welcoming the outcome of the high-level meetings on poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking, hosted by Gabon
and Germany and held on the margins of the high-level segments of the sixty-eighth and sixty-ninth sessions of the
General Assembly,
Emphasizing the need to strengthen the capacity for early warning, conflict prevention and peacekeeping in
Africa, and taking note in this regard of the concrete conflict prevention initiatives facilitated by the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs of the Secretariat,
Welcoming the close cooperation established between the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the Economic Community of Central African States, as well as the signing of the framework of cooperation
agreement between the two entities on 14 June 2016,
Bearing in mind the increased focus of the Standing Advisory Committee on human security questions, such as
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, as an important consideration for subregional peace, stability
and conflict prevention, and welcoming the adoption by the General Assembly at its seventy-second session of the
political declaration on the implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons314 following the high-level meeting of the Assembly on the appraisal of the Global Plan of Action,
Expressing continued concern about the fragile situation in the Central African Republic and in the neighbouring
countries affected, and noting the importance of promoting the political process through the implementation of the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in order to make tangible progress, in
particular with regard to the protection of civilians, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, and strengthening the authority of the State,
Taking note of the Kigali Declaration on the Situation in the Central African Republic,315 highlighting the
regional security implications of the situation in the Central African Republic, and reiterating the commitment of
States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to supporting the implementation of the African Union road
map for peace and reconciliation, including through financial contributions, and their cooperation to fight more
effectively the risks of instability in the country,

_______________
A/73/967-S/2019/613, annex, enclosure I.
A/50/474, annex I.
311
A/53/258-S/1998/763, annex II, appendix I.
312
A/53/868-S/1999/303, annex II.
313
A/52/871-S/1998/318.
314
Resolution 72/1.
315
A/73/224, annex I.
309
310

318

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note also of the Brazzaville Declaration on Confidence-Building Measures,316 and expressing concern
that the issue of mercenaries has become a major security concern, undermining trust and creating tensions among
States members of the Standing Advisory Committee,
Expressing concern about the increasing impact of cross-border criminality, in particular the activities of the
Lord’s Resistance Army, the terrorist attacks by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin region and incidents of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea, the illegal exploitation of natural resources, and the issue of transhumance and its cross-border
security implications for peace, security and development in Central Africa,
Welcoming the progress made by the States members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin in making
the Multinational Joint Task Force operational in order to combat effectively the threat posed by the Boko Haram
terrorist group to the Lake Chad basin region,
Welcoming also the adoption by the Lake Chad Basin Commission, with the support of the African Union, of
the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
Basin Region in Abuja on 30 August 2018,
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 2349 (2017) of 31 March 2017, in which the Council called for,
inter alia, increased assistance to the countries of the region,
Considering the urgent need to prevent the possible movement of illicit weapons, mercenaries and combatants
involved in conflicts in the Sahel and in neighbouring countries in the Central African subregion,
1. Reaffirms its support for efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building measures at the regional and
subregional levels in order to ease tensions and conflicts in Central Africa and to further sustainable peace, stability
and development in the subregion;
2. Welcomes and encourages the initiative of the States members of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa to further develop collaboration and synergies with the Economic
Community of Central African States, in particular the Commission for Defence and Security, including by means of
closed meetings, with a view to promoting the implementation of the regional strategy for combating terrorism and
the trafficking in small arms and light weapons in Central Africa adopted by the Committee;
3. Welcomes the adoption by the Standing Advisory Committee of the Kigali Declaration on the Reform of
the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa,317 and urges the States members of the Standing Advisory
Committee and the international community to provide technical and financial support to accelerate the reform of the
Council;
4. Also welcomes efforts under way by the Standing Advisory Committee and its secretariat to implement
the communication strategy adopted at the forty-fifth ministerial meeting of the Committee, held in Kigali from 4 to
8 December 2017, and encourages Member States and other partners to support initiatives aimed at increasing the
visibility of the Committee, including among the populations of the subregion, in cooperation with civil society;
5. Reaffirms the importance of disarmament and arms control programmes in Central Africa carried out by
the States of the subregion with the support of the United Nations, the African Union and other international partners;
6. Encourages Member States to provide assistance to those States members of the Standing Advisory
Committee that have ratified the Arms Trade Treaty,318 and encourages those that have not yet done so to ratify the
Treaty;
7. Encourages States members of the Standing Advisory Committee and other interested States to provide
financial support for the implementation of the Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and
Assembly (Kinshasa Convention),307 and encourages signatories that have not yet done so to ratify the Convention;

_______________
Ibid., annex IV.
Ibid., annex II.
318
See resolution 67/234 B.
316
317

319

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

8. Welcomes the holding of the first Conference of States Parties to the Central African Convention for the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for
Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, in Yaoundé from 11 to 13 June 2018, in accordance with article 34,
paragraph 3, of the Kinshasa Convention;
9. Encourages Member States to assist States parties to the Kinshasa Convention with coordination activities
for the control of small arms and light weapons at the regional and national levels, including funding thereof, as
expeditiously as possible;
10. Reaffirms its support for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy319 and its four pillars,
which constitute an ongoing effort, and calls upon Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate
international, regional and subregional organizations to step up their efforts to implement the Strategy in an integrated
and balanced manner and in all aspects;
11. Urges the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to implement the Libreville Declaration
on the Adoption and Implementation of the Regional Strategy and Plan of Action for Combating Terrorism and the
Trafficking in Small Arms and Light Weapons in Central Africa,308 and requests the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the international
community to support those measures;
12. Urges the States members of the Economic Community of Central African States to implement the
integrated strategy and plan of action for combating terrorism and the trafficking in small arms and light weapons in
Central Africa, and requests the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to support the efforts of States
members of the Economic Community of Central African States in this regard;
13. Welcomes the joint summit of the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States and the Economic Community of Central African States, in coordination with the African Union
Commission, on peace, security, stability and the fight against terrorism and violent extremism, held in Lomé on
30 July 2018, and also welcomes the Lomé Declaration on Peace, Security, Stability and the Fight against Terrorism
and Violent Extremism adopted at that summit;
14. Encourages the Economic Community of Central African States and the Economic Community of West
African States to work together towards the implementation of the Lomé Declaration;
15. Encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to carry out the programmes of
activities adopted at their ministerial meetings, and requests the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to
continue to provide support;
16. Appeals to the international community to support the efforts undertaken by the States concerned to
implement disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, and urges the States concerned to ensure that
such programmes take into consideration the needs of women and children associated with former combatants;
17. Welcomes the efforts of Cameroon and the Congo in providing assistance to the Interregional Coordination
Centre for Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea and the Regional Centre for Maritime Security in Central Africa,
respectively, and urges other member States to honour their financial commitments in order to ensure the predictable
and sustainable operation of the two Centres;
18. Encourages Member States to continue to implement the outcomes of the Summit of Heads of State and
Government on Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea by operationalizing the Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea and activities of the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa, and also encourages the implementation of the Charter on Maritime Security and Safety
and Development in Africa adopted at the African Union Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government
on Maritime Security and Safety and Development in Africa;

_______________
319

320

Resolution 60/288.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

19. Calls upon Member States and subregional bodies to take immediate concerted action to counter the
phenomenon of poaching and trafficking in wildlife and natural resources, including through the implementation of
the provisions of its resolutions 69/314, 70/301, 71/326 and 73/343;
20. Welcomes the determination of the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic Community of West African States to initiate common policies and joint
programmes on the management of pastoralism and cross-border transhumance;
21. Encourages the development of mechanisms for Community regulation, and calls for the holding of a
high-level conference to discuss issues relating to pastoralism and cross-border transhumance with a view to ensuring
joint and integrated management thereof;
22. Expresses its full support for the efforts of the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States, emphasizes the importance of the ongoing reform process of the Economic
Community of Central African States, and encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee and
the international community to support that reform;
23. Encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to pursue their discussions on
concrete conflict prevention initiatives, and requests in this regard the assistance of the Secretary-General;
24. Requests the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, in collaboration with the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, to facilitate the efforts undertaken by the States members of
the Standing Advisory Committee, in particular for their execution of the Implementation Plan for the Kinshasa
Convention;320
25. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
with the support of the international community, to continue to assist the countries of Central Africa in tackling the
issues of refugees and displaced persons in their territories;
26. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to continue to provide their full assistance for the proper functioning of the Subregional Centre for
Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa;
27. Welcomes the increased contributions made by several Member States to the trust fund of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, reminds the States members of the
Standing Advisory Committee of the commitments that they undertook on the adoption of the Declaration on the
Trust Fund of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa on 8 May
2009321 and the Bangui Declaration on 10 June 2016,322 and invites those States members of the Committee that have
not already done so to contribute to the trust fund;
28. Urges other Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support the
activities of the Standing Advisory Committee effectively through voluntary contributions to the trust fund;
29. Urges the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, to strengthen the gender component of the various meetings of the
Committee relating to disarmament and international security, in line with the Sao Tome Declaration on the
Participation of Women in the Statutory Meetings of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, adopted on 1 December 2016,323 in which member States were invited to increase the
representation of women in delegations participating in the statutory meetings of the Committee;
30. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support to the Standing Advisory Committee,
expresses appreciation for the role played by the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, welcomes the
strengthening of the Office, and strongly encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee and
international partners to support the work of the Office;

_______________
See A/65/717-S/2011/53, annex.
A/64/85-S/2009/288, annex I.
322
A/71/293, annex I.
323
A/72/363, annex II.
320
321

321

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

31. Welcomes the efforts of the Standing Advisory Committee towards addressing cross-border security
threats in Central Africa, including activities of Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army, and acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, the issue of transhumance and its cross-border security implications, as
well as the fallout from the situation in the Central African Republic, and also welcomes the role of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in coordinating those efforts, working closely with the Economic Community of
Central African States, the African Union and all relevant regional and international partners;
32. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support for the revitalization of the activities of
the Standing Advisory Committee, and requests him to continue to provide the assistance needed to ensure the success
of its regular biannual meetings;
33. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Review
and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the
sub-item entitled “Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa”.
RESOLUTION 74/74
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/370, para. 12)324

74/74.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament,325
Recalling its resolution 73/81 of 5 December 2018,
Convinced that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of
the international community, has the primary role in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament,
Recognizing the addresses of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as well as the addresses of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and other high-level officials in the Conference on Disarmament, and referring to their various
expressions of support for and concern about the endeavours of the Conference and calls for the Conference to
commence negotiations without delay to advance disarmament goals through the adoption of a balanced and
comprehensive programme of work,
Recognizing also the need to conduct multilateral negotiations with the aim of reaching agreement on concrete
issues, and emphasizing the importance of effective multilateralism in the context of the changing international
climate,
Noting with renewed concern that, despite the intensive efforts by States members and Presidents of the
Conference on Disarmament at its 2019 session to reach consensus on a programme of work on the basis of relevant
proposals and suggestions, the Conference did not succeed in commencing its substantive work by means of
negotiations or agree to a programme of work,
Recalling, in this respect, that the Conference on Disarmament has a number of priority issues for negotiation
to achieve disarmament goals,
Welcoming the overwhelming call for greater flexibility with respect to implementing the substantive work of
the Conference on Disarmament on the basis of a balanced and comprehensive programme of work,

_______________
324
325

322

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Zimbabwe.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/74/27).

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Underlining the need for continued cooperation among the States members of the Conference on Disarmament
as well as among the successive Presidents of the Conference,
Noting with appreciation the contributions made at the 2019 session to promote substantive discussions on
issues on the agenda,
Acknowledging the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, as a stand-alone, autonomous
institution, and the contribution that its research makes,
Recognizing the importance of engagement between civil society and the Conference on Disarmament
according to decisions taken by the Conference,
1. Reaffirms the role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating
forum of the international community;
2. Appreciates the strong support expressed for the Conference on Disarmament at its 2019 session by
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other high-level officials, while also acknowledging their concern about its ongoing
impasse, and takes into account their calls for greater flexibility with respect to commencing the substantive work of
the Conference without further delay;
3. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to further intensify consultations and to explore possibilities
for overcoming its ongoing deadlock of two decades by adopting and implementing a balanced and comprehensive
programme of work at the earliest possible date during its 2020 session, bearing in mind the decision on the programme
of work adopted by the Conference on 29 May 2009,326 as well as other relevant present, past and future proposals;
4. Encourages the current President and the incoming President of the Conference on Disarmament to
conduct consultations during the intersessional period and, if possible, to make recommendations, taking into account
all relevant proposals, past, present and future, including those submitted as documents of the Conference, views
presented and discussions held, and to endeavour to keep the membership of the Conference informed, as appropriate,
of their consultations;
5. Requests the current President and successive Presidents of the Conference on Disarmament to cooperate
with the States members of the Conference in the effort to guide the Conference to the early commencement of its
substantive work, including negotiations, at its 2020 session;
6. Recognizes the importance of continuing consultations in 2020 on the question of the expansion of the
membership of the Conference on Disarmament;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure and to strengthen, if needed, the provision to the
Conference on Disarmament of all necessary administrative, substantive and conference support services;
8. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session
a report on its work;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Review
of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special
session”, the sub-item entitled “Report of the Conference on Disarmament”.
RESOLUTION 74/75
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 152 to 6, with 24 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/371, para. 7)327
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,

_______________
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/64/27), para. 18.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt (on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the League of Arab States), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen and State of Palestine.
326
327

323

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Australia, Belgium, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia, France, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, India, Italy, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Panama, Poland, Romania, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/75.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its relevant resolutions, the latest of which is resolution 73/83 of 5 December 2018,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the latest of which is resolution GC(63)/RES/13, adopted on 19 September 2019,
Cognizant that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the region of the Middle East would pose a serious threat
to international peace and security,
Mindful of the immediate need for placing all nuclear facilities in the region of the Middle East under full-scope
safeguards of the Agency,
Recalling the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament adopted by
the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
on 11 May 1995,328 in which the Conference urged universal adherence to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons329 as an urgent priority and called upon all States not yet parties to the Treaty to accede to it at the
earliest date, particularly those States that operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities,
Recognizing with satisfaction that, in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,330 the Conference undertook to make determined efforts
towards the achievement of the goal of universality of the Treaty, called upon those remaining States not parties to the
Treaty to accede to it, thereby accepting an international legally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear weapons
or nuclear explosive devices and to accept Agency safeguards on all their nuclear activities, and underlined the
necessity of universal adherence to the Treaty and of strict compliance by all parties with their obligations under the
Treaty,
Recalling the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on 11 May 1995,328 in which the Conference noted with concern the continued existence in
the Middle East of unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, reaffirmed the importance of the early realization of universal
adherence to the Treaty, and called upon all States in the Middle East that had not yet done so, without exception,
to accede to the Treaty as soon as possible and to place all their nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency
safeguards,

_______________
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document,
Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)/Corr.2), annex.
329
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
330
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II), NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part III) and NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part IV)).
328

324

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Acknowledging that, in the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,331 the Conference emphasized the importance of a process leading to full
implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East and decided, inter alia, that the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the co-sponsors of the 1995 resolution, in consultation with the States of the region, would
convene a conference in 2012, to be attended by all States of the Middle East, on the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived
at by the States of the region, and with the full support and engagement of the nuclear-weapon States,
Expressing regret and concern that the conference was not convened in 2012 as mandated and that little progress
has been achieved towards the implementation of the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty,
Noting, in this context, the relevant resolutions of the League of Arab States aiming at the establishment of a
Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General,332
Recalling that Israel remains the only State in the Middle East that has not yet become a party to the Treaty,
Concerned about the threats posed by the proliferation of nuclear weapons to the security and stability of the
Middle East region,
Stressing the importance of taking confidence-building measures, in particular the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East, in order to enhance peace and security in the region and to consolidate the global
non‑proliferation regime,
Emphasizing the need for all parties directly concerned to seriously consider taking the practical and urgent steps
required for the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and, as a means of promoting this objective,
inviting the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty and, pending the establishment of the zone, to agree to place
all their nuclear activities under Agency safeguards,
Noting that 184 States have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,333 including a number of States
in the region,
1. Recalls the conclusions on the Middle East of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,334 and calls for the speedy and full implementation of the commitments
contained therein;
2. Stresses that the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty328 is an essential element of the outcome of the 1995 Conference and of the basis on which
the Treaty was indefinitely extended without a vote in 1995;
3. Reiterates that the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty remains valid until its goals and objectives are achieved;
4.

Calls for immediate steps towards the full implementation of that resolution;

5. Reaffirms the importance of Israel’s accession to the Treaty on the Non‑Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons329 and placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards, in realizing the goal of universal adherence to the Treaty in the Middle East;

_______________
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vols. I–III
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I), NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. II) and NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. III)).
332
A/74/157 (Part II).
333
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
334
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions, sect. IV.
331

325

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

6. Calls upon that State to accede to the Treaty without further delay, not to develop, produce, test or
otherwise acquire nuclear weapons, to renounce possession of nuclear weapons and to place all its unsafeguarded
nuclear facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards as an important confidence-building measure among all States
of the region and as a step towards enhancing peace and security;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “The risk of
nuclear proliferation in the Middle East”.
RESOLUTION 74/76
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/372, para. 8)335

74/76.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/84 of 5 December 2018,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and entry into force of the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects336 and its amended article 1,337 the Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I),336 the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II)336 and its
amended version,338 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol III),336
the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV)339 and the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War
(Protocol V),340
Recalling the results of the Fifth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, held in
Geneva from 12 to 16 December 2016,
Welcoming the results of the 2018 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, held in Geneva
from 21 to 23 November 2018,
Welcoming also the results of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended
Protocol II, held in Geneva on 20 November 2018,
Welcoming further the results of the Twelfth Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V, held in
Geneva on 19 November 2018,
Noting with satisfaction that the Meeting of the Group of Experts of the High Contracting Parties to Amended
Protocol II, the Meeting of Experts of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V and the two sessions of the Group
of Governmental Experts related to emerging technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems of the
High Contracting Parties to the Convention were held in 2019,
Noting the decision of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II that the President-designate of the
Twenty-first Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties would consult with delegations on possibilities to

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Latvia.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
337
Ibid., vol. 2260, No. 22495.
338
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
339
Ibid., vol. 2024, No. 22495.
340
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
335
336

326

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

include discussions on good practices in the implementation of the Protocol with respect to mines other than
anti-personnel mines, in particular with regard to the protection of civilians,
Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in the elaboration of the Convention
and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the particular efforts of various international, non-governmental and other
organizations in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of various categories of conventional weapons
which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
Emphasizing the importance of the perspectives of women, men, boys and girls in considering the issues
addressed by the Convention and its Protocols,
1. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to become parties, as soon as possible,
to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects336 and the Protocols thereto, as amended, with
a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these instruments at an early date and so as to ultimately achieve
their universality;
2. Calls upon all High Contracting Parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to express their consent
to be bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto to include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
3. Emphasizes the importance of the universalization of the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War
(Protocol V);340
4. Welcomes additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions to the Convention, as well as consents
to be bound by the Protocols thereto;
5. Acknowledges the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, as depositary of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto, and of the respective office holders of the conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention, Protocol V and Amended Protocol II, on behalf of the High Contracting Parties, to achieve the goal of
universality;
6. Recalls the following decisions by the Fifth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention:
(a) To establish an open-ended Group of Governmental Experts related to emerging technologies in the area
of lethal autonomous weapons systems in the context of the objectives and purposes of the Convention, adhering to
the agreed recommendations contained in document CCW/CONF.V/2, and to submit a report to the 2017 Meeting of
the High Contracting Parties to the Convention consistent with those recommendations;
(b)

To add to the agenda of the next Meeting of the High Contracting Parties in 2017 the item “Protocol III”;

(c) To add to the agenda of the next Meeting of the High Contracting Parties in 2017 the item “Mines other
than anti-personnel mines”;341
(d) To add to the agenda of the next Meeting of the High Contracting Parties in 2017 the item for informal
discussion “Consideration of how developments in the field of science and technology relevant to the Convention
may be addressed under the Convention”;
(e) To invite the Chair-elect to conduct consultations with a view to including on the agenda of the 2017
annual Meeting of the High Contracting Parties the item “Strengthening the respect for international humanitarian
law and addressing, in the context and objectives of the Convention and its annexed Protocols, the challenges
presented by the use of conventional weapons in armed conflicts and their impact on civilians, particularly in areas
where there are concentrations of civilians”;

_______________
Noting the update included in paragraph 34 of the final report of the 2018 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention
(CCW/MSP/2018/11).
341

327

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(f) To include on the agenda of the annual Meetings of the High Contracting Parties the item “Financial issues
related to the Convention and its annexed Protocols” and to consider at the next such meeting efficiency and costsaving measures and a report to be prepared by the Chair-elect;
(g) To retain the practice of keeping summary records only for the final sessions of the future Review
Conferences, the meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, and the Conferences of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V;
(h)
7.
in 2018:

To continue the Sponsorship Programme;
Also recalls the following decisions by the Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention

(a) To call for a seven-day meeting, to be held in Geneva in 2019, of the Group of Governmental Experts
related to emerging technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems in the context of the objectives
and purposes of the Convention;
(b) To call for the universalization and full implementation of Protocol III on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Incendiary Weapons,336 given the Protocol’s importance;
(c) To place on the agenda of its next meeting the item “Emerging issues in the context of the objectives and
purposes of the Convention” and to invite the High Contracting Parties to submit working papers on issues that they
intend to raise;
(d) To clarify certain aspects of the financial measures adopted at the Meeting of the High Contracting Parties
in 2017 and to continue to monitor the financial situation of the Convention;
(e) To request the Chair-elect to continue consultations aimed at improving the stability of the Secretariat’s
support to the Convention;
8. Calls upon all High Contracting Parties to ensure full and prompt compliance with their financial
obligations under the Convention and its annexed Protocols;
9. Welcomes the renewed efforts to strengthen the financial situation of the Convention and to find a stable
basis for the Implementation Support Unit;
10. Also welcomes the work of the Group of Governmental Experts related to emerging technologies in the
area of lethal autonomous weapons systems, including its 2018 report, which has provided a basis for further work;
11. Further welcomes the commitment by the High Contracting Parties to continue to contribute to the further
development of international humanitarian law, and, in this context, to keep under review both the development of
new weapons and uses of weapons, which may have indiscriminate effects or cause unnecessary suffering;
12. Welcomes the commitment of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V to the effective and efficient
implementation of the Protocol and the implementation of the decisions of the First and Second Conferences of the
High Contracting Parties to the Protocol establishing a comprehensive framework for the exchange of information
and cooperation;
13. Notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences may be convened to examine
amendments to the Convention or to any of the Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning other
categories of conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope and application of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any proposed amendments or additional protocols;
14. Underlines the vital role of the full and equal participation of women in decision-making and implementation
of the Convention;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to render the assistance necessary and to provide such services as may be
required for the annual conferences and expert meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention and of the
High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V, as well as for any continuation of the work after the
meetings;
328

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

16. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the Convention and the Protocols
thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and acceptances
of and accessions to the Convention, its amended article 1337 and the Protocols;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
RESOLUTION 74/77
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 179 to none, with 2 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/373, para. 7)342
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South
Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: None
Abstaining: Israel, United States of America

74/77.

Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution 73/85 of 5 December 2018,
Reaffirming the primary role of the Mediterranean countries in strengthening and promoting peace, security and
cooperation in the Mediterranean region,
Welcoming the efforts deployed by the Euro-Mediterranean countries to strengthen their cooperation in
combating terrorism, in particular through the adoption of the Euro-Mediterranean Code of Conduct on Countering
Terrorism by the Euro-Mediterranean Summit, held in Barcelona, Spain, on 27 and 28 November 2005,
Bearing in mind all the previous declarations and commitments, as well as all the initiatives taken by the riparian
countries at the recent summits, ministerial meetings and various forums concerning the question of the Mediterranean
region,
Recalling, in this regard, the adoption on 13 July 2008 of the Joint Declaration of the Paris Summit for the
Mediterranean, which launched a reinforced partnership, named the “Barcelona Process: Union for the
Mediterranean”, and the common political will to revive efforts to transform the Mediterranean into an area of peace,
democracy, cooperation and prosperity,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Austria, Cyprus, Egypt, Eritrea,
Georgia, Greece, Iraq, Ireland, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Libya, Malta, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Netherlands, Nigeria,
Portugal, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovenia, Sudan, Tunisia, Turkey and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
342

329

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Welcoming the entry into force of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba)343 as a
contribution to the strengthening of peace and security both regionally and internationally,
Recognizing the indivisible character of security in the Mediterranean and that the enhancement of cooperation
among Mediterranean countries with a view to promoting the economic and social development of all peoples of the
region will contribute significantly to stability, peace and security in the region,
Recognizing also the efforts made so far and the determination of the Mediterranean countries to intensify the
process of dialogue and consultations with a view to resolving the problems existing in the Mediterranean region and
to eliminating the causes of tension and the consequent threat to peace and security, as well as their growing awareness
of the need for further joint efforts to strengthen economic, social, cultural and environmental cooperation in the
region,
Recognizing further that prospects for closer Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in all spheres can be enhanced
by positive developments worldwide, in particular in Europe, in the Maghreb and in the Middle East,
Reaffirming the responsibility of all States to contribute to the stability and prosperity of the Mediterranean
region and their commitment to respecting the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations as well as
the provisions of the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,344
Noting the peace negotiations in the Middle East, which should be of a comprehensive nature and represent an
appropriate framework for the peaceful settlement of contentious issues in the region,
Expressing concern at the persistent tension and continuing military activities in parts of the Mediterranean that
hinder efforts to strengthen security and cooperation in the region,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,345
1. Reaffirms that security in the Mediterranean is closely linked to European security as well as to
international peace and security;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the continuing efforts by Mediterranean countries to contribute actively to the
elimination of all causes of tension in the region and to the promotion of just and lasting solutions to the persistent
problems of the region through peaceful means, thus ensuring the withdrawal of foreign forces of occupation and
respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all countries of the Mediterranean and the right of
peoples to self-determination, and therefore calls for full adherence to the principles of non-interference,
non‑intervention, non-use of force or threat of use of force and the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force, in accordance with the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
3. Commends the Mediterranean countries for their efforts in meeting common challenges through
coordinated overall responses, based on a spirit of multilateral partnership, towards the general objective of turning
the Mediterranean basin into an area of dialogue, exchanges and cooperation, guaranteeing peace, stability and
prosperity, encourages them to strengthen such efforts through, inter alia, a lasting multilateral and action-oriented
cooperative dialogue among States of the region, and recognizes the role of the United Nations in promoting regional
and international peace and security;
4. Recognizes that the elimination of the economic and social disparities in levels of development and other
obstacles, as well as respect and greater understanding among cultures in the Mediterranean area, will contribute to
enhancing peace, security and cooperation among Mediterranean countries through the existing forums;
5. Calls upon all States of the Mediterranean region that have not yet done so to adhere to all the multilaterally
negotiated legal instruments in force related to the field of disarmament and non-proliferation, thus creating the
conditions necessary for strengthening peace and cooperation in the region;
6. Encourages all States of the region to favour the conditions necessary for strengthening the confidencebuilding measures among them by promoting genuine openness and transparency on all military matters, by

_______________
A/50/426, annex.
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
345
A/74/97.
343
344

330

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

participating, inter alia, in the United Nations Report on Military Expenditures and by providing accurate data and
information to the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms;
7. Encourages the Mediterranean countries to strengthen further their cooperation in combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, including the possible resort by terrorists to weapons of mass destruction, taking into
account the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and in combating international crime and illicit arms transfers
and illicit drug production, consumption and trafficking, which pose a serious threat to peace, security and stability in
the region and therefore to the improvement of the current political, economic and social situation and which
jeopardize friendly relations among States, hinder the development of international cooperation and result in the
destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the democratic basis of pluralistic society;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
means to strengthen security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Strengthening
of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region”.
RESOLUTION 74/78
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 182 to 1, with 4 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/374, para. 7)346
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Abstaining: India, Mauritius, Syrian Arab Republic, United States of America

74/78.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the cessation of nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions constitutes an
effective nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation measure, and convinced that this is a meaningful step in the
realization of a systematic process for achieving nuclear disarmament,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Vanuatu.
346

331

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, adopted by the General Assembly by its resolution
50/245 of 10 September 1996, was opened for signature on 24 September 1996,
Stressing that a universal and effectively verifiable Treaty constitutes a fundamental instrument in the field of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and will be a major contribution to international peace and security,
Stressing also the vital importance and urgency of achieving the entry into force of the Treaty, as noted also in
Security Council resolution 2310 (2016) of 23 September 2016, and affirming its resolute determination, 23 years
after the Treaty was opened for signature, to achieve its entry into force,
Encouraged by the signing of the Treaty by 184 States, including 41 of the 44 whose ratification is needed for
its entry into force, and welcoming the ratification of the Treaty by 168 States, including 36 of the 44 whose ratification
is needed for its entry into force, among which there are 3 nuclear-weapon States,
Recalling its resolution 73/86 of 5 December 2018,
Recalling also the adoption by consensus of the conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions of the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,347 in which the
Conference, inter alia, reaffirmed the vital importance of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty as a core element of the international nuclear disarmament and non‑proliferation regime and included specific
actions to be taken in support of the entry into force of the Treaty,
Welcoming the Final Declaration adopted by the eleventh Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, held in New York on 25 September 2019, convened pursuant to article XIV
of the Treaty, and recalling the Joint Ministerial Statement on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, adopted
at the ministerial meeting held in New York on 27 September 2018,348
Noting the contribution of diverse participation in building and sustaining momentum for the universalization
and entry into force of the Treaty, including through the Youth Group of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
Welcoming continuing progress in the development of the Treaty’s verification regime, which advances the
Treaty’s primary non-proliferation and disarmament objective, and the establishment of 298 certified facilities of the
International Monitoring System network,
Recognizing the civil and scientific benefits provided by the Treaty’s global monitoring system,
1. Stresses the vital importance and urgency of signature and ratification, without delay and without
conditions, in order to achieve the earliest entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;349
2. Welcomes the contributions by the signatory States to the work of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, in particular its efforts to ensure that the verification regime
of the Treaty will be capable of meeting the verification requirements of the Treaty upon its entry into force, in
accordance with article IV of the Treaty, and encourages their continuation;
3.
regime;

Underlines the need to maintain momentum towards the completion of all elements of the verification

4. Urges all States not to carry out nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other nuclear explosions, to
maintain their moratoriums in this regard and to refrain from acts that would defeat the object and purpose of the
Treaty, while stressing that these measures do not have the same permanent and legally binding effect as the entry into
force of the Treaty;

_______________
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, vol. I
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on actions.
348
A/73/838, annex.
349
See resolution 50/245 and A/50/1027.
347

332

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Reiterates its condemnation of the six nuclear tests conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in violation of relevant Security Council resolutions,350 urges full compliance with the obligations under those
resolutions, including that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea abandon its nuclear weapons programme and
not conduct any further nuclear tests, notes with encouragement the statement of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea concerning a moratorium on nuclear tests and efforts towards the dismantlement of the Punggye-ri nuclear
test site, reaffirms its support for the complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula in
a peaceful manner, including through the Six-Party Talks, welcomes all efforts and dialogue to this end, including the
inter-Korean summits and summits between the United States of America and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, and encourages all parties to continue such efforts and dialogue;
6. Urges all States that have not yet signed or ratified, or that have signed but not yet ratified, the Treaty, in
particular those whose ratification is needed for its entry into force, to sign and ratify it as soon as possible and to
accelerate their ratification processes with a view to ensuring their earliest successful conclusion;
7. Welcomes, since the adoption of its previous resolution on the subject, the ratification of the Treaty by
Zimbabwe, since each ratification is a significant step towards the entry into force and universalization of the Treaty;
8. Encourages further expressions from among the remaining States whose ratification is needed for the
Treaty to enter into force of their intention to pursue and complete the ratification process;
9. Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political level and, where in a position to do
so, to promote adherence to the Treaty through bilateral and joint outreach, seminars and other means;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty”.
RESOLUTION 74/79
Adopted at the 46th plenary meeting, on 12 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/375, para. 8)351

74/79.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective prohibition of bacteriological
(biological) and toxin weapons and on their destruction,
Noting with satisfaction the increase in the number of ratifications of and accessions to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction,352 and stressing at the same time that there is a continuing need to achieve its universalization,
Reaffirming its call upon all signatory States that have not yet ratified the Convention to do so without delay,
and calling upon those States that have not signed the Convention to become parties thereto at the earliest possible
date, thus contributing to the achievement of universal adherence to the Convention, which will facilitate its
success,
Bearing in mind its call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate in the implementation of the
recommendations of the review conferences of the parties to the Convention, including the exchange of information
and data agreed to in the Final Declaration of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction, later amended by the Final Declaration of the Seventh Review Conference, and to provide such

_______________
Including Security Council resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2094 (2013), 2270 (2016), 2321 (2016) and 2375 (2017).
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Hungary.
352
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
350
351

333

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

information and data in conformity with the standardized procedure to the Implementation Support Unit within the
Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat on an annual basis and no later than 15 April,
Welcoming the reaffirmation made in the Final Declarations of the Fourth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Review
Conferences that under all circumstances the use of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and their
development, production and stockpiling are effectively prohibited under article I of the Convention,
Recognizing the importance of ongoing efforts by States parties to enhance international cooperation, assistance
and the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the use of
bacteriological (biological) agents and toxins for peaceful purposes, recognizing also that there still remain challenges
to be overcome in order to enhance international cooperation, and recognizing further the value of building capacity
through international cooperation as well as strengthening coordination and coherence of efforts of all relevant
international organizations, in line with the Final Document of the Eighth Review Conference,353
Reaffirming the importance of national measures, in accordance with constitutional processes, in strengthening
the implementation of the Convention by States parties, in line with the Final Document of the Eighth Review
Conference,
Reaffirming also the importance of the review of developments in the field of science and technology related to
the Convention,
Encouraging the equitable participation of women and men in the framework of the Convention,
Recalling previous intersessional processes carried out under the Convention,
Noting, in the decisions and recommendations of the Final Document, that the Eighth Review Conference
decided that States parties would hold annual meetings and that the first such meeting would start on 4 December
2017, have a duration of up to five days and seek to make progress on issues of substance and process for the period
before the next Review Conference, with a view to reaching consensus on an intersessional process,
Recalling the decision of the Eighth Review Conference that the Ninth Review Conference shall be held in
Geneva not later than 2021,
1. Notes the consensus outcome of and the decisions on all provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction352 reached at the Eighth Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention,353 and calls upon States
parties to the Convention to participate and actively engage in their continued implementation;
2. Notes with appreciation that the meeting of States parties to the Convention, held in Geneva from
4 to 8 December 2017, was able to reach consensus on reaffirming previous intersessional programmes carried out
during the period 2003–2015, on retaining the previous structure of annual meetings of States parties preceded by
annual meetings of experts, and on reaffirming that the purpose of the intersessional programme was to discuss, and
promote common understanding and effective action on, those issues identified for inclusion in the intersessional
programme, and that the work of the intersessional period would be guided by the aim of strengthening the
implementation of all articles of the Convention in order to better respond to current challenges;354
3. Also notes with appreciation that, in the light of the need to balance an ambition to improve the
intersessional programme within the financial and human resources constraints facing States parties, 12 days were
allocated to the intersessional programme each year from 2018 to 2020, that the meetings of experts for eight days
would be held back to back and at least three months before the annual meetings of States parties of four days each,
and that the meetings of experts would be open-ended and would consider the following topics: cooperation and
assistance, with a particular focus on strengthening cooperation and assistance under article X (two days); review of
developments in the field of science and technology related to the Convention (two days); strengthening national
implementation (one day); assistance, response and preparedness (two days); and institutional strengthening of the
Convention (one day);

_______________
353
354

334

BWC/CONF.VIII/4 and BWC/CONF.VIII/4/Corr.1.
See BWC/MSP/2017/6.

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Appreciates the information and data on confidence-building measures provided by States parties to the
Convention to date, and calls upon all States parties to participate in the exchange of information and data on
confidence-building measures called for in the relevant decisions of the review conferences, and invites them to make
use of the new platform for electronic submission, on a voluntary basis, without prejudice to their choice of methods
for submission;
5. Notes the decision of the Eighth Review Conference to continue and improve the database established by
the Seventh Review Conference to facilitate requests for and offers of exchange of assistance and cooperation, and
urges States parties to submit to the Implementation Support Unit, on a voluntary basis, requests for and offers of
cooperation and assistance, including in terms of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information
regarding the use of biological and toxin agents for peaceful purposes;
6. Encourages States parties to provide, at least biannually, appropriate information on their implementation
of article X of the Convention and to collaborate to offer assistance or training, upon request, as contained in specific
proposals, in support of the legislative and other implementation measures of States parties needed to ensure their
compliance with the Convention;
7. Notes the decision of the Eighth Review Conference to renew the sponsorship programme established by
the Seventh Review Conference in order to support and increase the participation of developing States parties in the
annual meetings, welcomes the continued willingness among States parties to provide voluntary contributions, and
calls upon States parties in a position to do so to offer voluntary contributions for the programme;
8. Also notes the decision of the Eighth Review Conference to renew the mandate of the Implementation
Support Unit agreed to at the Seventh Review Conference, mutatis mutandis, for the period from 2017 to 2021, and
notes with appreciation the work of the Unit;
9. Notes with appreciation the events organized by some States parties, regional organizations and the Office
for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat for exchanges of views on the implementation of the Convention, and
encourages States parties to continue to participate in such informal exchanges and discussions;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render the necessary assistance to the depositary
Governments of the Convention and to continue to provide such services as may be required for the conduct and the
implementation of the decisions and recommendations of the review conferences;
11. Appreciates that the meeting of States parties in Geneva in December 2018 adopted a set of financial
measures, as set out in its report,355 including the establishment of a working capital fund as an interim measure, to be
reviewed at the Ninth Review Conference, and resolved to continue to monitor the financial situation of the
Convention, and notes that the meeting of States parties requested the Chair of the meeting of States parties in 2019,
in close consultation with the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Office at Geneva and the
Implementation Support Unit, to report on the overall financial situation of the Convention, the implementation of the
measures outlined above and possible further measures to bring about the timely payment of assessed contributions,
as required, for consideration by the meeting of States parties in 2019;
12. Notes that the meeting of States parties in 2018 agreed that the financial difficulties of the Convention
stemmed from three principal sources, namely the non‑payment of contributions by some States parties, delays in the
receipt of contributions from other States parties and the financial requirements of the United Nations with respect to
activities not funded from its regular budget, and calls upon States parties to consider ways of addressing these serious
issues as a matter of urgency;
13. Encourages the meeting of States parties in 2019 to consider and to agree upon practical arrangements for
the Ninth Review Conference, taking into account the major renovation programme of the Palais des Nations;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons
and on Their Destruction”.

_______________
355

BWC/MSP/2018/6, paras. 20–24.

335

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/80.

Assistance in mine action ....................................................................................................................................339

74/81.

Effects of atomic radiation ..................................................................................................................................343

74/82.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space .............................................................................346

74/83.

Assistance to Palestine refugees ..........................................................................................................................352

74/84.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities...........................................................354

74/85.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ...............355

74/86.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues ................................................................................................363

74/87.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories ..............................................................364

74/88.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied
Syrian Golan ........................................................................................................................................................367

74/89.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem .....................................................................................................................371

74/90.

The occupied Syrian Golan .................................................................................................................................377

74/91.

Comprehensive review of special political missions ...........................................................................................379

74/92.

Questions relating to information ........................................................................................................................381
A.

Information in the service of humanity .......................................................................................................381

B.

United Nations global communications policies and activities ...................................................................382

74/93.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations...........................................................................................................................................396

74/94.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories ............................................................................................................................................................398

74/95.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations .....................400

74/96.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories ............................................................................................................................................................404

74/97.

Question of Western Sahara ................................................................................................................................405

74/98.

Question of American Samoa ..............................................................................................................................407

74/99.

Question of Anguilla ...........................................................................................................................................410

74/100.

Question of Bermuda...........................................................................................................................................414

74/101.

Question of the British Virgin Islands .................................................................................................................417

74/102.

Question of the Cayman Islands ..........................................................................................................................420

74/103.

Question of French Polynesia ..............................................................................................................................423

337

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/104.

Question of Guam ...............................................................................................................................................426

74/105.

Question of Montserrat ........................................................................................................................................430

74/106.

Question of New Caledonia.................................................................................................................................434

74/107.

Question of Pitcairn .............................................................................................................................................439

74/108.

Question of Saint Helena .....................................................................................................................................442

74/109.

Question of Tokelau ............................................................................................................................................445

74/110.

Question of the Turks and Caicos Islands ...........................................................................................................448

74/111.

Question of the United States Virgin Islands ......................................................................................................451

74/112.

Dissemination of information on decolonization.................................................................................................455

74/113.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ..........457

338

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 74/80
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/406, para. 8)1

74/80.

Assistance in mine action

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 72/75 of 7 December 2017 and all its previous resolutions on assistance in mine
clearance and on assistance in mine action, all adopted without a vote,
Recalling also all relevant treaties and conventions2 and their review processes,
Noting the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,3 and the establishment of
both the United Nations Mine Action Service and the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action,
Noting with appreciation the extent to which the International Day for Mine Awareness and Assistance in Mine
Action has been commemorated worldwide,
Noting all relevant United Nations resolutions that take into account the humanitarian aspects of assistance in
mine action,
Reaffirming its deep concern at the tremendous humanitarian and development impact of mines and explosive
remnants of war,4 in affected countries, which have serious and lasting social and economic consequences for the
civilian populations of such countries, including refugees and other displaced persons returning to their homes, as well
as persons residing in conflict and post-conflict areas, and which hinder the access of people in need to humanitarian
assistance and the achievement of sustainable development and inhibit peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts,
Expressing alarm at the renewed increase in casualties, of which nearly half are children, of mines and explosive
remnants of war, in conflict and post-conflict situations,
Bearing in mind the serious humanitarian risk that mines and explosive remnants of war pose, in affected
countries, to the safety, health and lives of populations, including local civilian populations, as well as of personnel
participating in humanitarian, peacekeeping, rehabilitation, reconstruction and mine clearance programmes and
operations,
Emphasizing the increased necessity and urgency of strengthening mine action efforts by the international
community with a view to eliminating the risk and the humanitarian impact of mines and explosive remnants of war
on civilians as soon as possible and to facilitating the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel and the
delivery of supplies and equipment, in accordance with the humanitarian principles,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta,
Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States
of America.
2
These include the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction, 1997; the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices, as amended in 1996
(Protocol II to the 1980 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects); the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War, 2003 (Protocol V to the 1980
Convention); the Convention on Cluster Munitions, 2008; the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and
relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, 1977 (Protocol I); and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, 2006.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.
4
As defined by Protocol V to the 1980 Convention.
1

339

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing the continued progress made through a comprehensive approach to mine action, including
assessing, surveying and clearing mines and explosive remnants of war, providing risk education to affected
populations and supporting victims,
Noting that, for the purposes of the implementation of the present resolution, improvised explosive devices
meeting the definition of mines, booby traps or other devices fall under the scope of mine action when their clearance
is undertaken for humanitarian purposes and in areas where major active hostilities have ceased,
Recognizing that, in addition to the primary role of Member States, the United Nations plays a significant role
in the field of assistance in mine action, in particular through the implementation of the Strategy of the United Nations
on Mine Action 2019–2023 by members of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action,5 chaired by the
Mine Action Service at the working level,
Considering mine action to be an important and integrated component of United Nations humanitarian
assistance and development activities, and noting the integration of mine action in numerous United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions mandated by the Security Council,
Recognizing the contribution of mine action to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,6
Noting with satisfaction that humanitarian appeals increasingly include mine action, where relevant, and
underlining the importance of considering mine action during the earliest stages of planning and programming, where
appropriate, in humanitarian emergency responses,7 in accordance with the humanitarian principles,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action in cooperating
and coordinating with non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders through meetings of the Committee on
Mine Action,8 and the strengthening of United Nations coordination at the global level through the mine action area
of responsibility within the Global Protection Cluster, and encouraging further enhancement of that cooperation,
Recognizing the importance of the full involvement and equal opportunities for participation of both women
and men in mine action programmes and of gender- and age-appropriate perspective in mine action programmes,
Recognizing also the valuable mine action efforts of national, regional and international mine action
practitioners, including United Nations personnel and peacekeepers, and also experts from relevant non-governmental
organizations involved in mine action, enabling local communities and mine survivors to resume normal lives and
reclaim their livelihoods by regaining access to previously contaminated lands,
Noting with appreciation national, regional and subregional efforts, including the ongoing development by the
African Union of a new strategic framework on mine action, as well as other relevant regional mine action strategies,
Taking note of the updated United Nations Policy on Victim Assistance in Mine Action, which highlights the
significance of integrating victim assistance efforts into broader national and international frameworks, such as the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,9 as well as the importance of sustained services and support to
victims of mines and explosive remnants of war,
_______________
Consisting of the Mine Action Service of the Department of Peace Operations of the Secretariat, the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Office for Project
Services, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme
and the World Health Organization. The United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research and the World Bank are observers.
6
Resolution 70/1.
7
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 and the guiding principles contained in the annex thereto, other relevant General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions and agreed conclusions of the Council, reaffirming also the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence in the provision of humanitarian assistance and reaffirming further the need for all actors engaged
in the provision of humanitarian assistance in situations of complex emergencies and natural disasters to promote and fully respect these
principles.
8
The Committee on Mine Action is an informal information-sharing forum. The members are the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on
Mine Action, non-governmental organizations involved in mine action, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Geneva
International Centre for Humanitarian Demining and academic institutions.
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
5

340

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting with appreciation the launch of the Strategy of the United Nations on Mine Action 2019–2023, including
its reinforced monitoring and evaluation mechanism, emphasizing the importance of using evaluation to inform the
future direction of mine action within the United Nations, including the role and function of the Mine Action Service,
and encouraging the members of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on Mine Action to continue their work to
improve the impact of the United Nations in the field of mine action,
Noting the coordination efforts under the informal donor information-sharing forum known as the Mine Action
Support Group, which endeavours to coordinate the humanitarian mine action programmes of donor States,
harmonizing the prioritization of their respective mine action programmes and increasing donor support for mine
action where it is most needed,
Noting also the discussions on the issue of improvised explosive devices of the informal group of experts under
the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices, as amended on
3 May 1996 (Amended Protocol II),10 and on the technical annex to the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War
(Protocol V)11 to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects,12
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,13 including the recommendations contained therein;

2.

Calls upon Member States to comply with their respective international obligations related to mine action;

3. Calls, in particular, for the continuation of the efforts of Member States, including through South-South,
regional and subregional cooperation, bearing in mind the need to ensure national ownership, with the assistance of
the United Nations and relevant organizations involved in mine action, upon request and as appropriate and in
coordination with the affected country, to foster the establishment and development of national mine action capacities
in countries in which mines and explosive remnants of war constitute a serious threat to the safety, health and lives of
the local civilian population or an impediment to the delivery of humanitarian assistance and social and economic
development efforts at the national and local levels;
4. Urges all Member States, in particular those that have the capacity to do so, as well as the United Nations
system and other relevant organizations and institutions involved in mine action, to support mine-affected States, upon
request and as appropriate, by providing:
(a) Assistance to countries affected by mines and explosive remnants of war for the establishment and
development of national mine action capacities, including in the fulfilment of the relevant international obligations of
those countries and the implementation of national mine action strategies and plans;
(b) Support for national and, where and as appropriate, local programmes, in cooperation with the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system and relevant regional, governmental and non-governmental organizations, to
reduce the risks posed by mines and explosive remnants of war, taking into consideration the different needs of
women, girls, boys and men;
(c) Reliable, predictable, timely and, where possible, multi-annual contributions for mine action activities,
including through national mine action efforts and mine action programmes of the United Nations and nongovernmental organizations, including those relating to rapid response in humanitarian emergencies, victim assistance
and mine risk education, especially at the local level, as well as through relevant national, regional and global trust
funds, including the voluntary trust fund for assistance in mine action;
(d) Necessary information and technical, financial and material assistance to locate, remove, destroy and
otherwise render ineffective minefields, mines and explosive remnants of war, in accordance with international law,
as soon as possible;
_______________
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
12
Ibid., vol. 1342, No. 22495.
13
A/74/288.
10
11

341

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

(e) Technological assistance (i) to countries affected by mines and explosive remnants of war, and (ii) to
promote user-oriented scientific research on and development of mine action techniques and technologies that are
effective, sustainable, appropriate and environmentally sound;
5. Encourages efforts to conduct all mine action activities in accordance with the International Mine Action
Standards or national standards compliant with those Standards, and emphasizes the importance of ensuring the
accuracy and objectivity of reporting information as well as of using state-of-the-art technologies and an information
management system, such as the Information Management System for Mine Action, to help to facilitate mine action
activities;
6. Notes the update of the International Mine Action Standards with regard to improvised explosive devices,
and encourages the United Nations Mine Action Service to continue its efforts in this regard;
7. Urges all mine-affected States, pursuant to applicable international law, to identify all areas, as appropriate,
under their jurisdiction or control containing mines and explosive remnants of war in the most efficient manner
possible and to employ land release techniques, including non-technical survey, technical survey and clearance when
appropriate;
8. Encourages mine-affected States, with support from relevant United Nations agencies and development
partners as appropriate, to proactively mainstream mine action, including victim assistance requirements and their
linkage with health care and disabilities agendas, into development plans and processes to ensure that development
priorities include mine action and that mine action, including victim assistance requirements, is funded in a predictable
and sustainable manner;
9. Encourages all relevant multilateral, regional and national programmes and bodies to include activities
related to mine action, including clearance, in their peacebuilding, humanitarian, stabilization, rehabilitation,
reconstruction, peace sustainment and development assistance activities, where appropriate, bearing in mind the need
to ensure national and local ownership, sustainability and capacity-building, as well as to include a gender- and
age-appropriate perspective in all aspects of such activities and to take into account the specific needs of persons with
disabilities;
10. Encourages Member States, as appropriate, and relevant organizations involved in mine action to continue
efforts to ensure that mine action programmes take into account risk education, the specific needs and requirements
of victims and persons with disabilities and are gender- and age-sensitive, so that women, girls, boys and men can
benefit equally from them, and also take into account the specific needs of refugees and internally displaced persons,
as well as persons residing in conflict and post-conflict areas, and encourages the participation of all stakeholders,
including women, in the programming of mine action;
11. Urges States to provide humanitarian assistance for victims of mines and explosive remnants of war and
to take measures to spare the civilian population, consistent with the principles of international humanitarian law;
12. Encourages States to support victims’ access to appropriate medical care, physical and sensory
rehabilitation, psychosocial support, education and skills training and income-earning opportunities and to provide
those services to all, regardless of gender, age or socioeconomic status;
13. Encourages the provision of capacity-building assistance to affected countries in order to integrate
assistance for victims into their national policy frameworks on health care, social services and disability-inclusive
development by relevant United Nations agencies, civil society organizations and other entities with expertise in those
matters;
14. Stresses the importance of cooperation and coordination in mine action and of devoting existing resources,
as appropriate, to that end, emphasizes the primary responsibility of national authorities in that regard, and also stresses
the supporting role of the United Nations, with the Mine Action Service as the coordinator for mine action within the
United Nations system, and other relevant organizations in that regard;
15. Encourages the United Nations to continue to take measures to improve coordination, efficiency,
transparency and accountability, in particular by implementing the Strategy of the United Nations on Mine
Action 2019–2023;
16. Notes with appreciation the continued partnership and cooperation of the United Nations with regional
and subregional organizations, especially the African Union, to mitigate the risk to civilians from mines and explosive
342

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

remnants of war, including through the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security and other joint initiatives, and encourages in this regard the establishment of partnerships with
regional, national and local organizations, as appropriate;
17. Recognizes the importance of explicitly incorporating references to mine action, when appropriate, in
ceasefire and peace agreements, as well as in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
as appropriate, in the light of the potential that mine action can have as a peace- and confidence-building measure in
post-conflict situations among the parties concerned and in view of the ongoing dangers faced by peacekeeping
personnel and host populations;
18. Encourages those Member States and organizations in a position to do so to support measures by all
relevant actors aimed at improving rapid response capacity in humanitarian emergencies, as well as transparency and
accountability;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and on follow-up to previous resolutions on assistance in mine clearance
and on assistance in mine action;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session the item entitled “Assistance in
mine action”.
RESOLUTION 74/81
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/407, para. 8)14

74/81.

Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it established the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its subsequent resolutions on the subject, in which, inter alia, it
requested the Scientific Committee to continue its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future generations resulting from the levels of
radiation to which humankind and the environment are exposed,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information about atomic and ionizing radiation and
to analyse its effects on humankind and the environment, and conscious also of the increased volume, complexity and
diversity of that information,
Acknowledging the concerns about the radiological consequences of nuclear accidents,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work, and welcoming the increased
commitment of States members of the Committee,
Emphasizing the vital need for sufficient, assured and predictable funding, as well as efficient management, of
the work of the secretariat of the Scientific Committee to arrange the annual sessions and coordinate the development
of documents based on scientific reviews of the sources of ionizing radiation and its effects on human health and the
environment,
Recognizing the increasing importance of the scientific work of the Scientific Committee and the need to carry
out unforeseen additional work, such as after the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Cyprus, Czechia, Fiji, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, Palau, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Thailand and Ukraine.
14

343

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Considering that the high quality of the work and the scientific rigour of the Scientific Committee need to be
maintained in the future,
Recognizing the importance of disseminating the findings of the Scientific Committee, in particular to the public,
and widely publicizing scientific knowledge about atomic radiation, and recalling in that context principle 10 of the
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,15
Noting the need for the resources of the Scientific Committee to be sufficient, assured and predictable, and
recognizing the importance of voluntary contributions to the general trust fund established by the Executive Director
of the United Nations Environment Programme to support the work of the Committee,
Acknowledging the attendance of Algeria, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Norway and the United Arab Emirates as
observers at the sixty-fifth and sixty-sixth sessions of the Scientific Committee,
Bearing in mind that the incorporation of new members will imply a proportional increase in operational costs
for the Scientific Committee, including travel costs,
Commending the secretariat of the Scientific Committee for its ongoing efforts to ensure the sustainable and
effective work of the Committee, and encouraging all States in a position to do so to provide support to the secretariat
of the Committee,
Recalling the support expressed by the International Atomic Energy Agency and the World Health Organization
for the Scientific Committee’s work in producing the most reliable and comprehensive sources of scientific
information about the levels and effects of ionizing radiation, without which safety guidance and safety standards
could not be developed and maintained and priorities for research in the areas of sources and effects of ionizing
radiation could not be determined,
Noting the commitment made by the United Nations Environment Programme to addressing the developments
that resulted in the request by the Scientific Committee during its sixty-fifth session for an investigation or inspection
into the process to recruit the Scientific Secretary to ensure that the successful candidate was selected on the basis of
scientific qualifications and credibility and that the process was aligned with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations,16
Recognizing that sufficient staffing of the secretariat is essential to support the work of the Scientific Committee,
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for the valuable
contribution that it has been making since its inception to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects
and risks of exposure to ionizing radiation and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific authority and
independence of judgment;
2.

Reaffirms the decision to maintain the present functions and independent role of the Scientific Committee;

3. Re-emphasizes the need for the Scientific Committee to hold regular sessions on an annual basis so that
its report will be able to reflect the latest developments and findings in the field of ionizing radiation and thereby
provide updated information for dissemination among all States;
4. Notes with appreciation the work of the Scientific Committee, takes note of the report on its sixty-sixth
session,16 including the report on the implementation of its long-term strategic directions, and encourages the
Committee, over its coming sessions, to continue to work towards implementing strategies to support its long-term
efforts to serve the scientific community, as well as wider audiences;
5. Welcomes the continuation of the ad hoc working group to assist the Scientific Committee in developing
its future programme of work on the effects of radiation exposure and the biological mechanisms by which they
occur;17
_______________
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
16
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 46 (A/74/46).
17
Ibid., chap. II, sect. C.
15

344

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

6. Also welcomes the establishment of an ad hoc working group on sources and exposure, following the
experience of the ad hoc working group on effects and mechanisms;17
7. Appreciates the arrangements made by the Scientific Committee for activities to follow up on its 2013
evaluation of the levels and effects of radiation exposure due to the nuclear accident after the 2011 great east-Japan
earthquake and tsunami, looks forward to the Committee’s evaluation of the implications of the information published
since the 2013 report, and encourages the secretariat of the Committee to disseminate the findings of the Committee’s
evaluation, in particular to the public;
8. Welcomes the two substantive scientific reports adopted by the Scientific Committee during its sixty-sixth
session, on selected health effects and inference of risk due to radiation exposure and on lung cancer from exposure
to radon,18 and looks forward to the publication of the supporting scientific annexes thereto as their outcomes are
relied upon by other international organizations;
9. Looks forward to the Scientific Committee’s evaluations of biological mechanisms relevant for the
inference of cancer risk after low-dose radiation exposure, and the assessments of human exposures to medical
ionizing radiation and occupational ionizing radiation;
10. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including its important activities to increase
knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing radiation from all sources, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
11. Supports the intentions and plans of the Scientific Committee for conducting its programme of work of
scientific review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly, in particular its next global survey of public
radiation exposure, its assessments of second primary cancer after radiotherapy and its epidemiological studies of
radiation and cancer, to be conducted in close cooperation with other relevant organizations, and requests the
Committee to submit plans for its ongoing and future programme of work to the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
12. Welcomes developments in streamlining procedures for publishing the reports of the Scientific Committee
electronically on its official website and as sales publications, and calls upon the secretariat to continue both to monitor
the timely publication of those reports and to strive to publish them within the same calendar year as their approval;
13. Invites the Scientific Committee to continue its consultations with scientists and experts from interested
Member States in the process of preparing its future scientific reports, and requests the secretariat to continue to
facilitate such consultations;
14. Welcomes, in this context, the readiness of Member States to provide the Scientific Committee with
relevant information on the levels and effects of ionizing radiation, and invites the Committee to analyse and give due
consideration to such information, particularly in the light of its own findings;
15. Recalls the strategy of the Scientific Committee to improve data collection, encourages in this regard
Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations concerned to
provide further relevant data about levels, effects and risks of radiation exposure from various sources, which would
greatly help in the preparation of future reports of the Committee to the General Assembly, and encourages the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organization and other
relevant organizations to further collaborate with the secretariat on arrangements for the collection, analysis and
dissemination of data on radiation exposures of patients, workers and the public;
16. Welcomes the use and ongoing development by the secretariat of an online platform for collecting data on
the exposure of patients, workers and the public, and urges Member States to take part in the Scientific Committee’s
global surveys of radiation exposure and to nominate a national contact person to facilitate coordination of the
collection and submission of data on the exposure of patients, workers and the public within the country;
17. Also welcomes the Scientific Committee’s outreach strategy for the period 2020–2024, in particular the
enhancement of the website of the Committee and the publication of information for the general public in all the
official languages of the United Nations, continues to encourage that consideration be given to publishing the website
_______________
18

Ibid., chap. III.

345

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

in all of those languages, and notes that the dissemination of the Committee’s findings and further enhancements to
the website would depend on the financial and human resources made available to the secretariat;
18. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue, within existing resources, to service
the Scientific Committee and to disseminate its findings to Member States, the scientific community and the public
and to ensure that the administrative measures in place are appropriate, including clear roles and responsibilities of
the various actors, so that the secretariat is able to adequately and efficiently service the Committee in a predictable
and sustainable manner and effectively facilitate the use of the invaluable expertise offered to the Committee by its
members in order that the Committee may discharge the responsibilities and mandate entrusted to it by the General
Assembly;
19. Welcomes the appointment of a new Secretary of the Scientific Committee by the United Nations
Environment Programme, and urges the United Nations Environment Programme to ensure that future recruitment
processes are conducted in an efficient, effective, timely and transparent manner;
20. Also welcomes the establishment of the post of Deputy Secretary, which replaces the previous post of
Scientific Officer, allows for the deputization of the Deputy Secretary as Secretary as appropriate and assists in the
avoidance of disruptions in staffing;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen support for the Scientific Committee within existing
resources, particularly with regard to the increase of operational costs in the case of a further increase in membership,
and to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on these issues;
22. Encourages Member States in a position to do so to make voluntary contributions to the general trust fund
established by the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme and also to make contributions
in kind, in order to support the work of the Scientific Committee, and the dissemination of its findings, in a sustainable
manner;
23. Invites Algeria, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Norway and the United Arab Emirates to designate one
scientist to attend the sixty-seventh session of the Scientific Committee as an observer, pursuant to paragraph 19 of
General Assembly resolution 72/76 of 7 December 2017 and to the procedures referred to in paragraph 21 of
Assembly resolution 73/261 of 22 December 2018;
24. Recalls the procedure for the possible further increases in membership of the Scientific Committee as
adopted in paragraph 21 of General Assembly resolution 73/261, pursuant to paragraph 19 of Assembly resolution
66/70 of 9 December 2011.
RESOLUTION 74/82
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/408, para. 10)19

74/82.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December 1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004,
61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of 17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of
10 December 2010, 65/271 of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 67/113 of 18 December 2012, 68/50 of
5 December 2013, 68/74 and 68/75 of 11 December 2013, 69/85 of 5 December 2014, 70/1 of 25 September 2015,
70/82 of 9 December 2015, 70/230 of 23 December 2015, 71/90 of 6 December 2016, 72/77 and 72/78 of 7 December
2017, 73/6 of 26 October 2018 and 73/91 of 7 December 2018,
Emphasizing the significant progress in the development of space science and technology and their applications
that has enabled humans to explore the universe, and the extraordinary achievements made in space exploration
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Brazil (on behalf of the Working
Group of the Whole on International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space).
19

346

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

efforts, including deepening the understanding of the planetary system and the Sun and the Earth itself, in the use of
space science and technology for the benefit of all humankind and in the development of the international legal regime
governing space activities,
Recognizing, in that regard, the unique platform at the global level for international cooperation in space
activities represented by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee and Legal Subcommittee and assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and expanding the exploration and
use of outer space, as the province of all humankind, for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all
Member States the benefits derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this field,
for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule of international law, including
the relevant norms of international space law and their important role in international cooperation for the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges, especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and bearing in mind the importance of
article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,20
Recognizing that all Member States, in particular those with major space capabilities, should contribute actively
to the prevention of an arms race in outer space with a view to promoting and strengthening international cooperation
in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the challenges to the long-term sustainability
of outer space activities, in particular the impact of space debris, which is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the development of peaceful space exploration and applications as well as in
various national and cooperative space projects, and the importance of further developing the legal framework to
strengthen international cooperation in space,
Convinced that space science and technology and their applications, including satellite communications, Earth
observation systems and satellite navigation technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long-term solutions
for sustainable development and can contribute more effectively to efforts to promote the development of all countries
and regions of the world, and stressing in that regard the need to harness the benefits of space technology towards
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,21
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters,22 and desirous of enhancing international
coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster management and emergency response through greater
access to and use of space-based services and geospatial information for all countries and facilitating capacity-building
and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in developing countries,
Firmly convinced that the use of space science and technology and their applications in areas such as tele-health,
tele-education, disaster management, environmental protection, natural resources management and ocean and climate
monitoring contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations that address various
aspects of economic, social and cultural development, particularly poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned about the devastating effects of infectious diseases, including Ebola virus disease, to the
detriment of human life, society and development, and urging the international community to enhance the role of
space-based solutions, in particular tele-epidemiology, in monitoring, preparedness and response activities,
_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
Resolution 70/1.
22
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
20
21

347

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the fact that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, recognized the important role that space science and technology play in promoting
sustainable development,23
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its sixtysecond session,24
1. Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its sixty-second
session;24
2. Welcomes with appreciation the adoption by the Committee of the preamble and 21 guidelines for the
long-term sustainability of outer space activities, as contained in annex II to the report of the Committee, and the
establishment, under a five-year workplan, of a working group under the agenda item on the long-term sustainability
of outer space activities of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the Committee, notes that the Committee
encouraged States and international intergovernmental organizations to voluntarily take measures to ensure that the
guidelines were implemented to the greatest extent feasible and practicable, and emphasizes that the Committee serves
as the principal forum for continued institutionalized dialogue on issues related to the implementation and review of
the guidelines;
3. Agrees that the Committee, at its sixty-third session, should consider the substantive items and convene
the working group recommended at its sixty-second session,25 including holding intersessional consultations as
necessary, taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
4. Notes that, at its fifty-eighth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the Committee continued its work,26 as
mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 73/91;
5. Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fifty-ninth session, should consider the substantive items and
reconvene the working groups recommended by the Committee,27 including holding intersessional consultations as
necessary, taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
6. Urges Member States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties governing the uses of
outer space28 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those treaties in accordance with their national law, as
well as incorporating them into their national legislation;
7. Notes with satisfaction that the space law curriculum developed by the Office and published in all official
languages of the United Nations could encourage further studies within Member States in cooperation with relevant
entities in support of capacity-building efforts in space law and policy;
8. Takes note of the report of the Working Group on the Review of International Mechanisms for
Cooperation in the Peaceful Exploration and Use of Outer Space on the work conducted under its multi-year
workplan,29 as finalized at the fifty-sixth session of the Legal Subcommittee, and notes that the report provides an
important source of information and useful guidance for further joint undertakings by spacefaring nations and
emerging space nations, as appropriate;

_______________
Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20).
25
Ibid., para. 374.
26
Ibid., chap. II, sect. C; see also A/AC.105/1203.
27
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20), paras. 261–262.
28
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return
of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International Liability for Damage
Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020); and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
29
A/AC.105/C.2/112.
23
24

348

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

9. Notes that, at its fifty-sixth session, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee continued its work,30 as
mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 73/91;
10. Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fifty-seventh session, should consider the
substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by the Committee,31 including holding
intersessional consultations as necessary, taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of
developing countries;
11. Reiterates the importance of information-sharing in discovering, monitoring and physically characterizing
potentially hazardous near-Earth objects to ensure that all countries, in particular developing countries with limited
capacity for predicting and mitigating a near-Earth object impact, are aware of potential threats, emphasizes the need
for capacity-building for effective emergency response and disaster management in the event of a near-Earth object
impact, and notes with satisfaction the work carried out by the International Asteroid Warning Network and the Space
Mission Planning Advisory Group to strengthen international cooperation to mitigate the potential threat posed by
near-Earth objects, with the support of the Office, serving as the permanent secretariat of the Advisory Group;32
12. Notes with appreciation that some Member States are already implementing space debris mitigation
measures on a voluntary basis, through national mechanisms and consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation
Guidelines of the Inter‑Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris Mitigation
Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,33 endorsed by the General Assembly in its
resolution 62/217, and invites other States to implement, through relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris
Mitigation Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
13. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to the problem of the gradually
increasing probability of collisions of space objects, especially those with nuclear power sources, with space debris,
and other aspects of space debris, calls for the continuation of national research on this question, for the development
of improved technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and dissemination of data on space
debris, also considers that, to the extent possible, information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that international cooperation is needed to expand appropriate and affordable
strategies to minimize the impact of space debris on future space missions;
14. Urges all Member States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to contribute actively to the
goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation
in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
15. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority, ways and means of maintaining
outer space for peaceful purposes and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, and agrees
that the Committee should continue to consider the broader perspective of space security and associated matters that
would be instrumental in ensuring the safe and responsible conduct of space activities, including ways to promote
international, regional and interregional cooperation to that end;
16. Emphasizes the central role of the Office in promoting international cooperation in the exploration and
peaceful uses of outer space for economic, social and scientific development, in particular for the benefit of developing
countries;
17. Notes with satisfaction the programme of work undertaken by the Office in 2019 to strengthen
international cooperation in the conduct of space activities for peaceful purposes and the use of space science and
technology and their applications towards the achievement of the internationally agreed Sustainable Development
Goals, including the workshops and symposiums conducted to build capacity, the assistance provided to developing
countries, at their request, in the development of national space policy and legislation in conformity with international
space law, and actions implemented to strengthen institutional capacity in space activities;
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20), chap. II, sect. B; see also A/AC.105/1202.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20), para. 184; see also A/AC.105/1202.
32
See A/AC.105/1138, paras. 205–210.
33
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), paras. 117–118 and annex.
30
31

349

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

18. Welcomes, in this regard, the activities being carried out by the Office to promote gender equality
and the increased role of women in space activities, including through targeted capacity-building and technical
advisory activities, and efforts to encourage enhanced involvement of women and girls in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics education, and invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to those
activities;
19. Requests the Office to continue to apprise the Committee and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee
and Legal Subcommittee, at their respective sessions in 2020, of the status of its capacity-building activities;
20. Recognizes the capacity-building activities under the United Nations Programme on Space Applications,
which provide unique benefits for Member States, in particular developing countries, participating in those activities;34
21. Notes with satisfaction the activities carried out under the United Nations Platform for Space-based
Information for Disaster Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER), and recognizes the significant
achievements made and the advisory support provided to Member States within the framework of UN-SPIDER since
its establishment in 200635 with the valuable contributions of its network of regional support offices, and encourages
Member States, on a voluntary basis, to provide the programme with the additional resources necessary to address the
increasing demand for support successfully and in a timely manner;
22. Reiterates the importance of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,36 in which
the value of space-based technology and Earth observation for disaster management and emergency response is
recognized, and notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Office and its UN-SPIDER programme towards promoting
international cooperation as a way to enhance the use of space-based technologies and related services at the national
and local levels in contributing to the implementation of the Sendai Framework and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;21
23. Notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the International Committee on Global
Navigation Satellite Systems with the support of the Office, in its capacity as executive secretariat of the International
Committee, towards achieving compatibility and interoperability among global and regional space-based positioning,
navigation and timing systems and in the promotion of the use of global navigation satellite systems and their
integration into national infrastructure, particularly in developing countries, and notes with appreciation that the
International Committee held its fourteenth meeting in Bengaluru, India, from 8 to 13 December 2019;
24. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and technology education, affiliated to
the United Nations, namely, the African regional centres for space science and technology education in the French
and English languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Regional Centre for Space Science and
Technology Education for Asia and the Pacific, located in China, the Centre for Space Science and Technology
Education in Asia and the Pacific, located in India, the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education
for Latin America and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexico, and the Regional Centre for Space
Science and Technology Education for Western Asia, located in Jordan, have continued their education programmes
in 2019, encourages the regional centres to continue to promote greater participation of women in their education
programmes, and agrees that the regional centres should continue to report to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space on their activities;
25. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of space activities is essential to
strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist Member States in the development of their space capabilities and
contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to that end requests relevant
regional organizations and their groups of experts to offer the assistance necessary so that countries can carry out the
recommendations of regional conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of women
in all fields of science and technology;
26. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by such organizations as the Asia-Pacific Space
Cooperation Organization and the European Space Agency and by conferences and other mechanisms, such as the
_______________
See A/AC.105/1202, sect. II.
See resolution 61/110.
36
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
34
35

350

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

African Leadership Conference on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the Asia-Pacific
Regional Space Agency Forum and the Space Conference of the Americas, in strengthening regional and international
cooperation among States;
27. Notes with satisfaction the adoption of the African Space Policy and Strategy by the Assembly of the
African Union at its twenty-sixth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January 2016, notes that this
achievement marks the first step towards the realization of an African outer space programme within the framework
of the African Union Agenda 2063, and welcomes in this regard the establishment of the African Space Agency, to be
hosted by Egypt;
28. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its applications and to contribute to
an orderly growth of space activities favourable to sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all
countries, including strengthening sustainable spatial data infrastructure at the regional and national levels and
building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular in developing countries;
29. Reiterates the need to promote the benefits of space technology and its applications in the major United
Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and cultural development and related fields, and recognizes
that the fundamental significance of space science and technology and their applications for global, regional, national
and local sustainable development processes should be promoted in the formulation of policies and programmes of
action and their implementation, including through efforts towards achieving the objectives of those conferences and
summits and in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
30. Encourages Member States, to that end, to promote the inclusion in those conferences, summits and
processes of the relevance of space science and technology applications and the use of space-derived geospatial data,
and in general, space-based data and infrastructures, with the involvement of the Office;
31. Encourages the Office to take active part in those conferences, summits and processes and other activities
in support of their objectives, as appropriate, and to conduct capacity-building activities, hold lectures and participate
in academic and research activities to foster international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space;
32. Urges the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space), under the leadership of the
Office, to continue to examine how space science and technology and their applications could contribute to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and encourages entities of the United Nations system to participate, as
appropriate, in UN-Space coordination efforts;
33. Encourages the Office to continue to conduct capacity-building and outreach activities associated with
space security and transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities, as appropriate, and within
the context of the long-term sustainability of outer space activities;
34. Also encourages the Office to continue to explore existing avenues and new opportunities to increase its
capability to meet the growing demand for support to strengthen the capacity of countries, in particular developing
countries, in using space science and technology and their applications and to inform the Committee of those efforts;
35. Agrees that the Office should pursue greater engagement with industry and private sector entities to further
their support for and contributions to the overall work of the Office;37
36. Appeals to Governments, the relevant entities of the United Nations system, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, institutions, industry and private sector entities and individuals to make voluntary
contributions to the trust fund in support of the United Nations Programme on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in
order to support the efforts of the Office to secure additional resources to facilitate the full implementation of its
programme of work, including, where appropriate, the financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the Office
in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance activities, in particular for developing countries;
37. Reiterates, with regard to the composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its subcommittees for the
period 2020–2021,38 that the Committee and its subcommittees should elect their officers at their respective sessions
in 2020 in accordance with that composition;
_______________
37
38

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/72/20), para. 326.
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/73/20), paras. 365–370.

351

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

38. Decides that the Dominican Republic, Rwanda and Singapore shall become members of the Committee;39
39. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant the status of observer to the Moon Village Association,
in accordance with the procedures of the Committee;40
40. Encourages the regional groups to promote active participation in the work of the Committee and its
subsidiary bodies by the States members of the Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.
RESOLUTION 74/83
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 169 to 2, with 9 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/409, para. 16)41
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Canada, Guatemala, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
Vanuatu

74/83.

Assistance to Palestine refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948 and all its subsequent resolutions on the question,
including resolution 73/92 of 7 December 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, by which, inter alia, it established the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
Recalling further the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Aware of the fact that, for more than seven decades, the Palestine refugees have suffered from the loss of their
homes, lands and means of livelihood,
Affirming the imperative of resolving the problem of the Palestine refugees for the achievement of justice and
for the achievement of lasting peace in the region,
_______________
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20), paras. 365–367.
Ibid., paras. 368–370.
41
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
39
40

352

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Acknowledging the essential role that the Agency has played for over 65 years since its establishment in
ameliorating the plight of the Palestine refugees through the provision of education, health, relief and social services
and ongoing work in the areas of camp infrastructure, microfinance, protection and emergency assistance,
Taking note of the report of the Commissioner-General of the Agency covering the period from 1 January to
31 December 2018,42
Taking note also of the report of the Commissioner-General of 31 May 2019, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 57 of the report of the Secretary-General,43 and expressing concern regarding the severe financial crisis of
the Agency and the negative implications for the continued delivery of core programmes to the Palestine refugees in
all fields of operation,
Aware of the growing needs of the Palestine refugees throughout all the fields of operation, namely, Jordan,
Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Expressing grave concern at the especially difficult situation of the Palestine refugees under occupation,
including with regard to their safety, well-being and socioeconomic living conditions,
Expressing grave concern in particular at the grave humanitarian situation and socioeconomic conditions of the
Palestine refugees in the Gaza Strip, and underlining the importance of emergency and humanitarian assistance and
urgent reconstruction efforts,
Noting the signing of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements on 13 September
1993 by the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization44 and the subsequent implementation
agreements,
1. Notes with regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees, as provided for in paragraph 11 of
General Assembly resolution 194 (III), has not yet been effected, and that, therefore, the situation of the Palestine
refugees continues to be a matter of grave concern and the Palestine refugees continue to require assistance to meet
basic health, education and living needs;
2. Also notes with regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine has been unable to
find a means of achieving progress in the implementation of paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
and reaffirms its request to the Conciliation Commission to continue exerting efforts towards the implementation of
that paragraph and to report to the Assembly on the efforts being exerted in this regard as appropriate, but no later than
1 September 2020;
3. Affirms the necessity for the continuation of the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the importance of its unimpeded operation and its provision of services,
including emergency assistance, for the well-being, protection and human development of the Palestine refugees and
for the stability of the region, pending the just resolution of the question of the Palestine refugees;
4. Calls upon all donors to continue to strengthen their efforts to meet the anticipated needs of the Agency,
including with regard to increased expenditures and needs arising from conflicts and instability in the region and the
serious socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, particularly in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, and those needs
mentioned in recent emergency, recovery and reconstruction appeals and plans for the Gaza Strip and in the regional
crisis response plans to address the situation of Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic and those Palestine
refugees who have fled to countries in the region;
5. Commends the Agency for its provision of vital assistance to the Palestine refugees and its role as a
stabilizing factor in the region and the tireless efforts of the staff of the Agency in carrying out its mandate;
6. Recalls its decision 60/522 of 8 December 2005, and decides to invite the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to attend the meetings of the Advisory Commission of the Agency;
7. Decides to extend the mandate of the Agency until 30 June 2023, without prejudice to the provisions of
paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/74/13).
A/71/849.
44
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
42
43

353

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 74/84
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 162 to 7, with 11 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/409, para. 16)45
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad,
Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Papua New Guinea, United States
of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras, Kiribati, Rwanda, South
Sudan, Togo, Vanuatu

74/84.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967, 2341 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and all subsequent
related resolutions,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967 and 259 (1968) of 27 September 1968,
Taking note of the report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 January to 31 December 2018,46
Concerned about the continuing human suffering resulting from the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities,
Taking note of the relevant provisions of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements of 13 September 199347 with regard to the modalities for the admission of persons displaced in 1967,
and concerned that the process agreed upon has not yet been effected,
Taking note also of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
1. Reaffirms the right of all persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities to return
to their homes or former places of residence in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
2. Stresses the necessity for an accelerated return of displaced persons, and calls for compliance with the
mechanism agreed upon by the parties in article XII of the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements of 13 September 199347 on the return of displaced persons;
3. Endorses, in the meantime, the efforts of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to continue to provide humanitarian assistance, as far as
practicable, on an emergency basis, and as a temporary measure, to persons in the area who are currently displaced
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa,
Sudan, Suriname, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
46
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/74/13).
47
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
45

354

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

and in serious need of continued assistance as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities, and requests the
Commissioner-General to include information on relevant efforts in his annual report;
4. Strongly appeals to all Governments and to organizations and individuals to contribute generously to the
Agency and to the other intergovernmental and non‑governmental organizations concerned for the above-mentioned
purposes.
RESOLUTION 74/85
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 167 to 6, with 7 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/409, para. 16)48
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Guatemala, Nauru, Rwanda, Vanuatu

74/85.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 212 (III) of 19 November 1948, 302 (IV) of
8 December 1949 and all subsequent related resolutions, including its resolution 73/94 of 7 December 2018,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 January to 31 December 2018,49
Taking note of the letter dated 18 June 2019 from the Chair of the Advisory Commission of the Agency
addressed to the Commissioner-General,50
Underlining that, at a time of heightened conflict and instability in the Middle East, the Agency continues to
play a vital role in ameliorating the plight of the Palestine refugees through the provision of, inter alia, essential
education, health, relief and social services programmes and emergency assistance to a registered population of more
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jordan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
49
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/74/13).
50
Ibid., pp. 6–8.
48

355

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

than 5.4 million refugees whose situation has become extremely precarious, in mitigating the consequences of
alarming trends, including increasing violence, marginalization and poverty, in the areas of operation, and in providing
a crucial measure of stability in the region,
Deeply concerned about the extremely critical financial situation of the Agency, caused by the structural
underfunding of the Agency, as well as by rising needs and expenditures resulting from the deterioration of the
socioeconomic and humanitarian conditions and the conflicts and rising instability in the region and their significant
negative impact on the ability of the Agency to deliver essential services to the Palestine refugees, including its
emergency, recovery, reconstruction and development programmes in all fields of operation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,51 submitted pursuant to resolution 71/93 of 6 December 2016, and
the request contained therein for broad consultations to explore all ways and means, including through voluntary and
assessed contributions, to ensure that the Agency’s funding is sufficient, predictable and sustained for the duration of
its mandate, and considering the recommendations contained in the report,
Taking note also of the report of 31 May 2019 of the Commissioner-General, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 57 of the report of the Secretary-General and in follow-up to the update to the special report of 3 August
2015 of the Commissioner-General,52 submitted pursuant to paragraph 21 of General Assembly resolution 302 (IV),
regarding the severe financial crisis of the Agency and the negative implications for the continued delivery of core
Agency programmes to the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation,
Expressing appreciation for the efforts of donors and host countries to respond to the Agency’s unprecedented
financial crisis, including through generous, additional contributions and, where possible, continued increases in
voluntary contributions, while acknowledging the steadfast support of all other donors to the Agency,
Welcoming the contributions made to the Agency’s emergency appeals, including for the Gaza Strip and for the
Syrian Arab Republic, and calling urgently upon the international community to continue its support, since needs
persist and these appeals remain severely underfunded,
Noting that contributions have not been predictable enough or sufficient to meet growing needs and remedy the
persistent shortfalls, which have, since 2018, been exacerbated by the suspension of the single largest voluntary
contribution to the Agency, undermining the Agency’s operations and efforts to promote human development and
meet Palestine refugees’ basic needs, and stressing the need for further efforts to comprehensively address the
recurrent funding shortfalls affecting the Agency’s operations,
Recognizing the Agency’s extensive efforts to rapidly develop innovative and diversified ways to address its
financial shortfall and mobilize resources, including through the expansion of the donor base and partnerships with
international financial institutions, the private sector and civil society, including through special digital campaigns,
Commending the Agency for the measures taken to address the financial crisis, despite difficult operational
circumstances, including through the implementation of the medium-term strategy for 2016–2021 and various internal
measures to contain expenditures, reduce operational and administrative costs, maximize the use of resources and
reduce the funding shortfalls, and expressing profound concern that, despite such measures, the Agency’s programme
budget, which is funded primarily by voluntary contributions from Member States and intergovernmental
organizations, faces persistent shortfalls that continue to threaten the delivery of the Agency’s core programmes of
assistance to the Palestine refugees,
Encouraging the Agency to sustain those reform efforts, while also taking all possible measures to protect and
improve the quality of access to and the delivery of core programmes of assistance,
Recalling its resolution 65/272 of 18 April 2011, in which it requested the Secretary-General to continue to
support the institutional strengthening of the Agency,
Stressing the need to support the Agency’s capacity to uphold its mandate and to avert the serious humanitarian,
political and security risks that would result from any interruption or suspension of its vital work,
_______________
51
52

356

A/71/849.
A/70/272, annex.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing that the recurring and growing financial shortfalls directly affecting the sustainability of the
Agency’s operations need to be remedied by examining new funding modalities designed to put the Agency on a
stable financial footing to enable it to effectively carry out its core programmes in accordance with its mandate and
commensurate with humanitarian needs,
Welcoming the affirmation in the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, adopted by the General
Assembly on 19 September 2016,53 that, inter alia, the Agency, along with other relevant organizations, requires
sufficient funding to be able to carry out its activities effectively and in a predictable manner,
Bearing in mind the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,54 including the pledge that no one will be left
behind, emphasizing that the Sustainable Development Goals apply to all, including refugees, and commending the
efforts of the Agency’s programmes to promote 10 of the 17 Goals, as indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral,51
Welcoming the joint efforts of host countries and donors to mobilize support for the Agency, including through
extraordinary ministerial meetings, inter alia, the extraordinary ministerial conference held in Rome on 15 March
2018, and the ministerial meeting convened at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 26 September 2019,
hosted by Jordan and Sweden, aimed at urgently addressing the Agency’s funding shortfall, expanding donor support
for the Agency and reaffirming support for its mandate,
Welcoming also the establishment, pursuant to the recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report on the operations of the Agency,51 by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation at the forty-sixth session of its
Council of Foreign Ministers, held in Abu Dhabi in March 2019, of a waqf fund at the Islamic Development Bank to
support Palestine refugees through enhanced support to the Agency,
Recalling Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations,55
Recalling also the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,56
Recalling further its resolutions 73/137 of 14 December 2018 on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and protection of United Nations personnel and 73/139 of 14 December 2018 on the strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, calling upon, inter alia, all States to ensure
respect for and the protection of all humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel, to respect
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence for the provision of humanitarian assistance and
to respect and ensure respect for the inviolability of United Nations premises,
Affirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,57 to the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation, namely Jordan, Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Gravely concerned about the extremely difficult socioeconomic conditions being faced by the Palestine refugees
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly in the refugee camps in the Gaza Strip,
as a result of the recurrent military operations, continuing prolonged Israeli closures, the construction of settlements
and the wall, evictions, the demolition of homes and livelihood properties causing forced transfers of civilians, and
the severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade, which have deepened
unemployment and poverty rates among the refugees, with potentially lasting, long-term negative effects, while taking
note of developments with regard to the situation of access there,

_______________
Resolution 71/1.
Resolution 70/1.
55
Resolution 22 A (I).
56
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.
57
Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.
53
54

357

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Concerned about plans and measures to interfere with or obstruct the operations of the Agency, including in
East Jerusalem, contrary to international law and the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, and reiterating the need for the Agency to fully implement its mandate in support of Palestine refugees
without interference, including in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Commending the health-care staff of the Agency for their dedication in responding to the profound stresses
caused to the health system by the high number of Palestinian civilian casualties in the recent period in the Gaza
Strip,
Expressing grave concern in this regard about the lasting impact on the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation of the Palestine refugees in the Gaza Strip, including high rates of food insecurity, poverty, displacement
and the depletion of coping capacities,
Recalling the temporary tripartite agreement facilitated by the United Nations in September 2014, and
stressing the urgent need for the lifting of all Israeli closures and restrictions on the Gaza Strip,
Recalling also its resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009 and Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of
8 January 2009, as well as the Agreement on Movement and Access of 15 November 2005,
Expressing concern about the continuing classroom shortage, including in the Gaza Strip, and the consequent
negative impact on the right to education of refugee children,
Stressing the urgent need for the advancement of reconstruction in the Gaza Strip, including by ensuring the
timely facilitation of construction projects, including extensive shelter repair, and the need for the accelerated
implementation of other urgent United Nations-led civilian reconstruction activities, and calling upon Israel to
ensure the expedited and unimpeded import of all necessary construction materials into the Gaza Strip and to
reduce the burdensome cost of importation of Agency supplies, while taking note of the continued implementation
of the tripartite agreement facilitated by the United Nations,
Urging the full disbursement of pledges made at the Cairo International Conference on Palestine:
Reconstructing Gaza, held on 12 October 2014, for ensuring the provision of the necessary humanitarian assistance
and accelerating the reconstruction, rehabilitation and recovery process,
Stressing that the situation in the Gaza Strip is unsustainable and that a durable ceasefire agreement must lead
to a fundamental improvement in the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, including
through the sustained and regular opening of crossing points, and must ensure the safety and well-being of civilians
on both sides,
Affirming the need to support the Palestinian Government in its assumption of full government
responsibilities in both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, in all fields, as well as through its presence at Gaza’s
crossing points,
Expressing deep concern at the critical situation of Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic and at the
impact of the crisis on the Agency’s installations and its ability to deliver its services, and regretting profoundly
the loss of life and widespread displacement among refugees and the killing of staff members of the Agency in the
crisis since 2012,
Emphasizing the continuing need for assistance to Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic as well as
those who have fled to neighbouring countries, and emphasizing the necessity of ensuring open borders for
Palestine refugees fleeing the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic, consistent with the principles of
non‑discrimination and non-refoulement under international law, and recalling in this regard the statement by the
President of the Security Council of 2 October 201358 and the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,
Aware of the valuable work done by the Agency in providing protection to the Palestinian people, in particular
Palestine refugees, and recalling the need for the protection of all civilians in situations of armed conflict,
_______________
58

358

S/PRST/2013/15; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2013–31 July 2014 (S/INF/69).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Deploring the endangerment of the safety of the Agency’s staff and the damage and destruction caused to the
facilities and properties of the Agency during the period covered by the report of the Commissioner-General, and
stressing the need to maintain the neutrality and safeguard the inviolability of United Nations premises, installations
and equipment at all times,
Deploring also the breaches of the inviolability of United Nations premises, the failure to accord the property
and assets of the Organization immunity from any form of interference, incursions or misuse, the failure to protect
United Nations personnel, premises and property and any disruption caused to Agency operations by such violations,
Deploring further all attacks affecting United Nations installations, including Agency schools sheltering
displaced civilians, and all other breaches of the inviolability of United Nations premises, including during the
conflict in the Gaza Strip in July and August 2014, as reported in the summary by the Secretary-General of the
report of the Board of Inquiry59 and by the independent commission of inquiry established pursuant to Human
Rights Council resolution S-21/1,60 and stressing the imperative of ensuring accountability,
Condemning the killing, injury and detention contrary to international law of Agency staff members,
Condemning also the killing, wounding and detention contrary to international law of refugee children and
women,
Affirming the need for accountability and compensation to victims of violations of international law in
accordance with international standards by all sides,
Deeply concerned about the continuing imposition of restrictions on the freedom of movement and access of
the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, and the injury, harassment and intimidation of the Agency’s staff, which
undermine and obstruct the work of the Agency, including its ability to provide essential basic and emergency
services,
Recalling the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001 and on
17 December 201461 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, including
the call upon parties to facilitate the activities of the Agency, to guarantee its protection and to refrain from levying
taxes and imposing undue financial burdens,
Aware of the agreement between the Agency and the Government of Israel,
Taking note of the agreement reached on 24 June 1994, embodied in an exchange of letters between the
Agency and the Palestine Liberation Organization,62
1. Reaffirms that the effective functioning of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East remains essential in all fields of operation;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the Agency, as well as to all the staff of the
Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable work, particularly in the light of the difficult conditions, instability
and crises faced during the past year;
3. Expresses special commendation to the Agency for the essential role that it has played for almost seven
decades since its establishment in providing vital services for the well-being, human development and protection
of the Palestine refugees and the amelioration of their plight and for the stability of the region, and affirms the
necessity for continuing the work of the Agency and its unimpeded operation and provision of services, pending
the just resolution of the question of the Palestine refugees;
4. Commends the Agency for its extraordinary efforts, in cooperation with other United Nations agencies
on the ground, to provide emergency humanitarian assistance, including shelter, food and medical aid, to refugees
_______________
S/2015/286, annex.
See A/HRC/29/52.
61
A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.
62
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/49/13), annex I.
59
60

359

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

and affected civilians during periods of crisis and conflict, and recognizes its exemplary capacity to mobilize in
emergency situations while continuously carrying out its core human development programmes;
5. Expresses its grave concern about attempts to discredit the Agency despite its proven operational
capacity, record of effective provision of humanitarian and development assistance and consistent implementation
of its mandate in accordance with relevant resolutions and its regulatory framework, even under the most difficult
circumstances;
6. Reaffirms the Agency’s important role in providing humanitarian and development assistance to
Palestine refugees, engaging with international human rights mechanisms, as appropriate, and in doing so
contributing to the protection and resilience of Palestinian civilians, as outlined in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of the Palestinian civilian population,63 and contributing to regional stability;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the important support and cooperation provided by the host Governments
to the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the Agency, and requests it to continue its
efforts and to keep the General Assembly informed of its activities;
9. Takes note of the report of the Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East64 and the efforts to assist in ensuring the financial security of the
Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary services and assistance to the Working Group
for the conduct of its work;
10. Expresses its deep appreciation to all donor countries and organizations that have, inter alia, sustained,
accelerated or increased their contributions to the Agency, helping to alleviate its unprecedented financial crisis in
2018, to mitigate imminent risks to its core and emergency programming and to prevent an interruption of essential
assistance to Palestine refugees;
11. Commends the Agency for its six-year medium-term strategy for 2016–2021 and the CommissionerGeneral for his continuing efforts to increase the budgetary transparency and efficiency of the Agency, as reflected
in the Agency’s proposed programme budget for 2020;65
12. Also commends the Agency for sustaining its robust internal reform efforts, despite difficult operational
circumstances, and recognizes its implementation of maximum efficiency procedures to contain expenditures,
reduce operational and administrative costs, reduce its funding shortfalls and maximize the use of resources;
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the operations of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East51 and the conclusions and recommendations contained
therein;
14. Appeals to States and organizations for the maintenance of their voluntary contributions to the Agency,
as well as an increase in contributions where possible, in particular to the Agency’s programme budget, including
in the consideration of their allocation of resources for international human rights, peace and stability, development
and humanitarian efforts, to support the Agency’s mandate and its ability to meet the rising needs of the Palestine
refugees and essential associated costs of operations;
15. Appeals to States and organizations not currently contributing to the Agency to urgently consider
making voluntary contributions in response to the calls of the Secretary-General for expansion of the Agency’s
donor base, in order to stabilize funding and ensure greater sharing of the financial burden of supporting the
Agency’s operations, in accordance with the continuing responsibility of the international community as a whole
to assist the Palestine refugees;

_______________
A/ES-10/794.
A/74/337.
65
A/74/6 (Sect. 26).
63
64

360

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

16. Calls for the provision by donors of early annual voluntary contributions, less earmarking, and multiyear funding, in line with the Grand Bargain on humanitarian financing announced at the World Humanitarian
Summit, held in Istanbul, Turkey, in May 2016, in order to enhance the Agency’s ability to plan and implement its
operations with a greater degree of assurance regarding resource flows;
17. Also calls for the full and timely funding by donors of the Agency’s emergency, recovery and reconstruction
programmes as set out in its appeals and response plans;
18. Requests the Commissioner-General to continue efforts to maintain and increase traditional donor support
and to enhance income from non-traditional donors, including through partnerships with public and private entities;
19. Encourages the Agency to explore financing avenues in relation to the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals;54
20. Urges States and organizations to actively pursue partnerships with and innovative support for the Agency,
including as recommended in paragraphs 47, 48 and 50 of the report of the Secretary-General,51 including through
the establishment of endowments, trust funds or revolving fund mechanisms and assistance to the Agency to access
humanitarian, development and peace and security trust funds and grants;
21. Welcomes pledges by States and organizations to provide diplomatic and technical support to the Agency,
including engagement with international and financial development institutions, including the World Bank and the
Islamic Development Bank, and, where appropriate, to facilitate support for the establishment of financing
mechanisms that can provide assistance to refugees and in fragile contexts, including to meet the needs of the Palestine
refugees, and calls for serious follow-up efforts;
22. Encourages further progress with regard to the creation of a World Bank multi-donor trust fund, as well
as for the financing of a waqf fund by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation at the Islamic Development Bank to
support Palestine refugees through the Agency;
23. Requests the Agency to continue to implement efficiency measures through its medium-term strategy and
the development of a five-year proposal for stabilizing the Agency’s finances, including specific and time-bound
measures, and to continue to improve its cost efficiency and resource mobilization efforts;
24. Calls upon the members of the Advisory Commission and the Working Group on the Financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to consider the relevant
recommendations in the report of the Secretary-General,51 including to help the Agency to address resource
mobilization challenges and to actively assist the Commissioner-General in the efforts to create sustainable, sufficient
and predictable support for the Agency’s operations;
25. Takes note of the recommendations of the Secretary-General regarding the support provided to the Agency
from the regular budget of the United Nations;
26. Endorses the efforts of the Commissioner-General to continue to provide humanitarian assistance, as far
as is practicable, on an emergency basis and as a temporary measure, to persons in the area who are internally
displaced and in serious need of continuing assistance as a result of recent crises in the Agency’s fields of operation;
27. Encourages the Agency to provide increased assistance, in accordance with its mandate, to affected
Palestine refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic as well as to those who have fled to neighbouring countries, as detailed
in the Syrian regional crisis response plans, and calls upon donors to urgently ensure sustained support to the Agency
in this regard in the light of the continuing grave deterioration of the situation and the growing needs of the refugees;
28. Welcomes the progress made thus far by the Agency in rebuilding the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in
northern Lebanon, and calls for donor funding to enable the expeditious completion of its reconstruction, for the
continued provision of relief assistance to those displaced following its destruction in 2007 and for the alleviation of
their ongoing suffering through the provision of the necessary support and financial assistance until the reconstruction
of the camp is complete;
29. Encourages the Agency, in close cooperation with other relevant United Nations entities, to continue to
make progress in addressing the needs, rights and protection of children, women and persons with disabilities in its
operations, including through the provision of necessary psychosocial and humanitarian support, in accordance with
361

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

the Convention on the Rights of the Child,66 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women67 and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;68
30. Also encourages the Agency to continue to reduce the vulnerability and improve the self-reliance and
resilience of Palestine refugees through its programmes;
31. Recognizes the acute protection needs of Palestine refugees across the region, and encourages the
Agency’s efforts to contribute to a coordinated and sustained response in accordance with international law, including
the Agency’s development of its protection framework and function in all field offices, including for child protection;
32. Commends the Agency for its humanitarian and psychosocial support programmes and other initiatives
that provide recreational, cultural and educational activities for children in all fields, including in the Gaza Strip,
recognizing their positive contribution, as well as the detrimental impact of the funding shortfall on some emergency
assistance provided by the Agency, calls for full support for such initiatives by donor and host countries, and
encourages the building and strengthening of partnerships to facilitate and enhance the provision of these services;
33. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply fully with the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;57
34. Also calls upon Israel to abide by Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations55 in order to ensure the safety of the personnel of
the Agency, the protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, at all times;
35. Urges the Government of Israel to expeditiously reimburse the Agency for all transit charges incurred and
other financial losses sustained as a result of the delays and restrictions on movement and access imposed by Israel;
36. Calls upon Israel particularly to cease obstructing the movement and access of the staff, vehicles and
supplies of the Agency and to cease levying taxes, extra fees and charges, which affect the Agency’s operations
detrimentally;
37. Reiterates its call upon Israel to fully lift the restrictions impeding or delaying the import of necessary
construction materials and supplies for the reconstruction and repair of the remaining damaged or destroyed refugee
shelters, and for the implementation of suspended and urgently needed civilian infrastructure projects in refugee
camps in the Gaza Strip, noting the alarming figures reflected in the United Nations country team reports of 26 August
2016, entitled “Gaza: two years after” and of July 2017, entitled “Gaza ten years later”;
38. Notes with appreciation the positive contribution of the Agency’s microfinance and job creation
programmes, encourages efforts to enhance the sustainability and benefits of microfinance services to a greater
number of Palestine refugees, especially in view of the high unemployment rates affecting them, and youth in
particular, welcomes the Agency’s efforts to streamline costs and increase microfinance services through internal
reform efforts, and calls upon the Agency, in close cooperation with the relevant agencies, to continue to contribute to
the development of the economic and social stability of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation;
39. Reiterates its appeals to all States, the specialized agencies, and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to continue and to augment their contributions to the programme budget of the Agency, to increase their
special allocations for grants and scholarships for higher education to Palestine refugees and to contribute to the
establishment of vocational training centres for Palestine refugees, and requests the Agency to act as the recipient and
trustee for the special allocations for grants and scholarships;
40. Calls upon the Commissioner-General to include, in the annual reporting to the General Assembly,
assessments on the progress made to remedy the recurrent funding shortfalls of the Agency and ensure sustained,
sufficient and predictable support for the Agency’s operations, including through the implementation of the relevant
provisions of the present resolution.
_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
68
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
66
67

362

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 74/86
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 163 to 6, with 12 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/409, para. 16)69
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Brazil, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Guatemala, Honduras, Kiribati, Papua New Guinea,
Rwanda, South Sudan, Togo, Vanuatu

74/86.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948 and 36/146 C of 16 December 1981 and all its
subsequent resolutions on the question,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to its resolution 73/95 of 7 December
2018,70 as well as that of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine for the period from 1 September
2018 to 31 August 2019,71
Recalling that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights72 and the principles of international law uphold the
principle that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his or her property,
Recalling in particular its resolution 394 (V) of 14 December 1950, in which it directed the Conciliation
Commission, in consultation with the parties concerned, to prescribe measures for the protection of the rights, property
and interests of the Palestine refugees,
Noting the completion of the programme of identification and evaluation of Arab property, as announced by the
Conciliation Commission in its twenty-second progress report,73 and the fact that the Land Office had a schedule of
Arab owners and a file of documents defining the location, area and other particulars of Arab property,
Expressing its appreciation for the preservation and modernization of the existing records, including the land
records, of the Conciliation Commission, and stressing the importance of such records for a just resolution of the
plight of the Palestine refugees in conformity with resolution 194 (III),
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
70
A/74/307.
71
A/74/332.
72
Resolution 217 A (III).
73
Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session, Annexes, Annex No. 11, document A/5700.
69

363

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling that, in the framework of the Middle East peace process, the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Government of Israel agreed, in the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of
13 September 1993,74 to commence negotiations on permanent status issues, including the important issue of the
refugees,
1. Reaffirms that the Palestine refugees are entitled to their property and to the income derived therefrom, in
conformity with the principles of equity and justice;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropriate steps, in consultation with the United Nations
Conciliation Commission for Palestine, for the protection of Arab property, assets and property rights in Israel;
3. Calls once again upon Israel to render all facilities and assistance to the Secretary-General in the
implementation of the present resolution;
4. Calls upon all the parties concerned to provide the Secretary-General with any pertinent information in
their possession concerning Arab property, assets and property rights in Israel that would assist him in the
implementation of the present resolution;
5. Urges the Palestinian and Israeli sides, as agreed between them, to deal with the important issue of
Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues within the framework of the final status peace negotiations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/87
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 81 to 13, with 80 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/410, para. 16)75
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Israel, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Haiti, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu

74/87.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
_______________
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South
Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
74
75

364

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Guided also by international humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,76 as well as international standards of human rights, in
particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights77 and the International Covenants on Human Rights,78
Recalling its relevant resolutions and the relevant resolutions of the Human Rights Council,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including resolution 2334 (2016) of
23 December 2016,
Taking into account the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the
legal consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,79 and recalling in this regard
its resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004,
Recalling the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001 and on 17 December
201480 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, and welcoming initiatives
by States parties, both individually and collectively, according to article 1 of the Convention and aimed at ensuring
respect for the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Recalling also its resolution 58/292 of 6 May 2004,
Convinced that occupation itself represents a gross and grave violation of human rights, and deeply concerned
by the ensuing persistent and systematic violations of international law committed by Israel, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, including discriminatory policies against the Palestinian civilian population in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,81
Gravely concerned by reports regarding serious human rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law,
Taking note of the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the implications of
the Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people throughout
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,82
Recalling the report of the independent international commission of inquiry established pursuant to Human
Rights Council resolution S-28/1,83
Stressing the need for ensuring accountability for all violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law in order to end impunity, ensure justice, deter further violations, protect civilians and
promote peace,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories84 and the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General,85
Recalling the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of 13 September 199386 and
the subsequent implementation agreements between the Palestinian and Israeli sides,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
Resolution 217 A (III).
78
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
79
See A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1.
80
A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.
81
See A/63/855-S/2009/250 and A/HRC/12/48.
82
A/HRC/22/63.
83
A/HRC/40/74.
84
A/74/356.
85
A/74/192, A/74/219, A/74/357 and A/74/468.
86
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
76
77

365

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law conventions,
as well as other international treaties,
Stressing the urgency of bringing a complete end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967, and an end to the
violation of the human rights of the Palestinian people, and of allowing for the realization of their inalienable human
rights, including their right to self-determination and their independent State, leading to a peaceful, just, lasting and
comprehensive solution for the question of Palestine,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories for its impartiality and efforts in performing the tasks
assigned to it by the General Assembly, in spite of the obstruction of its mandate;
2. Reiterates its demand that Israel, the occupying Power, cooperate, in accordance with its obligations as a
State Member of the United Nations, with the Special Committee in implementing its mandate, and deplores the
continued lack of cooperation in this regard;
3. Deplores those policies and practices of Israel that violate the human rights of the Palestinian people and
other Arabs of the occupied territories, as reflected in the report of the Special Committee covering the reporting
period;84
4. Expresses grave concern about the critical situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of unlawful Israeli practices and measures, and especially condemns and calls for the immediate
cessation of all illegal Israeli settlement activities and the construction of the wall, the lifting of the blockade of the
Gaza Strip, as well as the complete cessation of the excessive and indiscriminate use of force and military operations
against the civilian population, settler violence, provocations and incitements regarding the holy places, the destruction
and confiscation of properties, the forced displacement of civilians, the detention and imprisonment of thousands of
civilians, and all measures of collective punishment against the Palestinian civilian population;
5. Requests the Special Committee, pending complete termination of the Israeli occupation, to continue to
investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, especially Israeli violations of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,76 and to consult, as appropriate, with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, according to its regulations, in order to ensure that the welfare and human
rights of the peoples of the occupied territories, including prisoners and detainees, are safeguarded, as well as to submit
regularly to the Secretary-General periodic reports on the current situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem;
6. Also requests the Special Committee to continue to investigate the treatment and status of the thousands
of Palestinian and Arab prisoners and detainees, including children, women and elected representatives, in Israeli
prisons and detention centres, and expresses grave concern about the harsh conditions of imprisonment and
ill-treatment of prisoners and recent hunger strikes, stressing the need for respect for all applicable rules of
international law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention,76 the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules)87 and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women
Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules);88
7.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To provide the Special Committee with all necessary facilities, including those required for its visits to the
occupied territories, so that it may investigate the Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present resolution;
(b)

To utilize his good offices to facilitate and support the Special Committee in carrying out its mandate;

(c) To continue to task the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights with assisting
the Special Committee in the performance of its tasks;

_______________
87
88

366

Resolution 70/175, annex.
Resolution 65/229, annex.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

(d) To circulate to Member States the periodic reports mentioned in paragraph 5 above and ensure the widest
availability of the reports of the Special Committee and of information regarding its activities and findings through
the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Report of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other
Arabs of the Occupied Territories”.
RESOLUTION 74/88
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 157 to 7, with 15 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/410, para. 16)89
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Papua New Guinea, United States
of America
Abstaining: Australia, Brazil, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Eswatini, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Kiribati, Rwanda, South Sudan, Togo, Vanuatu

74/88.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied
Syrian Golan

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and the need to respect the
obligations arising from the Charter and other instruments and rules of international law,
Reaffirming the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 73/97 and 73/98 of 7 December 2018, as well as those
resolutions adopted at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including resolutions 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967, 446 (1979) of 22 March 1979, 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980, 476 (1980) of 30 June 1980,
478 (1980) of 20 August 1980, 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981, 904 (1994) of 18 March 1994 and 2334 (2016) of
23 December 2016,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
89

367

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Reaffirming the applicability of the Regulations annexed to the Hague Convention IV of 1907, the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,90 and relevant provisions
of customary law, including those codified in Additional Protocol I91 to the four Geneva Conventions,92 to the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and to other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including the occupied Syrian Golan,
Affirming that the transfer by the occupying Power of parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies constitutes a breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention,90
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,93 and recalling also General
Assembly resolutions ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Noting that the International Court of Justice concluded that “the Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory (including East Jerusalem) have been established in breach of international law”,94
Taking note of the recent reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,95
Recalling the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the implications of the
Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people throughout the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,96
Recalling also the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements of 13 September 199397
and the subsequent implementation agreements between the Palestinian and Israeli sides,
Recalling further the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,98
and emphasizing specifically its call for a freeze on all settlement activity, including so-called natural growth, and the
dismantlement of all settlement outposts erected since March 2001, and the need for Israel to uphold its obligations
and commitments in this regard,
Recalling its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Noting the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law conventions,
as well as other international treaties,
Aware that Israeli settlement activities involve, inter alia, the transfer of nationals of the occupying Power into
the occupied territories, the confiscation of land, the forced transfer of Palestinian civilians, including Bedouin
families, the exploitation of natural resources, the fragmentation of territory and other actions against the Palestinian
civilian population and the civilian population in the occupied Syrian Golan that are contrary to international law,
Bearing in mind the extremely detrimental impact of Israeli settlement policies, decisions and activities on the
ongoing regional and international efforts to resume and advance the peace process, on the prospects for the
achievement of peace in the Middle East in accordance with the two-State solution of Israel and Palestine, living side
by side in peace and security within recognized borders, on the basis of the pre‑1967 borders, and on the viability and
credibility of that solution,
Condemning settlement activities by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, as violations of international humanitarian law, relevant United Nations resolutions, the
_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
92
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
93
See A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1.
94
Ibid., advisory opinion, para. 120.
95
A/HRC/40/73; see also A/74/507.
96
A/HRC/22/63.
97
A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
98
S/2003/529, annex.
90
91

368

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

agreements reached between the parties and obligations under the Quartet road map and as actions in defiance of the
calls by the international community to cease all settlement activities,
Deploring in particular Israel’s construction and expansion of settlements in and around occupied East
Jerusalem, including its so-called E-1 plan that aims to connect its illegal settlements around and further isolate
occupied East Jerusalem, the continuing demolition of Palestinian homes and eviction of Palestinian families from
the city, the revocation of Palestinian residency rights in the city, and ongoing settlement activities in the Jordan Valley,
all of which further fragment and undermine the contiguity of the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
Deploring the plans to demolish the Palestinian village of Khan al-Ahmar, in contravention of international law,
which would have serious consequences with regard to the displacement of its residents, severely threaten the viability
of the two‑State solution and undermine the prospect of peace, given the area’s sensitive location and importance for
preserving the contiguity of the Palestinian territory, and demanding the cessation of such plans,
Condemning the demolition by Israel, in contravention of international law, of Palestinian buildings in the
neighbourhood of Wadi al-Hummus in the village of Sur Bahir, south of occupied East Jerusalem,
Taking note of the Quartet report of 1 July 2016,99 and stressing its recommendations, as well as its relevant
statements in which the Quartet members concluded that, inter alia, the continuing policy of settlement construction
and expansion, designation of land for exclusive Israeli use and denial of Palestinian development, including the recent
high rate of demolitions, are steadily eroding the two-State solution,
Deploring the continuing unlawful construction by Israel of the wall inside the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, and expressing its concern, in particular, about the route of the wall in
departure from the Armistice Line of 1949 and in such a way as to include the great majority of the Israeli settlements
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and which is causing humanitarian hardship and a
serious decline of socioeconomic conditions for the Palestinian people, is fragmenting the territorial contiguity of the
Territory and undermining its viability, and could prejudge future negotiations and make the two-State solution
physically impossible to implement,
Condemning acts of violence and terror against civilians on both sides, and recalling the need to end all acts of
violence, including acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction,
Condemning also all acts of violence, destruction, harassment, provocation and incitement by Israeli settlers in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, against Palestinian civilians, including children, and
their properties, including historic and religious sites, and agricultural lands, as well as acts of terror by several
extremist Israeli settlers, and calling for accountability for the illegal actions perpetrated in this regard,
Taking note of the relevant reports of the Secretary-General, including pursuant to Security Council resolution
2334 (2016),100
1. Reaffirms that the Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and
in the occupied Syrian Golan are illegal and an obstacle to peace and economic and social development;
2. Demands that Israel accept the de jure applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,90 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including the occupied Syrian Golan, and abide
scrupulously by the provisions of the Convention, in particular article 49, and comply with all of its obligations under
international law and cease immediately all actions causing the alteration of the character, status and demographic
composition of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the occupied Syrian Golan;
3. Reiterates its demand for the immediate and complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in all of
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan, and calls in this regard
for the full implementation of all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including, inter alia, resolutions
446 (1979), 452 (1979) of 20 July 1979, 465 (1980), 476 (1980), 478 (1980), 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003 and
2334 (2016);
_______________
99

S/2016/595, annex.
A/74/192, A/74/219, A/74/357 and A/74/468.

100

369

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

4. Stresses that a complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities is essential for salvaging the two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, and calls for affirmative steps to be taken immediately to reverse the
negative trends on the ground that are imperilling the viability of the two-State solution;
5. Recalls the affirmation by the Security Council, in its resolution 2334 (2016), that it will not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through
negotiations;
6. Stresses that the occupation of a territory is to be a temporary, de facto situation, whereby the occupying
Power can neither claim possession nor exert its sovereignty over the territory it occupies, recalls in this regard the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land by force and therefore the illegality of the annexation of any
part of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, which constitutes a breach of international law,
undermines the viability of the two-State solution and challenges the prospects for a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace settlement, and expresses its grave concern at recent statements calling for the annexation by Israel of areas in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory;
7. Condemns in this regard settlement activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan and any activities involving the confiscation of land, the disruption of
the livelihood of protected persons, the forced transfer of civilians and the annexation of land, whether de facto or
through national legislation;
8. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal obligations, as mentioned in the advisory
opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice;93
9. Reiterates its call for the prevention of all acts of violence, destruction, harassment and provocation by
Israeli settlers, especially against Palestinian civilians and their properties, including historic and religious sites and
including in Occupied East Jerusalem, and their agricultural lands;
10. Calls for accountability for the illegal actions perpetrated by Israeli settlers in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, and stresses in this regard the need for the implementation of Security Council resolution 904 (1994), in
which the Council called upon Israel, the occupying Power, to continue to take and implement measures, including
the confiscation of arms, aimed at preventing illegal acts of violence by Israeli settlers, and called for measures to be
taken to guarantee the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilians in the occupied territory;
11. Stresses the responsibility of Israel, the occupying Power, to investigate all acts of settler violence against
Palestinian civilians and their properties and to ensure accountability for these acts;
12. Calls upon all States and international organizations to continue to actively pursue policies that ensure
respect for their obligations under international law with regard to all illegal Israeli practices and measures in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly Israeli settlement activities;
13. Calls for measures of accountability, consistent with international law, in the light of continued noncompliance with the demands for a complete and immediate cessation of all settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make a two-State solution impossible, stressing
that compliance with and respect for international humanitarian law and international human rights law is a
cornerstone for peace and security in the region;
14. Recalls, in this regard, the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001
and on 17 December 2014101 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention on
measures to enforce the Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, welcomes in this
regard initiatives by States parties, both individually and collectively, in accordance with article 1 of the Convention,
aimed at ensuring respect for the Convention and accountability, and calls upon all High Contracting Parties to the
Convention to continue, individually and collectively, to exert all efforts to ensure respect for its provisions by Israel,
the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967;
_______________
101

370

A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

15. Also recalls that the Security Council, in its resolution 2334 (2016), called upon all States to distinguish,
in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967;
16. Calls upon all States, consistent with their obligations under international law and the relevant resolutions,
not to recognize, and not to render aid or assistance in maintaining, the situation created by measures that are illegal
under international law, including those aimed at advancing annexation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
17. Calls upon the relevant United Nations bodies to take all necessary measures and actions within their
mandates to ensure full respect for and compliance with Human Rights Council resolution 17/4 of 16 June 2011,102
concerning the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights103 and other relevant international laws and
standards, and to ensure the implementation of the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework, which
provides a global standard for upholding human rights in relation to business activities that are connected with Israeli
settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/89
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 157 to 9, with 13 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/410, para. 16)104
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Papua
New Guinea, United States of America
Abstaining: Belarus, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Eswatini, Haiti, Honduras, Kiribati,
Rwanda, South Sudan, Togo, Vanuatu

74/89.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,105
_______________
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. III, sect. A.
A/HRC/17/31, annex.
104
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa,
Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
105
Resolution 217 A (III).
102
103

371

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,106 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights106 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,107 and affirming that these
human rights instruments must be respected in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Reaffirming its relevant resolutions, including resolution 73/99 of 7 December 2018, as well as those adopted
at its tenth emergency special session,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Human Rights Council,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and stressing the need for their implementation,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories108 and the report of the Secretary-General
on the work of the Special Committee,109
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,110 as well as of other relevant recent reports of the Human
Rights Council,
Taking note also of the report of the independent international commission of inquiry established pursuant to
Human Rights Council resolution S-28/1,111
Stressing the need to ensure accountability for all violations of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in order to end impunity, ensure justice, deter further violations, protect civilians and promote peace,
Taking note of the recent report by the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on the economic
and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan,112
Deeply regretting that 52 years have passed since the onset of the Israeli occupation, and stressing the urgent
need for efforts to reverse the negative trends on the ground and to restore a political horizon for advancing and
accelerating meaningful negotiations aimed at the achievement of a peace agreement that will bring a complete end
to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and the resolution of all core final status issues, without exception, leading
to a peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive solution of the question of Palestine,
Aware of the responsibility of the international community to promote human rights and ensure respect for
international law, and recalling in this regard its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Recalling the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,113 and recalling also relevant General
Assembly resolutions,
Noting in particular the Court’s reply, including that the construction of the wall being built by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and its associated
regime are contrary to international law,
Taking note of its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Noting the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law conventions,
as well as other international treaties,
Reaffirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
_______________
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
108
A/74/356.
109
A/74/468.
110
A/HRC/40/73.
111
A/HRC/40/74.
112
A/74/88-E/2019/72.
113
See A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1.
106
107

372

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Reaffirming also the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,114 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
Reaffirming further the obligation of the States parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention114 under articles 146,
147 and 148 with regard to penal sanctions, grave breaches and responsibilities of the High Contracting Parties,
Recalling the statement of 15 July 1999 and the declarations adopted on 5 December 2001 and on 17 December
2014115 by the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention on measures to enforce the
Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, aimed at ensuring respect for the
Convention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Reaffirming that all States have the right and the duty to take actions in conformity with international law and
international humanitarian law to counter deadly acts of violence against their civilian population in order to protect
the lives of their citizens,
Stressing the need for full compliance with the Israeli-Palestinian agreements reached within the context of the
Middle East peace process, including the Sharm el‑Sheikh understandings, and the implementation of the Quartet
road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,116
Stressing also the need for the full implementation of the Agreement on Movement and Access and the Agreed
Principles for the Rafah Crossing, both of 15 November 2005, to allow for the freedom of movement of the Palestinian
civilian population within and into and out of the Gaza Strip,
Gravely concerned by the tensions and violence in the recent period throughout the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem and including with regard to the holy places of Jerusalem, including the Haram
al-Sharif, and deploring the loss of innocent civilian life,
Reaffirming that the international community, through the United Nations, has a legitimate interest in the
question of the City of Jerusalem and in the protection of the unique spiritual, religious and cultural dimensions of the
city, as foreseen in relevant United Nations resolutions on this matter,
Reaffirming also the obligation to respect the historic status quo, the special significance of the holy sites and
the importance of the City of Jerusalem for the three monotheistic religions,
Recognizing that security measures alone cannot remedy the escalating tensions, instability and violence, and
calling for full respect for international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, including for the protection
of civilian life, as well as for the promotion of human security, the de-escalation of the situation, the exercise of
restraint, including from provocative actions and rhetoric, and the establishment of a stable environment conducive
to the pursuit of peace,
Expressing grave concern about the continuing systematic violation of the human rights of the Palestinian
people by Israel, the occupying Power, including that arising from the excessive use of force and military operations
causing death and injury to Palestinian civilians, including children, women and non-violent, peaceful demonstrators,
as well as journalists, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel; the arbitrary imprisonment and detention of
Palestinians, some of whom have been imprisoned for decades; the use of collective punishment; the closure of areas;
the confiscation of land; the establishment and expansion of settlements; the construction of a wall in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory in departure from the Armistice Line of 1949; the destruction of property and infrastructure; the
forced displacement of civilians, including attempts at forced transfers of Bedouin communities; and all other actions
by it designed to change the legal status, geographical nature and demographic composition of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and demanding the cessation of all such unlawful actions,
Gravely concerned by the ongoing demolition by Israel, the occupying Power, of Palestinian homes, as well as
of structures, including schools, provided as international humanitarian aid, in particular in and around Occupied East
_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
A/69/711-S/2015/1, annex.
116
S/2003/529, annex.
114
115

373

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Jerusalem, including if carried out as an act of collective punishment in violation of international humanitarian law,
which has escalated at unprecedented rates, and by the revocation of residence permits and eviction of Palestinian
residents of the City of Jerusalem,
Deploring the continuing and negative consequences of the conflicts in and around the Gaza Strip and the high
number of causalities among Palestinian civilians in the recent period, including among children, and any violations
of international law, and calling for full respect for international humanitarian and human rights law and for the
principles of legality, distinction, precaution and proportionality,
Gravely concerned about the disastrous humanitarian situation and the critical socioeconomic and security
situation in the Gaza Strip, including that resulting from the prolonged closures and severe economic and movement
restrictions that in effect amount to a blockade and deepen poverty and despair among the Palestinian civilian
population, and about the short- and long-term detrimental impacts of this situation and the widespread destruction
and continued impeding of the reconstruction process by Israel, the occupying Power, on the human rights situation,
Recalling with grave concern the United Nations country team report of August 2012, entitled “Gaza in 2020:
a liveable place?”,
Recalling the statement by the President of the Security Council of 28 July 2014,117
Stressing the need for the full implementation by all parties of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of
8 January 2009 and General Assembly resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009,
Stressing also that the situation in the Gaza Strip is unsustainable and that a durable ceasefire agreement must
lead to a fundamental improvement in the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, including
through the sustained and regular opening of crossing points, and ensure the safety and well-being of civilians on both
sides, and regretting the lack of progress made in this regard,
Gravely concerned by reports regarding serious human rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law committed during the successive military operations in the Gaza Strip,118 and reiterating the
necessity for serious follow-up by all parties of the recommendations addressed to them towards ensuring
accountability and justice,
Stressing the need for protection of human rights defenders engaged in the promotion of human rights issues in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, to allow them to carry out their work freely and without
fear of attacks and harassment,
Expressing deep concern about the Israeli policy of closures and the imposition of severe restrictions, including
through hundreds of obstacles to movement, checkpoints and a permit regime, all of which obstruct the freedom of
movement of persons and goods, including medical and humanitarian goods, and the follow-up and access to donorfunded projects of development cooperation and humanitarian assistance, throughout the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and impair the Territory’s contiguity, consequently violating the human rights of
the Palestinian people and negatively impacting their socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, which remains dire
in the Gaza Strip, and the efforts aimed at rehabilitating and developing the Palestinian economy, and calling for the
full lifting of restrictions,
Expressing grave concern that thousands of Palestinians, including many children and women, as well as elected
representatives, continue to be held in Israeli prisons or detention centres under harsh conditions, including unhygienic
conditions, solitary confinement, the extensive use of administrative detention of excessive duration without charge
and denial of due process, lack of proper medical care and widespread medical neglect, including for prisoners who
are ill, with the risk of fatal consequences, and denial of family visits, that impair their well-being, and expressing
grave concern also about the ill-treatment and harassment and all reports of torture of any Palestinian prisoners,
Expressing deep concern about the hunger strikes by Palestinian prisoners in protest of the harsh conditions of
their imprisonment and detention by the occupying Power, while taking note of agreements reached on conditions
of detention in Israeli prisons and calling for their full and immediate implementation,
_______________
117
118

374

S/PRST/2014/13; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2013–31 July 2014 (S/INF/69).
See A/63/855-S/2009/250; S/2015/286, annex; A/HRC/12/48; and A/HRC/29/52.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules)119 and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for
Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),120 and calling for respect for those Rules,
Recalling also the prohibition under international humanitarian law of the deportation of civilians from occupied
territories,
Deploring the practice of withholding the bodies of those killed, and calling for the release of the bodies that
have not yet been returned to their relatives, in line with international humanitarian law and human rights law, in order
to ensure dignified closure in accordance with their religious beliefs and traditions,
Stressing the need for the prevention of all acts of violence, harassment, provocation and incitement by extremist
Israeli settlers and groups of armed settlers, especially against Palestinian civilians, including children, and their
properties, including homes, agricultural lands and historic and religious sites, including in Occupied East Jerusalem,
and deploring the violation of the human rights of Palestinians in this regard, including acts of violence leading to
death and injury among civilians,
Convinced of the need for an international presence to monitor the situation, to contribute to ending the violence
and protecting the Palestinian civilian population and to help the parties to implement the agreements reached, in this
regard recalling the importance of the mandate and the positive contribution of the Temporary International Presence
in Hebron, and regretting the unilateral decision by the Government of Israel not to renew its mandate,
Stressing the need for an immediate and complete cessation of all acts of violence, including military attacks,
destruction and acts of terror,
Stressing also that the protection of civilians is a critical component in ensuring peace and security, and stressing
further the need for measures to be taken to guarantee the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilian population
throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, consistent with the provisions and obligations of international
humanitarian law,
Stressing further the need to respect the right of peaceful assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of the Palestinian civilian population121 and
the observations made therein on ways and means for ensuring the safety, protection and well-being of the Palestinian
civilian population under Israeli occupation,
Noting the continued efforts and tangible progress made in the Palestinian security sector, and noting also the
continued cooperation that benefits both Palestinians and Israelis, in particular by promoting security and building
confidence,
Urging the parties to observe calm and restraint and to refrain from provocative actions, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric, especially in areas of religious and cultural sensitivity, including in East Jerusalem, and to take
every possible step to defuse tensions and promote conditions conducive to the credibility and success of the peace
negotiations,
Emphasizing the right of all people in the region to the enjoyment of human rights as enshrined in the
international human rights covenants,
1. Reiterates that all measures and actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, in violation of the relevant provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,114 and contrary to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, are illegal and have no validity;
2. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease all measures contrary to international law, as well as
discriminatory legislation, policies and actions in the Occupied Palestinian Territory that violate the human rights of
the Palestinian people, including the killing and injury of civilians, the arbitrary detention and imprisonment
_______________
Resolution 70/175, annex.
Resolution 65/229, annex.
121
A/ES-10/794.
119
120

375

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

of civilians, the forced displacement of civilians, including attempts at forced transfers of Bedouin communities, the
destruction and confiscation of civilian property, including home demolitions, including if carried out as collective
punishment in violation of international humanitarian law, and any obstruction of humanitarian assistance, and that it
fully respect human rights law and comply with its legal obligations in this regard, including in accordance with
relevant United Nations resolutions;
3. Also demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply fully with the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949114 and cease immediately all measures and actions taken in violation and in breach of the
Convention;
4. Calls for urgent measures to ensure the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilian population in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law and as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 904 (1994) of 18 March 1994;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of the Palestinian civilian population,121
notably the observations made therein, including the possible expansion of existing protection mechanisms to prevent
and deter violations, and calls for continued efforts within the United Nations human rights framework regarding the
legal protection and safety of the Palestinian civilian population;
6. Calls for full cooperation by Israel with the relevant special rapporteurs and other relevant mechanisms
and inquiries of the Human Rights Council, including the facilitation of entry to the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, for monitoring and reporting on the human rights situation therein according to their
respective mandates;
7. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease all of its settlement activities, the construction of the wall
and any other measures aimed at altering the character, status and demographic composition of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, all of which, inter alia, gravely and detrimentally impact
the human rights of the Palestinian people, and the prospects for achieving without delay an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides, and calls for the full respect and implementation of all relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions in this regard, including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016) of 23 December 2016;
8. Calls for urgent attention to the plight and the rights, in accordance with international law, of Palestinian
prisoners and detainees in Israeli jails, including those on hunger strike, also calls for efforts between the two sides for
the further release of prisoners and detainees, and further calls for respect for the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules)119 and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment
of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules);120
9. Condemns all acts of violence, including all acts of terror, provocation, incitement and destruction,
especially any use of force by the Israeli occupying forces against Palestinian civilians in violation of international
law, particularly in the Gaza Strip, including against journalists, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel, which
have caused extensive loss of life and vast numbers of injuries, including among children and women;
10. Also condemns all acts of violence by militants and armed groups, including the firing of rockets, against
Israeli civilian areas, resulting in loss of life and injury;
11.

Reiterates its demand for the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009);

12. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal obligations under international law, as
mentioned in the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice113 and as demanded
in General Assembly resolutions ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/13 of 21 October 2003, and that it immediately
cease the construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem,
dismantle forthwith the structure situated therein, repeal or render ineffective all legislative and regulatory acts relating
thereto, and make reparations for all damage caused by the construction of the wall, which has gravely impacted the
human rights and the socioeconomic living conditions of the Palestinian people;
13. Reiterates the need for respect for the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory and for guarantees of the freedom of movement of persons and goods within the Palestinian
territory, including movement into and from East Jerusalem, into and from the Gaza Strip, between the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip, and to and from the outside world;
376

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

14. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its imposition of prolonged closures and economic and
movement restrictions, including those amounting to a blockade on the Gaza Strip, and in this regard to fully
implement the Agreement on Movement and Access and the Agreed Principles for the Rafah Crossing, both of
15 November 2005, in order to allow for the sustained and regular movement of persons and goods and for the
acceleration of long overdue and massive reconstruction needs and economic recovery in the Gaza Strip, while noting
the tripartite agreement facilitated by the United Nations in this regard;
15. Stresses the urgent need to address the continuing health crisis in the Gaza Strip, including by ensuring the
provision of adequate infrastructure, medical supplies and equipment, alongside expertise, to deal with the increasing
caseload of injuries requiring complex treatment in the context of the protests in the Gaza Strip;
16. Urges Member States to continue to provide emergency assistance to the Palestinian people to alleviate
the financial crisis and the dire socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, particularly in the Gaza Strip;
17. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system to continue
to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their inalienable human rights, including their
right to self‑determination, as a matter of urgency, in the light of the passage of more than 52 years of the Israeli
occupation and the continued denial and violation of the human rights of the Palestinian people;
18. Emphasizes the need to preserve and develop the Palestinian institutions and infrastructure for the
provision of vital public services to the Palestinian civilian population and the promotion of human rights, including
civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, and urges in this regard the implementation of the agreement
signed in Cairo on 12 October 2017,122 which would be an important step towards achieving Palestinian unity and
lead to the effective functioning of the Palestinian Government, including in the Gaza Strip, under the leadership of
President Mahmoud Abbas, consistent with the Palestine Liberation Organization commitments and the Quartet
principles;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including with regard to the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention
to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab territories.
RESOLUTION 74/90
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 157 to 2, with 20 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/410, para. 16)123
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America

_______________
S/2017/899, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and State of Palestine.
122
123

377

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Abstaining: Australia, Brazil, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, South Sudan,
Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu

74/90.

The occupied Syrian Golan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories,124
Deeply concerned that the Syrian Golan, occupied since 1967, has been under continued Israeli military
occupation,
Recalling Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981,
Recalling also its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was resolution 73/100 of
7 December 2018,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of resolution 73/100,125
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions in which, inter alia, it called upon Israel to put an end to its occupation
of the Arab territories,
Reaffirming once more the illegality of the decision of 14 December 1981 taken by Israel to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian Golan, which has resulted in the effective annexation of that
territory,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,126 to the occupied Syrian Golan,
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967,
Welcoming the convening at Madrid of the Peace Conference on the Middle East on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973 aimed at the realization of
a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, and expressing grave concern about the stalling of the peace process on all
tracks,
1. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with the relevant resolutions on the occupied Syrian
Golan, in particular Security Council resolution 497 (1981), in which the Council, inter alia, decided that the Israeli
decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian Golan was null and void and
without international legal effect and demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, rescind forthwith its decision;
2. Also calls upon Israel to desist from changing the physical character, demographic composition,
institutional structure and legal status of the occupied Syrian Golan and in particular to desist from the establishment
of settlements;
3. Determines that all legislative and administrative measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, that purport to alter the character and legal status of the occupied Syrian Golan are null and void,
constitute a flagrant violation of international law and of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,126 and have no legal effect;
4. Calls upon Israel to desist from imposing Israeli citizenship and Israeli identity cards on the Syrian citizens
in the occupied Syrian Golan, and from its repressive measures against the population of the occupied Syrian Golan;
_______________
A/74/356.
A/74/192.
126
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
124
125

378

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

5. Deplores the violations by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;
6. Calls once again upon Member States not to recognize any of the legislative or administrative measures
and actions referred to above;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/91
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/412, para. 8)127

74/91.

Comprehensive review of special political missions

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 67/123 of 18 December 2012, 68/85 of 11 December 2013, 69/95 of 5 December 2014,
70/92 of 9 December 2015, 71/100 of 6 December 2016, 72/89 of 7 December 2017 and 73/101 of 7 December 2018
on the comprehensive review of special political missions,
Reaffirming its commitment to respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of all
States,
Recalling the primary role of the United Nations and the respective roles and authority of the General Assembly
and the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the Charter, and
recalling also in this context the contribution of regional and subregional arrangements and the important role they
can play, as appropriate,
Recalling also the adoption by the General Assembly and the Security Council of substantively identical
resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016) of 27 April 2016, further recalling the adoption of resolutions 72/276 and
2413 (2018) of 26 April 2018 on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and recognizing in this regard the important
role played by special political missions in the area of sustaining peace, as a goal and a process, where mandated,
Recognizing the important role of the special political missions as a flexible tool for the maintenance of
international peace and security, including through contributions to a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace,
Noting that the relevant reforms, in particular of the peace and security pillar, are an opportunity to further
advance and strengthen the work of special political missions in all mandated tasks, including in conflict prevention,
and stressing that actions by the United Nations should support and complement, as appropriate, the conflict
prevention roles of national Governments,
Encouraging enhanced exchanges of information, in an appropriate manner, among the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, making use of the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission, when
relevant, on overall policy matters pertaining to special political missions,
Reaffirming the principles of impartiality, consent of the parties, national ownership and national responsibility,
and stressing the significance of the views of and dialogue with countries hosting special political missions,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and Uruguay.
127

379

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the relevant reports on the review of arrangements for funding and backstopping special political
missions,128 which addressed the financial and administrative arrangements pertaining to such missions, recognizing
that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities
for administrative and budgetary matters,
Recognizing, in this regard, the importance of adequately resourcing the peacebuilding components of relevant
special political missions, including during mission transitions and drawdown, to support the stability and continuity
of peacebuilding activities,
Stressing the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the pacific settlement of
disputes, including mediation, conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
Acknowledging the significant increase in the number and complexity of special political missions and the
challenges faced by them,
Recognizing the need for system-wide coherence between special political missions and the United Nations
system, and emphasizing the importance of close cooperation between special political missions, peacekeeping
operations and United Nations country teams for maintaining sustainable peace, conflict prevention and conflict
resolution,
Recognizing also the need for special political missions to operate under clear, credible and achievable
mandates, including through the articulation of their goals and purposes, and the need to review their progress as
stipulated in their respective mandates,
Stressing the need for, as relevant, enhanced coordination and cooperation between special political missions
and concerned regional and subregional organizations, particularly leveraging ongoing strategic partnerships, to take
concrete measures to strengthen mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and resolution, and emphasizing
the need to build and strengthen human and institutional capacities at the national, subregional and regional levels,
Recognizing the importance of efforts towards improving broad geographical representation, gender balance
and expertise in the composition of all special political missions, and acknowledging the necessity of reducing the
overall environmental footprint of relevant special political missions,
Recalling the relevant resolutions on women, peace and security, reaffirming the important role of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and recognizing the importance of the equal and
effective participation and the full involvement of women at all levels, at all stages and in all aspects of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and conflict resolution,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions on youth, peace and security, and affirming the important role that youth
can play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and as a key aspect of the sustainability, inclusiveness and success
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts,
Noting the approval of the restructuring of the peace and security architecture within the Secretariat, particularly
the endorsement of the establishment of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of
Peace Operations and of a single, regional political-operational structure shared between both Departments, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 72/262 C of 5 July 2018,
Noting also that the relevant reform efforts within the United Nations should ensure a more coordinated
approach to strengthen the ability of special political missions to deliver on their mandates and should contribute to
ensuring enhanced accountability, coherence and effectiveness of special political missions,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 73/101;129

2. Requests the Secretary-General to hold regular, inclusive and interactive dialogue on the overall policy
matters pertaining to special political missions, and requests the Secretariat to reach out to Member States prior to the
holding of such dialogue to ensure wide and meaningful participation;
_______________
128
129

380

A/66/340 and A/66/7/Add.21.
A/74/338.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

3. Respects the purview of the mandate of special political missions, as stipulated in the respective relevant
resolutions, recognizes the specificity of each mandate of such missions, and emphasizes the role of the General
Assembly in discussing the overall policy matters pertaining to special political missions;
4. Acknowledges the importance of strong coordination, coherence and cooperation of the Security Council
and the General Assembly with the Peacebuilding Commission, and in this regard notes the intention and recent
practice of the Security Council to regularly request, deliberate and draw upon the specific, strategic and targeted
advice of the Commission, including to assist with the longer-term perspective required for sustaining peace being
reflected in the formation, review and drawdown of peacekeeping operations and special political missions mandates,
in line with General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016);
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its seventy-fifth session, a timely
report on the implementation of the present resolution regarding the overall policy matters pertaining to special
political missions, including efforts towards improving expertise and effectiveness, transparency, accountability,
geographical representation, gender perspective and the equal participation of women, as well as youth participation,
and in this regard also requests the Secretary-General to include relevant detailed information on these matters in the
report;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in the aforementioned report information on the
implementation of the reforms in the Organization in relation to special political missions;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Comprehensive
review of special political missions” and to consider the above-mentioned report of the Secretary-General under
that item.
RESOLUTIONS 74/92 A and B
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/413, para. 9)130

74/92.

Questions relating to information

A
Information in the service of humanity
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the comprehensive and important report of the Committee on Information,131
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General,132
Urges all countries, organizations of the United Nations system as a whole and all others concerned, reaffirming
their commitment to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to the principles of freedom of the press
and freedom of information, as well as to those of the independence, pluralism and diversity of the media, deeply
concerned by the disparities existing between developed and developing countries and the consequences of every
kind arising from those disparities that affect the capability of the public, private or other media and individuals in
developing countries to disseminate information and communicate their views and their cultural and ethical values
through endogenous cultural production, as well as to ensure the diversity of sources and their free access to
information, and recognizing the call in this context for what in the United Nations and at various international forums
has been termed “a new world information and communication order, seen as an evolving and continuous process”:
(a) To cooperate and interact with a view to reducing existing disparities in information flows at all levels by
increasing assistance for the development of communications infrastructures and capabilities in developing countries,
_______________
The draft resolutions recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee were submitted by the Committee on Information.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/74/21).
132
A/74/283.
130
131

381

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

with due regard for their needs and the priorities attached to such areas by those countries, and in order to enable them
and the public, private or other media in developing countries to develop their own information and communications
policies freely and independently and increase the participation of media and individuals in the communication
process, and to ensure a free flow of information at all levels;
(b) To ensure for journalists the free and effective performance of their professional tasks and condemn
resolutely all attacks against them;
(c) To provide support for the continuation and strengthening of practical training programmes for
broadcasters and journalists from public, private and other media in developing countries;
(d) To enhance regional efforts and cooperation among developing countries, as well as cooperation between
developed and developing countries, to strengthen communications capacities and to improve the media infrastructure
and communications technology in developing countries, especially in the areas of training and dissemination of
information;
(e) To aim at, in addition to bilateral cooperation, providing all possible support and assistance to developing
countries and their media, public, private or other, with due regard to their interests and needs in the field of
information and to action already adopted within the United Nations system, including:
(i) The development of the human and technical resources that are indispensable for the improvement of
information and communications systems in developing countries and support for the continuation and
strengthening of practical training programmes, such as those already operating under both public and private
auspices throughout the developing world;
(ii) The creation of conditions that will enable developing countries and their media, public, private or other,
to have, by using their national and regional resources, the communications technology suited to their national
needs, as well as the necessary programme material, especially for radio and television broadcasting;
(iii) Assistance in establishing and promoting telecommunication links at the subregional, regional and
interregional levels, especially among developing countries;
(iv) Facilitation, as appropriate, of access by developing countries to advanced communications technology
available on the open market;
(f) To provide full support for the International Programme for the Development of Communication of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which should support both public and private
media.
B
United Nations global communications policies and activities
The General Assembly,
Emphasizing that the Committee on Information is its main subsidiary body mandated to make
recommendations to it relating to the work of the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat,
Reaffirming its resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946, by which the General Assembly established the
Department of Public Information (now the Department of Global Communications), with a view to promoting to the
greatest possible extent an informed understanding of the work and purposes of the United Nations among the peoples
of the world, and all other relevant resolutions of the Assembly related to the activities of the Department,
Emphasizing that the contents of public information and communications should be placed at the heart of the
strategic management of the United Nations and that a culture of communications and transparency should permeate
all levels of the Organization as a means of fully informing the peoples of the world of the aims and activities of the
United Nations, in accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in
order to create broad-based global support for the United Nations,
Stressing that the primary mission of the Department of Global Communications is to provide, through its
outreach activities, accurate, impartial, comprehensive, balanced, timely, relevant and multilingual information to the
382

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

public on the tasks and responsibilities of the United Nations in order to strengthen international support for the
activities of the Organization with the greatest transparency,
Recalling its resolutions 73/102 A and B of 7 December 2018, which provided an opportunity to take due steps
to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the Department of Public Information and to maximize the use of its
resources,
Expressing its concern that the gap in information and communications technology between the developed and
the developing countries has continued to widen and that vast segments of the population in developing countries are
not benefiting from the information and communications technologies that are currently available, and in this regard
underlining the necessity of rectifying the imbalances in the present development of and access to information and
communications technologies in order to create a more just, equitable, accessible and effective environment in this
regard,
Recognizing that developments in information and communications technologies open vast new opportunities
for economic growth and social development and can play an important role in the eradication of poverty in
developing countries, and at the same time emphasizing that the development of these technologies poses challenges
and risks and could lead to further rising inequalities within and among countries,
Recalling its resolution 73/346 of 16 September 2019 on multilingualism, and emphasizing the importance of
making appropriate use of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the activities of the Department of
Global Communications, including in coordination with other departments of the Secretariat, with the aim
of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other official languages, as well as the
importance of ensuring the full and equitable treatment of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the
activities of the Department,
I
Introduction
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in respect of the global communications policies and activities of the
United Nations, to continue to implement fully the recommendations contained in relevant resolutions;
2. Reaffirms that the United Nations remains the indispensable foundation of a peaceful and just world and
that its voice must be heard in a clear and effective manner, and emphasizes the essential role of the Department of
Global Communications of the Secretariat in this context;
3. Underlines that the reform of the Department of Global Communications with a view to adapting its
capacity and work to the current trends of global communication should take into account the priorities set out by the
Committee on Information as the main subsidiary body mandated to make recommendations relating to the work of
the Department, and also underlines in that regard the importance of continuing the process of consultation with
Member States;
4. Stresses the importance of the provision of clear, timely, accurate and comprehensive information by the
Secretariat to Member States, upon their request, within the framework of existing mandates and procedures;
5. Also stresses that Member States should abstain from using information and communications technologies
in contravention of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, and encourages Member States to
consider better ways to cooperate, consistent with international law, in addressing threats posed by the use of
information and communications technologies for terrorist purposes;
6. Reaffirms the central role of the Committee on Information in United Nations global communications
policies and activities, including the prioritization of those activities, and decides that recommendations relating to the
programme of the Department of Global Communications shall originate, to the extent possible, in the Committee
and shall be considered by the Committee;
7. Requests the Department of Global Communications, following the priorities for the period 2018–2019
set out by the General Assembly in its resolutions 71/6 of 27 October 2016 and 73/269 of 22 December 2018, to pay
particular attention to the promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the Assembly and recent United Nations conferences, the maintenance of international
peace and security, the development of Africa, the promotion of human rights, the effective coordination of
383

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

humanitarian assistance efforts, the promotion of justice and international law, disarmament, and drug control, crime
prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations;
8. Requests the Department of Global Communications and its network of United Nations information
centres to pay particular attention to the outcomes of the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction, the third International Conference on Financing for Development and the annual Economic and Social
Council forum on financing for development follow-up, the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda and its follow-up by the annual high-level political forum on sustainable development, the
twenty-fourth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol, the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably
use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development and the second High-Level Conference on
South-South Cooperation, as well as the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace,133 and the
progress in implementing the outcomes;
9. Notes the contribution of the Department of Global Communications to the preparatory process for the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration,134 in line with the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants;135
II
General activities of the Department of Global Communications
10. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Global
Communications;136
11. Requests the Department of Global Communications to maintain its commitment to a culture of evaluation
and to continue to evaluate its products and activities with the objective of enhancing their effectiveness, and to
continue to cooperate and coordinate with Member States and the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the
Secretariat;
12. Reaffirms the importance of more effective coordination between the Department of Global
Communications and the Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General, and requests the Secretary-General
to ensure consistency in the messages of the Organization;
13. Notes the efforts of the Department of Global Communications to continue to publicize the work and
decisions of the General Assembly and its subsidiary bodies, and requests the Department to continue to enhance its
working relationship with the Office of the President of the General Assembly;
14. Encourages continued collaboration between the Department of Global Communications and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the promotion of culture and in the fields of education,
the advancement of communication and multilingualism, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 73/346,
including through multilingual education, as vehicles for sustainable development using existing resources and
bridging the existing gap between the developed and the developing countries;
15. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Department of Global Communications to work at the local level
with other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to enhance the coordination of their communications
activities, urges the Department to encourage the United Nations Communications Group to promote linguistic
diversity in its work, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at
its forty-second session on progress achieved in this regard;
16. Reaffirms that the Department of Global Communications must prioritize its work programme, while
respecting existing mandates and in line with regulation 5.6 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme
_______________
Resolutions 53/243 A and B.
Resolution 73/195, annex.
135
Resolution 71/1.
136
A/AC.198/2019/2, A/AC.198/2019/3 and A/AC.198/2019/4.
133
134

384

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation,137
to focus its message and better concentrate its efforts and to match its programmes with the needs of its target
audiences, including the linguistic dimension, on the basis of improved feedback and evaluation mechanisms;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to exert all efforts to ensure that publications and other
information services of the Secretariat, including the United Nations website, the United Nations News Service and
United Nations social media accounts, contain comprehensive, balanced, objective and equitable information in all
official languages about the issues before the Organization and that they maintain editorial independence, impartiality,
accuracy and full consistency with resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly;
18. Underlines the critical need to address violations of the relevant international rules and regulations that
govern the area of broadcasting, including television, radio and satellite broadcasting, in the most appropriate manner;
19. Reiterates its request to the Department of Global Communications and content-providing offices of the
Secretariat to ensure that United Nations publications are produced in all six official languages, as well as in an
environmentally friendly and cost-neutral manner, and to continue to coordinate closely with all other entities,
including all other departments of the Secretariat and funds and programmes of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates, in order to avoid duplication in the issuance of United Nations publications;
20. Encourages, in this regard, the Department of Global Communications and the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat to develop new collaborative arrangements to enhance
multilingualism in other outputs in a cost-neutral manner, bearing in mind the importance of ensuring the full and
equitable treatment of all the official languages of the United Nations, and to report thereon to the Committee on
Information at its forty-second session;
21. Emphasizes that the Department of Global Communications should maintain and improve its activities in
the areas of special interest to developing countries and, where appropriate, other countries with special needs, and
that the activities of the Department should contribute to bridging the existing gap between the developing and the
developed countries in the crucial field of public information and communications;
22. Reiterates its growing concern that the issuance of daily press releases has not been expanded to all official
languages, as requested in previous resolutions and in full respect of the principle of parity of all six official languages,
recalls the relevant report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Department of Global Communications,138
and reiterates its request that the Department, as a matter of priority, design a strategy to deliver daily press releases in
all six official languages through creative schemes, in a cost-neutral manner and in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions, at the latest by the forty-second session of the Committee on Information, and report
thereon to the Committee at that session;
23. Notes recent trends that contribute to undermining credible, transparent and fact-based information, and
encourages the Department of Global Communications to continue to promote unbiased and impartial information
about the work of the United Nations, to identify specific proposals in this regard and to report thereon to the
Committee on Information at its forty-second session;
Multilingualism and global communications
24. Emphasizes that multilingualism, as a core value of the Organization, entails the active involvement and
commitment of all stakeholders, including all United Nations duty stations and offices away from Headquarters;
25. Underlines the responsibility of the Secretariat in the mainstreaming of multilingualism into all of its
communication and information activities, within existing resources on an equitable basis, calls upon the Department
of Global Communications to consider it as an integral part of its strategic approach and to continue to work with the
Coordinator for Multilingualism on best practices throughout the Secretariat to fulfil this responsibility, and requests
the Secretary-General to report on such best practices and their implementation in his upcoming report to the
Committee on Information, bearing in mind the provisions of resolution 73/346;
_______________
137
138

ST/SGB/2016/6.
A/AC.198/2019/3.

385

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

26. Emphasizes the importance of making use of all the official languages of the United Nations, ensuring
their full and equitable treatment in all the activities of all divisions and offices of the Department of Global
Communications with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other
official languages, in this regard reaffirms its request that the Secretary-General ensure that the Department has the
necessary capacity in all the official languages to undertake all of its activities, and requests that this aspect be included
in future programme budget proposals for the Department, bearing in mind the principle of parity of all six official
languages, while respecting the workload in each official language;
27. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Department of Global Communications to enhance multilingualism
in all of its activities, stresses the importance of ensuring that the texts of all new public United Nations documents in
all six official languages, information materials, global promotional campaigns and all older United Nations
documents are made available through the United Nations websites and are accessible to Member States without
delay, and further stresses the importance of fully implementing its resolution 73/346;
28. Encourages the Department of Global Communications to continue its ongoing efforts to incorporate the
working method of having thematic focal points, currently applied by the language units of the United Nations
websites, as a best practice of multilingualism to improve the quality of the content of the websites;
29. Acknowledges and supports the continued use by the Department of Global Communications of
Portuguese, Kiswahili, Urdu, Bangla, Hindi and Persian in addition to the official languages, when appropriate,
according to the target audience, with a view to reaching the widest possible spectrum of audiences and extending the
United Nations message to all corners of the world in order to strengthen international support for the activities of the
Organization;
30. Encourages the Department of Global Communications to continue its long-standing and ongoing efforts
to promote multilingualism through global outreach in languages other than official languages, and to mobilize
adequate resources, including by exploring innovative financing options as well as voluntary contributions;
Bridging the digital divide
31. Requests the Department of Global Communications to contribute to raising the awareness of the
international community of the importance of the implementation of the outcome document of the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on the overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the
Information Society139 and of the possibilities that the use of the Internet and other information and communications
technologies, emerging particularly from the fourth industrial revolution, can bring to societies and economies, as well
as of ways to bridge the digital divide, within and among countries, including by commemorating World
Telecommunication and Information Society Day on 17 May;
32. Reiterates its call upon all stakeholders, particularly the relevant United Nations entities, within their
mandates and existing resources, to continue to work together to regularly analyse the nature of digital divides, study
strategies to bridge them and make their findings available to the international community, as well as to promote
public and private initiatives that aim to bridge the digital divide;
Network of United Nations information centres
33. Emphasizes the importance of the network of United Nations information centres in enhancing the public
image of the United Nations, in disseminating messages on the United Nations to local populations, especially in
developing countries, bearing in mind that information in local languages has the strongest impact on local
populations, and in mobilizing support for the work of the United Nations at the local level;
34. Welcomes the work done by the network of United Nations information centres, including the United
Nations Regional Information Centre, in favour of the publication of United Nations information materials and the
translation of important documents into languages other than the official languages of the United Nations, encourages
information centres to continue their important multilingual activities in the interactive and proactive aspects of their
work and to develop web pages and content in social media in local languages, encourages the Department of Global
Communications to provide the necessary resources and technical facilities, with a view to reaching the widest
_______________
139

386

Resolution 70/125; see also A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

possible spectrum of audiences and extending the United Nations message to all corners of the world in order to
strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization, and encourages the continuation of efforts in
this regard;
35. Stresses the importance of rationalizing the network of United Nations information centres, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to make proposals in this direction, including through the
redeployment of resources where necessary, and to report to the Committee on Information at its successive sessions;
36. Reaffirms that the rationalization of United Nations information centres must be carried out on a case-bycase basis in consultation with all concerned Member States in which existing information centres are located, the
countries served by those information centres and other interested countries in the region, taking into consideration
the distinctive characteristics of each region;
37. Recognizes that the network of United Nations information centres, especially in developing countries,
should continue to enhance its impact and activities, including through strategic communications support, and calls
upon the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of this approach to the Committee on Information at its
successive sessions;
38. Requests the Department of Global Communications, through the United Nations information centres, to
strengthen its cooperation with all other United Nations entities at the country level and in the context of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, in order to enhance coherence in communications and to avoid
duplication of work, and in that regard notes the ongoing United Nations reform, which, inter alia, calls for the
integration of the information centres into the resident coordinator system, to ensure coordinated, coherent and
strategic communications on local and global issues across the United Nations system and through the information
centres, including the United Nations Regional Information Centre, taking into account the needs and inputs emerging
at the country level, and requests the Secretary-General to include comprehensive information on this process in his
next report;
39. Stresses the importance of taking into account the special needs and requirements of developing countries
in the field of information and communications technology for the effective flow of information in those countries;
40. Also stresses the importance of efforts to strengthen the outreach activities of the United Nations to those
Member States remaining outside the network of United Nations information centres, and encourages the SecretaryGeneral, within the context of rationalization, to extend the services of the network of information centres to those
Member States;
41. Further stresses that the Department of Global Communications should continue to review the allocation
of both staff and financial resources to the United Nations information centres in developing countries, taking into
account the specific needs of the least developed countries in this regard, and requests the Secretary-General to include
in the next report comprehensive information on the functioning of the United Nations information centres, including
the outcome of the review of the effective and efficient allocation of staff and financial resources to United Nations
information centres and the possible measures to improve the operation of the centres in developing countries;
42. Welcomes the support of some Member States, including developing countries, in offering, inter alia,
rent-free premises for the United Nations information centres because of lack of funding, bearing in mind that such
support should not be a substitute for the full allocation of financial resources for the information centres in the context
of the programme budget of the United Nations;
43. Notes the concern of many Member States regarding the measures taken by the Secretariat in relation
to the information centres in Mexico City, Pretoria and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, expresses the hope that these
measures will not have an adverse impact on the ability of the centres to act as bridges between the United Nations
and local audiences, and therefore requests the Secretary-General to report on the impact of these measures and to
explore ways to strengthen the United Nations information centres in Cairo, Mexico City, Pretoria and Rio de
Janeiro, keeping in mind the need to do so within existing resources, and encourages the Secretary-General to
explore the strengthening of other centres, especially in Africa, in cooperation with the Member States concerned
and in a cost-neutral manner;
44. Recalls its resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009, in which the General Assembly requested the
Secretary-General to establish a United Nations information centre in Luanda as a contribution towards addressing
387

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

the needs of Portuguese-speaking African countries, and requests the Secretary-General, in coordination with the
Government of Angola, to accelerate the establishment of the information centre and report on the operationalization
of the centre to the Committee on Information at its forty-second session;
III
Strategic communications services
45. Reaffirms the role of the strategic communications services in devising and disseminating United Nations
messages by developing communications strategies, with the overall emphasis on multilingualism from the planning
stage, in close collaboration with the substantive departments, United Nations funds and programmes and the
specialized agencies, in full compliance with their legislative mandates;
Promotional campaigns
46. Notes with appreciation the work of the Department of Global Communications in promoting, through its
campaigns, issues of importance to the international community, and requests the Department, in cooperation with
the countries concerned and with the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to continue to
take appropriate measures to enhance world public awareness about, inter alia, reinforcing multilateralism,
unprecedented humanitarian crises and needs in the world, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,140 United
Nations reform, the eradication of poverty, sustainable urban development, conservation and sustainable use of the
oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development, climate change, sustainable management of forests,
combating desertification, conservation of biodiversity and other environmental issues, conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, refugees and migrants, people forcibly displaced by conflict and
other means that violate human rights and international law, culture and development, disarmament, decolonization,
human rights, including gender equality, the rights of children, persons with disabilities and migrant workers, strategic
coordination in humanitarian relief, especially in natural disasters and other crises, communicable and
non‑communicable diseases, the needs of the African continent, the strategic partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations, the nature of the critical economic and social situation in Africa and the priorities of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development,141 the special needs of the least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries, small island developing States and the countries that have met the criteria for graduation from the least
developed country category, the importance of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and the
activities that underlie them, such as corruption, embezzlement, fraud, tax evasion, safe havens that create incentives
for the transfer abroad of stolen assets, money-laundering and illegal exploitation of natural resources, the
identification, freezing and recovery of stolen assets and their return to their countries of origin in a manner consistent
with the United Nations Convention against Corruption,142 combating human trafficking and modern slavery,
combating transnational illicit trafficking, including in cultural heritage, the permanent memorial to and remembrance
of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, the
initiative on a world against violence and violent extremism, dialogue among civilizations, the culture of peace and
tolerance and the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, as well as prevention of genocide;
47. Requests the Secretariat, especially the Department of Global Communications, to contribute to the
observance of international days established by the General Assembly, including the International Day of
Commemoration in Memory of the Victims of the Holocaust, on 27 January, International Mother Language Day, on
21 February, as proclaimed by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the International Day of Happiness, on 20 March, the International Day of Nowruz, on 21 March, the
International Day of Forests, on 21 March, World Water Day, on 22 March, the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, on 25 March, the International Day of Multilateralism
and Diplomacy for Peace, on 24 April, World Press Freedom Day, on 3 May, the Time of Remembrance and
Reconciliation for Those Who Lost Their Lives During the Second World War, on 8 and 9 May, the International Day
of United Nations Peacekeepers, on 29 May, World Oceans Day, on 8 June, the International Day of Family
Remittances, on 16 June, the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, on 19 June, Nelson
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
A/57/304, annex.
142
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.
140
141

388

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Mandela International Day, on 18 July, International Youth Day, on 12 August, the International Day of Peace, on
21 September, the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, on 26 September, the International
Day of Non‑Violence, on 2 October, the International Day for Tolerance, on 16 November, the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, on 29 November, the International Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the
Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of this Crime, on 9 December, Human Rights Day, on
10 December, International Mountain Day, on 11 December, and International Universal Health Coverage Day, on
12 December, and to play a role in raising awareness and promoting these events, in a cost-neutral manner, where
appropriate, in accordance with the respective Assembly resolutions;
48. Requests the Department of Global Communications and its network of United Nations information
centres to raise broad awareness and to engage in a comprehensive and multilingual promotional campaign and
coverage, on an equal basis, of all summits, international conferences and high-level meetings mandated by the
General Assembly, including those to be held in 2019;
49. Notes that 2020 marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the end of
the Second World War, recognizes the work already undertaken by the Secretariat on planning activities in that regard,
and requests the Department of Global Communications to raise awareness of and disseminate information on the
anniversary, including at Expo 2020, and to ensure that multilingualism is mainstreamed into those activities, in a
cost-neutral manner;
50. Recognizes the communication efforts led by the Department of Global Communications in promoting
the review conferences of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and their preparatory
processes, in particular the production of various multimedia materials, including videos, images and graphics, to
promote the conferences and the issues before them in the six official languages of the Organization, and in this regard
encourages the Department to continue this practice in promoting high-level meetings, including through the use of
traditional and new media such as social media, as appropriate;
51. Requests the Department of Global Communications and its network of United Nations information
centres to continue raising awareness of and to disseminate information, in a cost-neutral manner, on the Third
International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, declared by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/119
of 10 December 2010;
52. Recalls its resolutions 68/237 of 23 December 2013 and 69/16 of 18 November 2014 on the International
Decade for People of African Descent, and requests the Department of Global Communications and its network of
United Nations information centres to continue raising awareness of and to disseminate information on the
International Decade, in accordance with the programme of activities for the implementation of the International
Decade adopted by the General Assembly,143 in a cost-neutral manner;
53. Also recalls its resolution 72/239 of 20 December 2017 on the United Nations Decade of Family Farming
(2019–2028), and requests the Department of Global Communications and its network of United Nations information
centres to raise awareness of and to disseminate information on the International Decade;
54. Welcomes the political declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit, held on 24 September
2018144 to commemorate the centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela, in which the period from 2019 to 2028 was
recognized as the Nelson Mandela Decade of Peace, and in this regard requests the Department of Global
Communications to raise awareness of, and disseminate information on, the Decade;
55. Recalls its resolution 71/178 of 19 December 2016 on the proclamation of 2019 as the International Year
of Indigenous Languages to draw attention to the critical loss of indigenous languages, and requests the Department
of Global Communications and its network of United Nations information centres to raise awareness of and
disseminate information on the International Year in accordance with its action plan;145
56. Underlines the importance of the Department of Global Communications integrating multilingualism in
the planning and implementation of promotional campaigns, including the design of logotypes and isologotypes in
_______________
Resolution 69/16, annex.
Resolution 73/1.
145
E/C.19/2018/8.
143
144

389

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

different languages, where appropriate, as well as the use of hashtags for social media campaigns in more than one
language, taking into account the needs of the target audiences;
57. Encourages the Department of Global Communications to develop partnerships with the private sector
and relevant organizations that promote the official languages of the United Nations and other languages, as
appropriate, in order to promote the activities of the United Nations in a cost-neutral manner, and to report thereon to
the Committee on Information at its forty-second session, and in this regard welcomes the partnership with airlines
that provide to their customers in-flight programmes featuring United Nations activities;
Role of the Department of Global Communications in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
special political missions and peacebuilding
58. Requests the Secretariat to continue to ensure the active involvement of the Department of Global
Communications from the planning stage and in all stages of future peacekeeping operations and special political
missions through interdepartmental consultations and coordination with other departments and offices of the
Secretariat, in particular with the Department of Peace Operations, the Department of Operational Support, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Peacebuilding Support Office;
59. Requests the Department of Global Communications, the Department of Peace Operations, the
Department of Operational Support, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Peacebuilding
Support Office to continue their cooperation in raising awareness of the new realities, successes and challenges faced
by peacekeeping operations, especially multidimensional and complex ones, in peacebuilding efforts and by special
political missions, and continues to call upon them to develop and implement a comprehensive communications
strategy on current challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping, countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission and special political missions;
60. Stresses the importance of enhancing the public information capacity of the Department of Global
Communications in the field of peacekeeping operations and special political missions as well as its role, in close
cooperation with the Department of Peace Operations, the Department of Operational Support and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, in the process of selecting public information staff for United Nations
peacekeeping operations or missions, and in this regard invites the Department of Global Communications to second
public information staff who have the skills necessary to fulfil the tasks of the operations and special political missions,
taking into account the principle of equitable geographical distribution in accordance with Chapter XV, Article 101,
paragraph 3, of the Charter, and to consider views expressed, especially by host countries, when appropriate, in this
regard;
61. Emphasizes the importance of the peacekeeping gateway on the United Nations website, and requests the
Department of Global Communications to continue its efforts to support the peacekeeping missions in further
developing and maintaining their websites;
62. Welcomes promotional campaigns showcasing individual troop-contributing countries, and requests the
Secretariat to ensure that all troop- and police-contributing countries are represented;
63. Requests the Department of Global Communications, in the context of its promotion of the United Nations
peacekeeping activities, to highlight the work and mandate of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;
64. Recalls its resolutions 62/214 of 21 December 2007 on the United Nations Comprehensive Strategy on
Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations Staff and Related Personnel,
70/268 of 14 June 2016 on the comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects, 70/286 of 17 June 2016 on cross-cutting issues, 71/134 of 13 December 2016 on criminal accountability of
United Nations officials and experts on mission and 71/278 of 10 March 2017 on United Nations action on sexual
exploitation and abuse, takes note of the report of the Secretary-General146 and Security Council resolutions
2242 (2015) of 13 October 2015 and 2272 (2016) of 11 March 2016, requests the Department of Global
Communications, the Department of Peace Operations, the Department of Operational Support, the Department of
_______________
146

390

A/73/744.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Peacebuilding Support Office to continue to cooperate in implementing
an effective outreach programme to explain the zero-tolerance policy of the Organization regarding sexual
exploitation and abuse in accordance with the objectives set out in the aforementioned resolutions and to inform the
public of the outcome of all such cases involving United Nations staff and related personnel, including cases where
allegations are ultimately found to be legally unproven, requests the Departments and the Office to inform the public
of steps taken to protect the rights of the victims and ensure adequate support for the witnesses, in accordance with
the United Nations Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
by United Nations Staff and Related Personnel, and stresses the importance of the Department of Global
Communications in showcasing the compact proposed between the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries in
that regard, as well as all the activities related to the circle of leadership;
65. Notes the importance of communication activities and the dissemination of information relating to
sustaining peace and peacebuilding efforts, in particular, meetings and activities of the Peacebuilding Commission,
country-specific configurations, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund, and requests the
Department of Global Communications to enhance its cooperation with these entities in that regard, in particular
through increased usage of social media, with a view to widening outreach of their important work and encouraging
national ownership;
Role of the Department of Global Communications in strengthening dialogue among civilizations
and the culture of peace as means of enhancing understanding among nations
66. Recalls its resolutions on dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace, and requests the
Department of Global Communications, while ensuring the pertinence and relevance of subjects for promotional
campaigns on this issue, to continue to provide the support necessary for the dissemination of information pertaining
to dialogue among civilizations and the culture of peace, as well as the initiative on the Alliance of Civilizations, and
to take due steps in fostering the culture of dialogue among civilizations, promoting the initiative on a world against
violence and violent extremism in accordance with General Assembly resolution 72/241 of 20 December 2017, and
promoting cultural understanding, tolerance, respect for and freedom of religion or belief and effective enjoyment by
all of all human rights and civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development, and
requests a briefing by the Secretariat on the measures taken to disseminate information pertaining to dialogue among
civilizations and the culture of peace, before the next session of the Committee on Information;
67. Invites the United Nations system, especially the Department of Global Communications, to continue to
encourage and facilitate dialogue among civilizations and to formulate ways and means to promote dialogue among
civilizations in the activities of the United Nations in various fields, taking into account the Programme of Action of
the Global Agenda for Dialogue among Civilizations;147
68. Recalls its resolution 69/312 of 6 July 2015, in which it acknowledged the achievements of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the efforts of the High Representative of the Secretary-General for the Alliance
of Civilizations, as well as the declarations adopted by the Global Forums of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations,148 and welcomes the continuing support of the Department of Global Communications for the work of
the Alliance, including its ongoing projects;
69. Welcomes and encourages the various initiatives at the local, national, regional and international levels to
enhance interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation and to strengthen people-to-people
bonds;
IV
News services
70. Stresses that the central objective of the news services implemented by the Department of Global
Communications is the timely delivery of accurate, objective and balanced news and information emanating from the
United Nations system in different supports and formats, including print, radio, television and the Internet, including
_______________
147
148

Resolution 56/6, sect. B.
Madrid, Spain; Istanbul, Turkey; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Doha, Qatar; Vienna, Austria; Bali, Indonesia; and Baku, Azerbaijan.

391

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

social media platforms, to the media and other audiences worldwide, with the overall emphasis on multilingualism
from the planning stage, and reiterates its request to the Department to ensure that all breaking news stories and news
alerts are accurate, impartial and free of bias;
71. Recognizes the efforts of the Department of Global Communications to mainstream and consolidate news
and multimedia content through the coordinated and centralized UN News online portal, which provides content in
both traditional and digital format in the six official languages, as well as in Hindi, Kiswahili and Portuguese, and in
this regard requests the Secretariat to continue to support those efforts;
72. Also recognizes the important role of television and video services provided by the Department of Global
Communications, and notes the recent efforts in making available online broadcast-quality video that can be streamed
or downloaded by smaller broadcast outlets that do not have access to satellite feeds;
Traditional means of communication
73. Welcomes the sustained efforts of United Nations Radio, which remains one of the most effective and
far-reaching traditional media available to the Department of Global Communications and an important instrument
in United Nations activities, to enhance the timeliness, presentation and thematic focus of its multilingual programmes
on United Nations activities and to ensure the widest possible dissemination of its programming to media outlets using
the most suitable platforms and formats, pre-recorded or live, requests the Secretary-General to continue to make
every effort to achieve parity in the six official languages in United Nations Radio productions, reiterates the important
role of the 15-minute daily programmes created pursuant to General Assembly resolution 54/82 B of 6 December
1999, and requests the Department to continue producing and disseminating the programmes, in accordance with
client needs;
74. Also welcomes the ongoing efforts being made by the Department of Global Communications to
disseminate programmes directly to broadcasting stations all over the world in the six official languages, with the
addition of Portuguese, Kiswahili, Urdu, Bangla and Hindi as well as other languages, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to include in his upcoming report to the Committee on Information detailed information about such
partnerships with broadcasting stations as well as statistics about their multiplying impacts on potential audiences;
75. Requests the Department of Global Communications to continue to build partnerships with local, national
and regional broadcasters to extend the United Nations message to all corners of the world in an accurate and impartial
way, and requests the News and Media Division of the Department to continue to take full advantage of modern
technologies and equipment;
76. Welcomes the completion of an inventory of 73 years of United Nations audiovisual history and,
recognizing the importance of the audiovisual archives of the United Nations, stresses the urgency of digitization in
order to prevent further deterioration of these unique historical archives, encourages the Department of Global
Communications to prioritize the development of collaborative arrangements for the digitization of these archives
while preserving their multilingual character, in a cost-neutral manner, and to report thereon to the Committee on
Information at its forty-second session, and recalls the contribution of Oman138 in this regard;
77. Notes, in this regard, the proposed strategy for the digitization of the United Nations audiovisual archive
materials for long-term preservation, access and sustainable management,149 and requests the Department of Global
Communications to submit for consideration by the relevant bodies both a detailed proposal for the mass digitization
of the audiovisual collections, within existing resources, and plans to solicit voluntary contributions to fund the
digitization and storage of the audiovisual archives;
United Nations website and social media
78. Reaffirms that the United Nations website is an essential tool for Member States and for the general public,
the media, non-governmental organizations and educational institutions, and in this regard reiterates the continued
need for strengthened efforts by the Department of Global Communications to regularly maintain, update and
improve it;
_______________
149

392

A/AC.198/2014/3, annex.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

79. Recognizes the potential of United Nations websites and social media accounts to offer multilingual and
multimedia digital content, integrating written, spoken and visual elements in all of the official languages, and
encourages the Department of Global Communications to work towards such an objective;
80. Also recognizes the efforts made by the Secretariat to implement the basic accessibility requirements for
persons with disabilities to gain access to and take part in the work of the United Nations in person or online, including
through the work of the Accessibility Centre at United Nations Headquarters, calls upon the Department of Global
Communications to continue to work towards compliance with accessibility requirements on all new and updated
pages of the website, with the aim of ensuring its accessibility for persons with different kinds of disabilities, and in
this regard encourages the Department of Global Communications and the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management to further cooperate and identify potential synergies;
81. Reaffirms the need to achieve full parity among the six official languages on all United Nations websites,
and urges the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts to develop, maintain and update multilingual United Nations
websites, including United Nations Web TV, its video content and metadata, and the web page of the SecretaryGeneral in all the official languages of the United Nations, from within existing resources and on an equitable basis;
82. Notes with concern that the multilingual development and enrichment of the United Nations website in
certain official languages has improved at a much slower rate than expected, and in this regard urges the Department
of Global Communications, in coordination with content-providing offices, to advance actions taken to achieve full
parity among the six official languages on the United Nations website;
83. Recalls paragraph 42 of its resolution 73/346, notes with concern the disparity between the English and
the non-English languages on the websites maintained by the Secretariat, urges the Secretary-General to lead the
efforts of all offices and departments of the Secretariat to take concrete action to address such uneven development,
and in this regard calls upon all stakeholders, including the Department of Global Communications, content-providing
offices and departments, in particular the Office of Information and Communications Technology of the Secretariat,
to continue their collaboration, within their respective mandates, so as to achieve full parity among the six official
languages on all United Nations websites developed and maintained by all Secretariat entities, in full conformity with
the principles of multilingualism and in compliance with the relevant resolutions addressing multilingualism and
accessibility for persons with disabilities, by making every effort to translate materials currently available only in
English and by providing offices and departments with technological solutions that comply with the principle of parity,
from within existing resources;
84. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to ensure, while maintaining an up-to-date and accurate
website and social media, the equitable distribution among all official languages of financial and human resources
within the Department of Global Communications allocated to the United Nations website and social media, with full
respect for the needs and the specificities of all six official languages;
85. Welcomes the cooperative arrangements undertaken by the Department of Global Communications with
academic institutions to increase the number of web pages available in official and non-official languages, and
requests the Secretary-General, in coordination with content-providing offices, to extend such cooperative
arrangements, in a cost-effective manner, to all the official languages of the United Nations, bearing in mind the
necessity of adherence to United Nations standards and guidelines;
86. Encourages the continuation of live webcasts of public meetings of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and their respective subsidiary bodies, as well as of the Security Council, with interpretation
services, and requests the Secretariat to make every effort to provide full access to archived videos in all official
languages of all past open formal United Nations meetings with interpretation services, in strict observance of the
principle of full parity of the six official languages of the United Nations, to promote transparency and accountability
within the Organization;
87. Reaffirms the need to enhance the technological infrastructure of the Department of Global
Communications, including the United Nations information centres, on a continuous basis in order to widen the
outreach of the Department and to continue to improve the United Nations website in a cost-neutral manner;
88. Encourages the Department of Global Communications, in collaboration with the Office of Information
and Communications Technology, to continue its efforts to ensure that technological infrastructures and supportive
applications in the United Nations fully support Latin, non-Latin and bidirectional scripts in order to enhance the
equality of all official languages on the United Nations website;
393

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

89. Underlines the importance that, in the implementation of its multilingual social media strategy, the
Department of Global Communications ensures full parity among the official languages of the Organization, and in
that regard stresses the need for United Nations social media campaigns to use hashtags suitable for each language;
90. Recalls that, in paragraph 34 of its resolution 71/328 of 11 September 2017, the General Assembly
welcomed the realization of the comprehensive review of the United Nations websites by the Secretary-General,
presenting the status of content in non-official languages, noted with appreciation the innovative ideas, potential
synergies and other cost-neutral measures proposed in the report of the Secretary-General on multilingualism150 to
reinforce the broader multilingual development and enrichment of the United Nations websites, as appropriate, and
requested the Secretary-General to present an updated version of the review in his next report;
91. Notes the uneven development of social media among the official languages of the United Nations, and
requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its forty-second session on the strategy
of the Department of Global Communications to ensure, by a more balanced use of all six official languages, that
social media contribute to raising awareness of and support for the activities of the Organization, and to include in the
report available analytics, classified by official language, on audiences of social media accounts managed by the
Secretariat;
V
Library services
92. Welcomes the efforts of the Department of Global Communications to implement the recommendations
of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library 2025 Vision working group on improvement of knowledge and electronic library
services;
93. Commends the steps taken by the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and the other Secretariat libraries, members
of the Steering Committee for Libraries of the United Nations, to put forward the New York pledge: United Nations
libraries mobilize to support the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and calls upon United Nations Secretariat
libraries to work with the Dag Hammarskjöld Library on practical cooperation in devising modern library and
knowledge services and electronic platforms, in a cost-neutral manner;
94. Reiterates the need to maintain a multilingual collection of books, periodicals and other materials in both
hard copy and electronic formats, accessible to Member States and others, ensuring that the Dag Hammarskjöld
Library continues to be a broadly accessible resource for information about the United Nations and its activities,
including through a multilingual home page, from within existing resources;
95. Welcomes the initiatives taken by the Dag Hammarskjöld Library, in its capacity as the focal point, to
expand the scope of the regional training and knowledge-sharing workshops organized for the depository libraries in
developing countries to include outreach in their activities;
96. Acknowledges the role of the Dag Hammarskjöld Library in enhancing knowledge-sharing and
networking activities to ensure access to the vast store of United Nations knowledge for delegates, permanent missions
of Member States, the Secretariat, researchers and depository libraries worldwide;
VI
Outreach services
97. Notes the efforts of the United Nations intranet and iSeek team to raise awareness among staff members
of new initiatives and developments in different departments of the Secretariat, and requests the Department of Global
Communications, as a matter of priority and in the spirit of synergies and efficiency, to study ways of integrating the
Member States’ e-deleGATE portal into the iSeek platform for more efficient and effective sharing of information
with Member States, and to report to the Committee on Information on this issue at its forty-second session;
98. Stresses that the central objective of the outreach and knowledge services implemented by the Department
of Global Communications is to promote awareness of the role and work of the United Nations by fostering dialogue
_______________
150

394

A/71/757.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

with global constituencies, such as academia, civil society, educators, students and youth, with the overall emphasis
on multilingualism from the planning stage, in close collaboration with the substantive departments, specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations;
99. Notes with serious concern that many outreach and knowledge services are not yet available in all official
languages, and in this regard urges the Department of Global Communications, as a matter of priority, to mainstream
multilingualism into all outreach and knowledge services, bearing in mind the importance of making use of all the
official languages of the United Nations and ensuring their full and equitable treatment in all the activities of the
Department, with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other official
languages;
100. Encourages the United Nations Academic Impact to take effective steps to facilitate exchanges between
the United Nations and institutions of higher education and academic, research and scientific communities in all
regions to support the common principles and purposes of the United Nations, contribute to the realization of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, foster global citizenship and fill knowledge gaps, while recognizing the role of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and its constitution;
101. Notes the continued growth of the United Nations Academic Impact, calls upon the Department of Global
Communications to promote global awareness of the Academic Impact in order to encourage balanced participation
among Member States and their continued support for the initiative, within existing resources, and encourages
Member States to promote the initiative among their academic institutions, as appropriate, with a view to their joining
it, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 73/102 A and B;
102. Welcomes the educational outreach activities of the Department of Global Communications, and requests
the Department to continue to reach educators and young people worldwide through a range of multilingual
multimedia platforms including, in particular, in the dissemination of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
through the educational system, including elementary schools;
103. Commends the United Nations Academic Impact for its continued engagement with the global community
of scholarship in realizing the objectives of the Organization, requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote
this initiative by encouraging eligible institutions of higher education in all regions, especially from developing
countries, to enrol and contribute actively to the goals of the United Nations, and in this regard notes with appreciation
the cost-neutral partnerships it has successfully initiated thus far with a view to multiplying membership;
104. Emphasizes the importance of the continued implementation by the Department of Global
Communications of the ongoing Reham Al-Farra Memorial Journalists’ Fellowship Programme for broadcasters and
journalists from developing countries and countries with economies in transition, as mandated by the General
Assembly, and requests the Department to consider how best to maximize the benefits derived from the Programme
by extending, inter alia, its duration and the number of its participants;
105. Encourages the Department of Global Communications to make the UN Chronicle available in paperless
editions only, with a view to expanding the service to all six official languages within existing resources, and requests
the Department to report to the Committee on Information at its forty-second session on progress in this matter;
106. Welcomes the movement towards educational outreach and the orientation of the UN Chronicle, and to
this end encourages the UN Chronicle to continue to develop partnerships and collaborative educational activities and
events with civil society organizations and institutions of higher learning;
107. Acknowledges the importance of the Yearbook of the United Nations as an authoritative reference work,
and welcomes the work of the Department of Global Communications in expanding the content and the functions of
the website of the Yearbook;
108. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that, in view of their income-generating
nature, guided tours at United Nations Headquarters are consistently available in all six official languages of the
United Nations as well as in non-official languages;
109. Notes the ongoing efforts of the Department of Global Communications to strengthen its role as a focal
point for two-way interaction with civil society relating to the priorities and concerns of the Organization identified
by Member States, and also notes in this regard the increasing involvement of civil society in United Nations activities,
including the outreach activities directed at youth representatives and young journalists;
395

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

110. Recalls its resolution 41/68 D of 3 December 1986, commends the World Federation of United Nations
Associations and its more than 100 national United Nations associations for the valuable contributions that they have
made during the past 73 years through their global activities in the mobilization of popular support for the United
Nations, and calls for continued collaboration between the World Federation and the Department of Global
Communications in support of their complementary objectives;
111. Commends, in a spirit of cooperation, the United Nations Correspondents Association for its ongoing
activities and for its Dag Hammarskjöld Memorial Scholarship Fund, which sponsors journalists from developing
countries to come to United Nations Headquarters and report on the activities during the sessions of the General
Assembly, and further encourages the international community to continue its financial support for the Fund;
112. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts and contribution of United Nations Messengers of Peace,
Goodwill Ambassadors and other advocates to promote the work of the United Nations and to enhance international
public awareness of its priorities and concerns, and calls upon the Department of Global Communications to continue
to involve them in its global communications and media strategies and outreach activities;
VII
Final remarks
113. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Committee on Information at its forty-second session and
to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the activities of the Department of Global Communications
and on the implementation of all recommendations and requests contained in the present resolution, and requests the
Department of Global Communications to provide a briefing in this regard, before the next session of the Committee
on Information;
114. Notes the initiative taken by the Department of Global Communications, in cooperation with the
Department of Safety and Security and the Protocol and Liaison Service of the Secretariat, during the annual general
debate of the General Assembly, to issue special identification stickers to mission-designated personnel of Member
States to enable them to escort media covering the visits of high-level officials to restricted areas, and strongly urges
the Secretary-General to continue to improve this practice by acceding to the request by Member States to provide
the needed number of additional passes to press and other relevant officers of Member States to allow their access to
all areas that are deemed restricted, in order to effectively and comprehensively report on high-level meetings that
include officials of delegations of Member States;
115. Requests the Committee on Information to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
116. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Questions
relating to information”.
RESOLUTION 74/93
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 176 to 2, with 3 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/414, para. 7)151
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
151

396

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Central African Republic, France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/93.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard
to the implementation of the Declaration, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 73/103 of 7 December 2018, in which it requested the Special Committee to
continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Stressing the importance of the timely transmission by the administering Powers of adequate information under
Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers on the
Territories concerned,
Mindful of the non-fulfilment of the obligation to transmit information on some Non-Self-Governing Territories
in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter,
Recalling its resolution 65/119 of 10 December 2010 on the Third International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, which will end in 2020, and stressing in that regard the need to make real progress towards its full
implementation,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General,152
1. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations,
the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with
respect to that Territory;
2. Requests the administering Powers concerned to respect their obligations under Article 73 e of the Charter
with regard to each Territory on the agenda of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Also requests the administering Powers concerned, in accordance with their Charter obligations, to
transmit or continue to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General for information purposes, subject to such limitation
as security and constitutional considerations may require, statistical and other information of a technical nature relating
to the economic, social and educational conditions in the Territories for which they are respectively responsible, as
well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
including the constitution, legislative act or executive order providing for the government of the Territory and the
constitutional relationship of the Territory to the administering Power, within a maximum period of six months
following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate information is drawn from all available
published sources in connection with the preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories concerned;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures.
_______________
152

A/74/63.

397

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 74/94
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 178 to 2, with 3 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/415, para. 7)153
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Central African Republic, France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/94.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories”,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019
relating to the item,154
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well as all its other relevant resolutions, including,
in particular, resolutions 46/181 of 19 December 1991, 55/146 of 8 December 2000 and 65/119 of 10 December 2010,
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to
promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under their
administration and to protect the human and natural resources of those Territories against abuses,
Reaffirming also that any economic or other activity, including the use of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
for military activity, that has a negative impact on the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
and on the exercise of their right to self-determination in conformity with the Charter, General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and the other relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization is contrary to the purposes and
principles of the Charter,
Reaffirming further that the natural resources are the heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, including the indigenous populations,
Taking into account its resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 regarding the sovereignty of peoples over
their natural wealth and resources in accordance with the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations
on decolonization,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
154
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. VI.
153

398

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location, size and economic conditions of each Territory,
and bearing in mind the need to promote the stability, diversification and strengthening of the economy of each
Territory,
Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the small Territories to hurricanes, natural phenomena or other
extreme weather events and environmental degradation,
Reaffirming its deep concern at the number and scale of hurricanes, natural phenomena or other extreme weather
events and their devastating impact in 2017 in the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the Caribbean Sea, resulting in
the loss of life and negative economic, social and environmental consequences for their vulnerable societies and
hampering the achievement of sustainable development in these Territories, in particular in Anguilla, the British Virgin
Islands, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands, as well as in Puerto Rico, whose situation
is addressed in the Special Committee,
Stressing the importance of inclusiveness within the United Nations development system and with respect to
the implementation of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015,
entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, and resolution 73/231 of
20 December 2018 on disaster risk reduction,
Conscious that foreign economic investment, when undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes, could make a valid contribution to the
socioeconomic development of the Territories and to the exercise of their right to self-determination in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Concerned about any activities aimed at exploiting the natural and human resources of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community,
1. Reaffirms the right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to self-determination in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and with other relevant resolutions
of the United Nations, as well as their right to the enjoyment of their natural resources and their right to dispose of
those resources in their best interest;
2. Affirms the value of foreign economic investment undertaken in collaboration with the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories and in accordance with their wishes in order to make a valid contribution to the
socioeconomic development of the Territories, especially during times of economic and financial crisis;
3. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the Charter to promote the political,
economic, social and educational advancement of the Non‑Self-Governing Territories, and also reaffirms the
legitimate rights of their peoples over their natural resources;
4. Reaffirms its concern about any activities aimed at the exploitation of the natural resources that are the
heritage of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the indigenous populations, in the Caribbean,
the Pacific and other regions, and of their human resources, to the detriment of their interests, and in such a way as to
deprive them of their right to dispose of those resources;
5. Reaffirms the need to avoid any economic or other activities, including the use of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories for military activity, that adversely affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
and in this regard reminds the administering Powers of their responsibility and accountability vis-à-vis any detriment
to the interests of the peoples of those Territories, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the United Nations on
decolonization;
6. Calls once again upon all Governments that have not yet done so to take, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of General Assembly resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, legislative, administrative or other
measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate enterprises
in the Non-Self-Governing Territories that are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, in
order to put an end to such enterprises;
399

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

7. Calls upon the administering Powers to ensure that the exploitation of the marine and other natural
resources in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration is not in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and does not adversely affect the interests of the peoples of those Territories;
8. Invites all Governments and organizations of the United Nations system to take all possible measures to
ensure that the permanent sovereignty of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories over their natural
resources is fully respected and safeguarded in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on
decolonization;
9. Once again urges the administering Powers concerned to take effective measures to safeguard and
guarantee the inalienable right of the peoples of the Non‑Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources and to
establish and maintain control over the future development of those resources, and requests the administering Powers
to take all steps necessary to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
10. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned to ensure that no discriminatory working conditions
prevail in the Territories under their administration and to promote in each Territory a fair system of wages applicable
to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
11. Also calls upon the administering Powers concerned to provide all the necessary assistance to the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories affected by hurricanes, natural phenomena or other extreme weather events in
order to alleviate the humanitarian needs in the affected communities, support the recovery and rebuilding efforts and
enhance capabilities for emergency preparedness and risk reduction;
12. Encourages the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and regional
organizations to continue to provide assistance to the Non-Self-Governing Territories affected by hurricanes, natural
phenomena or other extreme weather events and to formulate appropriate programmes to support emergency response
and recovery and rebuilding efforts, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on this
matter;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through all means at his disposal, to inform world public
opinion of any activity that affects the exercise of the right of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to
self-determination in conformity with the Charter, General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization;
14. Appeals to trade unions and non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals, to continue their
efforts to promote the economic well-being of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and also appeals to
the media to disseminate information about the developments in this regard;
15. Decides to follow the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories so as to ensure that all economic
activities in those Territories are aimed at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the interest of their
peoples, in particular the indigenous populations, and at promoting the economic and financial viability of those
Territories;
16. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this question and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/95
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 130 to 2, with 52 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/416, para. 7)155
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
155

400

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

74/95.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the
United Nations”,
Having also considered the report of the Secretary-General156 and the report of the Economic and Social
Council157 on the item,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019
relating to the item,158
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and the
resolutions of the Special Committee, as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions, including, in particular,
Economic and Social Council resolutions 2017/31 of 25 July 2017 and 2018/18 of 3 July 2018,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the final documents of the successive Conferences of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries and of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community,
Conscious of the need to facilitate the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting that the large majority of the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories are small island Territories,
Welcoming the assistance extended to Non-Self-Governing Territories by certain specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system,
Welcoming also the participation in the capacity of observers of those Non-Self-Governing Territories that are
associate members of regional commissions in the world conferences in the economic and social spheres, subject to
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and in accordance with relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations, including resolutions and decisions of the Assembly and the Special Committee on specific
Territories,
_______________
A/74/80.
E/2019/61.
158
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. VII.
156
157

401

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting that only some specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system have been
involved in providing assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Stressing that, because the development options of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories are limited,
there are special challenges to planning for and implementing sustainable development and that those Territories will
be constrained in meeting those challenges without the continuing cooperation and assistance of the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system,
Stressing also the importance of securing the resources necessary for funding expanded programmes of
assistance for the peoples concerned and the need to enlist the support of all major funding institutions within the
United Nations system in that regard,
Reaffirming the mandates of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to
take all appropriate measures, within their respective responsibilities, to ensure the full implementation of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions,
Expressing its appreciation to the African Union, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Caribbean Community and
other regional organizations for the continued cooperation and assistance that they have extended to the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system in this regard,
Expressing its conviction that closer contacts and consultations between and among the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system and regional organizations help to facilitate the effective
formulation of programmes of assistance to the peoples concerned,
Mindful of the imperative need to keep under continuous review the activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system in the implementation of the various resolutions and decisions of
the United Nations relating to decolonization,
Bearing in mind the extremely fragile economies of the small island Non-Self-Governing Territories and their
vulnerability to natural disasters, such as hurricanes, cyclones and sea level rise, and recalling the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/105 of 7 December 2018 on the implementation of the Declaration by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations,
Welcoming the participation of a representative of the United Nations Population Fund at the Caribbean regional
seminar held in Grand Anse, Grenada, from 2 to 4 May 2019, and encouraging further participation by specialized
agencies and institutions associated with the United Nations in the future regional seminars of the Special Committee,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;156

2. Recommends that all States intensify their efforts through the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system of which they are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV), and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
3. Reaffirms that the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations
system should continue to be guided by the relevant resolutions of the United Nations in their efforts to contribute to
the implementation of the Declaration and all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Also reaffirms that the recognition by the General Assembly, the Security Council and other United
Nations organs of the legitimacy of the aspirations of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to exercise
their right to self-determination entails, as a corollary, the extension of all appropriate assistance to those peoples;
5. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system that have continued to cooperate with the United Nations and the regional and subregional organizations in
the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
and requests all the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to implement the
relevant provisions of those resolutions;
6. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to intensify their
engagement with the work of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
402

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples as an important element for the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), including participation in the regional seminars on
decolonization, upon the invitation of the Special Committee;
7. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and international
and regional organizations to examine and review conditions in each Territory so as to take appropriate measures to
accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of the Territories;
8. Urges those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system that have not yet
provided assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories to do so as soon as possible;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system
and regional organizations to strengthen existing measures of support and formulate appropriate programmes of
assistance for the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, within the framework of their respective mandates, in
order to accelerate progress in the economic and social sectors of those Territories;
10. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system concerned to
provide information on:
(a)

Environmental problems facing the Non-Self-Governing Territories;

(b) The impact of natural disasters, such as hurricanes and volcanic eruptions, and other environmental
problems, such as beach and coastal erosion and droughts, on those Territories;
(c) Ways and means to assist the Territories to fight drug trafficking, money-laundering and other illegal and
criminal activities;
(d) Illegal exploitation of the marine and other natural resources of the Territories and the need to utilize those
resources for the benefit of the peoples of the Territories;
11. Recommends that the executive heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system formulate, with the active cooperation of the regional organizations concerned, concrete proposals for
the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and submit the proposals to their governing
and legislative organs;
12. Also recommends that the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
continue to review at the regular meetings of their governing bodies the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
13. Recalls the adoption by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean of its resolution
574 (XXVII) of 16 May 1998,159 calling for the necessary mechanisms for its associate members, including
Non-Self-Governing Territories, to participate in the special sessions of the General Assembly, subject to the rules of
procedure of the Assembly, to review and assess the implementation of the plans of action of those United Nations
world conferences in which the Territories originally participated in the capacity of observer, and in the work of the
Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies;
14. Requests the Chair of the Special Committee to deepen cooperation with the President of the Economic
and Social Council on the identical agenda items of both bodies on assistance to the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
through regular consultations, in accordance with relevant resolutions on decolonization;
15. Recalls the publication by the Department of Public Information and the Department of Political Affairs
of the Secretariat, in consultation with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and the Special Committee,
of an information leaflet on assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing Territories, which was
updated for the United Nations website on decolonization, and requests its continued updating and wide
dissemination;
16. Welcomes the continuing efforts made by the United Nations Development Programme in maintaining
close liaison among the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, including the
_______________
159

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 21 (E/1998/41), sect. III.G.

403

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific, and in providing assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
17. Encourages the Non-Self-Governing Territories to take steps to establish and/or strengthen disaster
preparedness and management institutions and policies, inter alia, with the assistance of the relevant specialized
agencies;
18. Requests the administering Powers concerned to facilitate, when appropriate, the participation of
appointed and elected representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories in the relevant meetings and conferences of
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with relevant resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations, including resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Special
Committee on specific Territories, so that the Territories may benefit from the related activities of those agencies and
organizations;
19. Recommends that all Governments intensify their efforts through the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system of which they are members to accord priority to the question of providing
assistance to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to assist the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies, with the assistance of those agencies and
organizations, a report on the action taken in implementation of the relevant resolutions, including the present
resolution, since the circulation of his previous report;
21. Commends the Economic and Social Council for its debate and resolution on this question, and requests
it to continue to consider and intensify its cooperation with the Special Committee, with the aim of developing
appropriate measures for the further coordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
22. Requests the specialized agencies to report annually to the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the present resolution;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to the governing bodies of the
appropriate specialized agencies and international institutions associated with the United Nations so that those bodies
may take the measures necessary to implement it, and also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
24. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/96
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/417, para. 7)160

74/96.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/106 of 7 December 2018,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General,161 prepared pursuant to its resolution 845 (IX) of
22 November 1954,
_______________
160
161

404

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Cuba, Iraq, Singapore and Thailand.
A/74/65 and A/74/65/Add.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Conscious of the importance of promoting the educational advancement of the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion of offers of scholarships is essential in order to meet the
increasing need of students from Non-Self-Governing Territories for educational and training assistance, and
considering that students in those Territories should be encouraged to avail themselves of such offers,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;161

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made scholarships available to the inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of those Territories that have not yet attained self‑government or independence and, wherever possible, to
provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective measures to ensure the widespread and continuous
dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training
facilities made by States and to provide all the facilities necessary to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/97
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)162

74/97.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western Sahara,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people concerned and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and other
resolutions of the Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/107 of 7 December 2018,
Recalling also all resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council on the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling further Security Council resolutions 658 (1990) of 27 June 1990, 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991,
1359 (2001) of 29 June 2001, 1429 (2002) of 30 July 2002, 1495 (2003) of 31 July 2003, 1541 (2004) of 29 April
2004, 1570 (2004) of 28 October 2004, 1598 (2005) of 28 April 2005, 1634 (2005) of 28 October 2005, 1675 (2006)
of 28 April 2006 and 1720 (2006) of 31 October 2006,
Underlining the adoption of Security Council resolutions 1754 (2007) on 30 April 2007, 1783 (2007) on
31 October 2007, 1813 (2008) on 30 April 2008, 1871 (2009) on 30 April 2009, 1920 (2010) on 30 April 2010,
_______________
162

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee.

405

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

1979 (2011) on 27 April 2011, 2044 (2012) on 24 April 2012, 2099 (2013) on 25 April 2013, 2152 (2014) on 29 April
2014, 2218 (2015) on 28 April 2015, 2285 (2016) on 29 April 2016, 2351 (2017) on 28 April 2017, 2414 (2018) on
27 April 2018, 2440 (2018) on 31 October 2018 and 2468 (2019) on 30 April 2019,
Expressing its satisfaction that the parties met on 18 and 19 June 2007, on 10 and 11 August 2007, from 7 to
9 January 2008 and from 16 to 18 March 2008 under the auspices of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara and in the presence of the neighbouring countries and that they have agreed to continue the
negotiations,
Also expressing its satisfaction at the holding of nine informal meetings convened by the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General on 9 and 10 August 2009 in Dürnstein, Austria, on 10 and 11 February 2010 in Westchester County,
New York, United States of America, from 7 to 10 November 2010, from 16 to 18 December 2010 and from
21 to 23 January 2011, all on Long Island, New York, from 7 to 9 March 2011 in Mellieha, Malta, from 5 to 7 June 2011
and from 19 to 21 July 2011, both on Long Island, and from 11 to 13 March 2012 in Manhasset, New York, to prepare
for the fifth round of negotiations,
Calling upon all the parties and the States of the region to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General and his
Personal Envoy and with each other,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations towards the people of Western Sahara,
Welcoming, in this regard, the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy in search of a mutually
acceptable political solution to the dispute, which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western
Sahara,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,163
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General,164
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;164

2. Supports the process of negotiations initiated by Security Council resolution 1754 (2007) and further
sustained by Council resolutions 1783 (2007), 1813 (2008), 1871 (2009), 1920 (2010), 1979 (2011), 2044 (2012),
2099 (2013), 2152 (2014), 2218 (2015), 2285 (2016), 2351 (2017), 2414 (2018), 2440 (2018) and 2468 (2019), with
a view to achieving a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide for the selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara, and commends the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and
his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara in this respect;
3. Welcomes the commitment of the parties to continue to show political will and work in an atmosphere
propitious for dialogue, in order to enter into a more intensive phase of negotiations, in good faith and without
preconditions, noting efforts and developments since 2006, thus ensuring the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1754 (2007), 1783 (2007), 1813 (2008), 1871 (2009), 1920 (2010), 1979 (2011), 2044 (2012),
2099 (2013), 2152 (2014), 2218 (2015), 2285 (2016), 2351 (2017), 2414 (2018), 2440 (2018) and 2468 (2019) and
the success of negotiations;
4. Also welcomes the ongoing negotiations between the parties held on 18 and 19 June 2007, on 10 and
11 August 2007, from 7 to 9 January 2008 and from 16 to 18 March 2008 in the presence of the neighbouring countries
and under the auspices of the United Nations;
5. Calls upon the parties to cooperate with the International Committee of the Red Cross, and calls upon
them to abide by their obligations under international humanitarian law;
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
_______________
163
164

406

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. VIII.
A/74/341.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

7. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/98
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)165

74/98.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa and examined the relevant chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,166
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on American Samoa167 and other relevant
information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of American Samoa and in conformity with the clearly
defined principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,168 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including American Samoa,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second169 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of American Samoa require
flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial
size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Acknowledging the outcome of the referendum held on 6 November 2018, in which the proposal to give the
Fono, the Territory’s legislature, the authority to override the Governor’s veto was rejected,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active involvement
that the views of the people of American Samoa in respect of their right to self- and participation of the people of
the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case basis, and determination should be
ascertained,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
166
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
167
A/AC.109/2019/1.
168
Resolution 1514 (XV).
169
A/56/61, annex.
165

407

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of American Samoa and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United States of
America as the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the
representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory,
Aware of the importance both to American Samoa and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected
and appointed representatives of American Samoa in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of American Samoa with their inalienable
right to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case
basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee170 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,171
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Noting the statement made by a representative of the Governor of American Samoa at the 2018 Pacific regional
seminar,172
Noting also the statement made by a representative of the Governor of American Samoa at the 2018 Pacific
regional seminar, in which he expressed his view that the people of American Samoa were happy with the relationship
with the administering Power, which could be described as strong and healthy as well as beneficial to the people and
the Government of the Territory, and that the most important benefit to American Samoa had been the protection of
its indigenous rights to the land as provided for in the Deeds of Cession,
Noting further the statement made by a representative of the Governor of American Samoa at the 2018 Pacific
regional seminar that the political status of American Samoa as an unincorporated and unorganized territory of the
administering Power limited its ability to self-government and exposed it to decisions made by the administering
Power,
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.
172
Available at www.un.org/dppa/decolonization/en/c24/regional-seminars/2018.
170
171

408

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting the statement by the representative that, while certain aspects of the form of government of the Territory
and its relationship with the administering Power were challenging and in need of improvement, the solutions could
be found within the confines of the political and judicial systems of the administering Power and that the territorial
Government was pursuing legal actions to counteract the impact of unfavourable federal actions and sought the
international community’s tacit support,
Noting also the information provided by the representative that the Government of American Samoa intended
to pursue additional funding from the administering Power to maintain and expand the work of the Office of Political
Status, Constitutional Review and Federal Relations,
Aware of the work of the Future Political Status Study Commission, completed in 2006, the release of its report,
with recommendations, in January 2007 and the creation of the American Samoa Constitutional Review Committee,
as well as the holding in June 2010 of the Territory’s fourth Constitutional Convention,
Recalling the decisions of the United States judiciary in which it dismissed a lawsuit seeking a declaratory
judgment that would have asserted that the citizenship clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States extended to American Samoa, and taking note of the decision in which the petition for a writ of certiorari
was denied,173
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Noting the elections held in the Territory to elect 20 members of the American Samoa House of Representatives
and the delegate to the United States House of Representatives, which took place in November 2018,174
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of American Samoa to self-determination, in conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of the decolonization of American Samoa, there is no alternative to the
principle of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human
rights conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of American Samoa to determine freely their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the
Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Takes note of the work of the territorial Government with respect to moving forward on political status,
local autonomy and self-governance issues with a view to making political and economic progress, and recalls the
establishment in April 2016 of the Office of Political Status, Constitutional Review and Federal Relations;
5. Recalls the indication by the territorial Government that American Samoa should remain on the list of
Non-Self-Governing Territories, under the purview of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, until such
time as its people have exercised their right to self-determination;
6. Also recalls the invitation extended in 2015 by the Governor of American Samoa to the Special Committee
to send a visiting mission to the Territory, calls upon the administering Power to facilitate such a mission if the
territorial Government so desires, and requests the Chair of the Special Committee to take all the steps necessary to
that end;
_______________
Decisions of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, issued on 5 June and 2 October 2015, affirming the judgment of
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, and of the Supreme Court of the United States on 13 June 2016.
174
See A/AC.109/2019/1, paras. 7–8.
173

409

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

7. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
8. Stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the people of
American Samoa and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of the existing
political and constitutional arrangements between American Samoa and the administering Power;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in American Samoa, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special
missions to the Territory;
10. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
11. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,175 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
12. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of American Samoa and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/99
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)176

74/99.

Question of Anguilla

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Anguilla and examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,177
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Anguilla178 and other relevant information,
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
177
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
178
A/AC.109/2019/2.
175
176

410

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of Anguilla and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of 15 December
1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,179 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including Anguilla,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second180 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of Anguilla require flexible,
practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial size,
geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active involvement
and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case basis, and
that the views of the people of Anguilla in respect of their right to self-determination should be ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of Anguilla and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate sources,
including the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory,
Aware of the importance both to Anguilla and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected and
appointed representatives of Anguilla in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of Anguilla with their inalienable right to
self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade
for the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic
measures”, held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada
from 2 to 4 May 2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress
_______________
179
180

Resolution 1514 (XV).
A/56/61, annex.

411

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

made and address challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the
Committee and renew its commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee181 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,182
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Recalling that the first regional seminar held in a Non-Self-Governing Territory was the 2003 Caribbean
regional seminar in Anguilla, hosted by the territorial Government with the cooperation of the administering Power,
Noting with serious concern that the Territory last participated in the activities of the Special Committee in 2012,
when concerns were expressed that the people of the Territory were being denied the full range of decolonization
options under a drafting exercise that began in 2011,
Aware of the follow-up meeting, held after the 2012 Pacific regional seminar, between the Chair of the Special
Committee and the Chief Minister of Anguilla, who reiterated the urgent need for a visiting mission,
Noting the decisions taken in 2011 to set up a drafting team to prepare a new constitution and present it for
public consultation in the Territory and the recent efforts undertaken in that regard, including the establishment, in
September 2015, of a new Constitutional and Electoral Reform Committee to advance constitutional and electoral
reform, draft proposals for electoral and constitutional reforms submitted as the draft constitution by the Committee
in November 2016, as well as the revised draft Constitution issued in March 2017 and presented to the Executive
Council in May 2017, and aware of the proposals made by the territorial Government to the administering Power on
amendments to the Constitution of Anguilla,
Noting also the participation of the Territory as a member in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories
Council and an associate member in the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States and the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean,
Expressing its concern at the devastating damage and impact caused in the Territory by Hurricane Irma and
Hurricane Maria in 2017,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Recalling the general elections that were held in April 2015,183
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Anguilla to self-determination, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of Anguilla, there is no alternative to the principle of
self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights
conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of Anguilla to determine freely their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.
183
See A/AC.109/2016/2, para. 3.
181
182

412

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Welcomes the preparations made for a new constitution, and urges that constitutional discussions with the
administering Power, including public consultations, be concluded as soon as possible;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory in its current efforts with regard to advancing the
internal constitutional review exercise, if requested;
6. Stresses the importance of the previously expressed desire of the territorial Government for a visiting
mission by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, calls upon the administering Power to facilitate such a
mission, if the territorial Government so desires, and requests the Chair of the Special Committee to take all the steps
necessary to that end;
7. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
8. Calls upon the administering Power to assist the territorial Government in strengthening its commitments
in the economic domain, including budgetary matters, with regional support as needed and appropriate;
9. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
10. Stresses that the Territory should continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee,
including regional seminars, in order to provide the Committee with up-to-date information regarding the decolonization
process;
11. Also stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the
people of Anguilla and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of the existing
political and constitutional arrangements between Anguilla and the administering Power;
12. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in Anguilla, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special missions to the
Territory;
13. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
14. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,184 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
15. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and
conserve the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized
_______________
184

Resolution 70/1.

413

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

agencies concerned to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the
Territory, consistent with their prevailing rules of procedure;
16. Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and regional organizations to provide all the assistance necessary to the Territory, support the recovery
and rebuilding efforts and enhance capabilities for emergency preparedness and risk reduction, in particular in the
aftermath of Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria that impacted the Territory in 2017;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of Anguilla and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/100
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)185

74/100. Question of Bermuda
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda and examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,186
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Bermuda187 and other relevant information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of Bermuda and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of 15 December
1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,188 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including Bermuda,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second189 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of Bermuda require flexible,
practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial size,
geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
186
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
187
A/AC.109/2019/3.
188
Resolution 1514 (XV).
189
A/56/61, annex.
185

414

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active involvement
and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case basis, and
that the views of the people of Bermuda in respect of their right to self-determination should be ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of Bermuda and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate sources,
including the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory,
Aware of the importance both to Bermuda and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected and
appointed representatives of Bermuda in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of Bermuda with their inalienable right
to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case
basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee190 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,191
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Noting the statement made by the Deputy Premier as a representative of the Government of Bermuda at the
2019 Caribbean regional seminar,
Welcoming the re-engagement of the Territory with the Special Committee,
Recalling the dispatch of the United Nations special mission to Bermuda in 2005, at the request of the territorial
Government and with the concurrence of the administering Power, which provided information to the people of the
Territory on the role of the United Nations in the process of self-determination, on the legitimate political status options
as clearly defined in General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and on the experiences of other small States that have
achieved a full measure of self-government,
_______________
190
191

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.

415

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Stressing the importance of good governance, transparency and accountability in the Territory,
Stressing also the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Recalling the extension by the administering Power to Bermuda of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women192 in March 2017,
Recalling also the general elections that were held in July 2017,193
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Bermuda to self-determination, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of Bermuda, there is no alternative to the principle of
self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights
conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of Bermuda to determine freely their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the
Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Stresses the importance of the 2005 report of the Bermuda Independence Commission, which provides a
thorough examination of the facts surrounding independence, and continues to regret that the plans for public meetings
and the presentation of a Green Paper to the House of Assembly followed by a White Paper outlining the policy
proposals for an independent Bermuda have so far not materialized;
5. Underlines the need further to strengthen good governance, transparency and accountability in
government for the benefit of the Territory;
6. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
7. Welcomes the active participation of Bermuda in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
8. Stresses that the Territory should continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, including regional seminars, in order to provide the Committee with up-to-date information regarding
the decolonization process;
9. Also stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the
people of Bermuda and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of the existing
political and constitutional arrangements between Bermuda and the administering Power;
10. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in Bermuda, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special missions to
the Territory;
11. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to
_______________
192
193

416

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
See A/AC.109/2018/3, para. 4.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

take steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in
the strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
12. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,194 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
13. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of Bermuda and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/101
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)195

74/101. Question of the British Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the British Virgin Islands and examined the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,196
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the British Virgin Islands197 and other relevant
information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of the British Virgin Islands and in conformity with the
clearly defined principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV)
of 15 December 1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,198 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the British Virgin
Islands,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second199 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
196
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
197
A/AC.109/2019/4.
198
Resolution 1514 (XV).
199
A/56/61, annex.
194
195

417

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of the British Virgin Islands require
flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial
size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active involvement
and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case basis, and
that the views of the people of the British Virgin Islands in respect of their right to self-determination should be
ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of the British Virgin Islands and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering Power and to receive information from other
appropriate sources, including the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people
of the Territory,
Aware of the importance both to the British Virgin Islands and to the Special Committee of the participation of
elected and appointed representatives of the British Virgin Islands in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of the British Virgin Islands with their
inalienable right to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on
a case-by-case basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee200 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,201
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
_______________
200
201

418

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Noting the statement made by the Premier, as a representative of the Government of the British Virgin Islands,
at the 2019 Caribbean regional seminar,
Welcoming the re-engagement of the Territory with the Special Committee,
Noting the invitation extended by the Premier of the British Virgin Islands to the Special Committee to send a
visiting mission to the Territory,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Cognizant of the Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
Expressing its concern at the devastating damage and impact caused in the Territory by Hurricane Irma and
Hurricane Maria in 2017,
Noting the general elections that were held in February 2019,202
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the British Virgin Islands to self-determination, in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of the British Virgin Islands, there is no alternative to
the principle of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human
rights conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the British Virgin Islands to determine freely their
future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with
the territorial Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education
programmes for the Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in
conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution
1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Recalls the 2007 Constitution of the British Virgin Islands, and stresses the importance of continued
discussions on constitutional matters, to accord greater responsibility to the territorial Government for the effective
implementation of the Constitution and increased levels of education relating to constitutional matters;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
6. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
7. Stresses that the Territory should continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, including regional seminars, in order to provide the Committee with up-to-date information regarding
the decolonization process;
8. Also stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the
people of the British Virgin Islands and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope
of the existing political and constitutional arrangements between the British Virgin Islands and the administering
Power;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
_______________
202

See A/AC.109/2019/4, para. 3.

419

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in the British Virgin Islands, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special
missions to the Territory;
10. Also calls upon the administering Power to facilitate a visiting mission to the Territory, and requests the
Chair of the Special Committee to take all the steps necessary to that end;
11. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
12. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,203 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
13. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
14. Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and regional organizations to provide all the necessary assistance to the Territory, support the recovery
and rebuilding efforts and enhance capabilities for emergency preparedness and risk reduction, in particular in the
aftermath of Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria that impacted the Territory in 2017;
15. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the British Virgin Islands and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present
resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/102
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)204

74/102. Question of the Cayman Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands and examined the relevant chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,205
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the Cayman Islands206 and other relevant
information,
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
205
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
206
A/AC.109/2019/5.
203
204

420

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of the Cayman Islands and in conformity with the clearly
defined principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,207 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the Cayman
Islands,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second208 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of the Cayman Islands require
flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial
size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active involvement
and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case basis, and
that the views of the people of the Cayman Islands in respect of their right to self-determination should be ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of the Cayman Islands and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate
sources, including the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the
Territory,
Aware of the importance both to the Cayman Islands and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected
and appointed representatives of the Cayman Islands in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of the Cayman Islands with their
inalienable right to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on
a case-by-case basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
_______________
207
208

Resolution 1514 (XV).
A/56/61, annex.

421

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee209 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,210
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Recalling the statement made by the honorary representative of the territorial Government at the 2010 Pacific
regional seminar held in Nouméa,
Noting with serious concern that the Territory last participated in the activities of the Special Committee in 2010,
Aware of the work, in accordance with the 2009 Constitution, of the Constitutional Commission, which serves
as an advisory body on constitutional matters, and aware also that the territorial Government proposed constitutional
changes to the administering Power,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Cognizant of the Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
Recalling the general election that was held in May 2017,211
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the Cayman Islands to self-determination, in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of the Cayman Islands, there is no alternative to the
principle of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human
rights conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the Cayman Islands to determine freely their future
political status, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the
Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Recalls the 2009 Constitution of the Cayman Islands, and stresses the importance of the work of the
Constitutional Commission, including its work on human rights education;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
6. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.
211
See A/AC.109/2018/5, para. 3.
209
210

422

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

7. Stresses that the Territory should continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, including regional seminars, in order to provide the Committee with up-to-date information regarding
the decolonization process;
8. Also stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the
people of the Cayman Islands and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of
the existing political and constitutional arrangements between the Cayman Islands and the administering Power;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in the Cayman Islands, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special
missions to the Territory;
10. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
11. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,212 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
12. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Cayman Islands and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/103
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)213

74/103. Question of French Polynesia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of French Polynesia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019
relating to French Polynesia,214
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
214
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. IX.
212
213

423

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on French Polynesia215 and other relevant
information,
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in
accordance with all relevant resolutions, including General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
Recalling its resolution 67/265 of 17 May 2013, entitled “Self-determination of French Polynesia”, in which it
affirmed the inalienable right of the people of French Polynesia to self-determination and independence in accordance
with Chapter XI of the Charter and its resolution 1514 (XV), recognized that French Polynesia remains a Non-SelfGoverning Territory within the meaning of the Charter and declared that an obligation exists under Article 73 e of the
Charter on the part of the Government of France, as the administering Power of the Territory, to transmit information
on French Polynesia,
Taking note of the section related to French Polynesia of the Final Document of the Eighteenth Midterm
Ministerial Meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Baku from 3 to 6 April 2018,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,216 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including French Polynesia,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territories are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned, on a case-by-case basis and in conformity with
the clearly defined principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV), 1541 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions of the Assembly,
Recognizing also that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of French Polynesia require
flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial
size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Reaffirming the inalienable rights of the people of French Polynesia to the ownership, control and disposal of
their natural resources, including marine resources and undersea minerals,
Conscious of the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the
Declaration in respect of French Polynesia,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the peoples
of the Territories and to fulfil its mandate effectively, on a case-by-case basis, it is important for it to be apprised by
the administering Powers and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the representatives of
the Territories, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territories,
Recognizing the significant health and environmental impacts of nuclear testing conducted by the administering
Power in the Territory over a 30-year period, and recognizing also the concerns in the Territory related to the
consequences of those activities for the lives and health of the people, especially children and vulnerable groups, as
well as the environment of the region, and bearing in mind General Assembly resolution 73/261 of 22 December
2018, entitled “Effects of atomic radiation”,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General on the environmental, ecological, health and other impacts of the
30-year period of nuclear testing in French Polynesia,217 prepared pursuant to paragraph 7 of General Assembly
resolution 71/120 of 6 December 2016,
Noting that, in February 2017, the administering Power amended the Act concerning the recognition and
compensating of victims of nuclear tests218 in order to allow for the compensation of a larger number of victims,
_______________
A/AC.109/2019/7.
Resolution 1514 (XV).
217
A/72/74.
218
Act No. 2010–2 of 5 January 2010 concerning the recognition and compensating of victims of nuclear tests.
215
216

424

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the peoples of the Territories in gaining a better
understanding of the options for self-determination,
Recalling the admission of French Polynesia as a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum at the forty-seventh
Pacific Islands Forum, convened in Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, from 8 to 10 September 2016,
Taking note of the statement made by the President of French Polynesia in the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), at the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, in October 2018,
Taking note also of the participation of a representative of the Government of the Territory in the regional
seminar, which in 2019 was held in Grand Anse, Grenada, from 2 to 4 May,
Noting the invitation extended by the President of French Polynesia to the Special Committee to send a visiting
mission to the Territory, as reiterated by his representative at the 2019 session of the Special Committee,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Noting the legislative elections that were held in April and May 2018,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of French Polynesia to self-determination, in conformity with
the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of French Polynesia to determine freely their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the
Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of French Polynesia of their right to self-determination in
conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution
1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions;
3. Recalls the statement made by a representative of the Government of the Territory at the 2019 Caribbean
regional seminar reaffirming its previous calls to delist French Polynesia from the list of Non-Self-Governing
Territories, and takes note of resolution No. 2013-3, adopted by the Assembly of French Polynesia on 30 May 2013,
which repealed the resolution of the Assembly adopted in 2011 requesting the reinscription of French Polynesia on
that list;
4. Reaffirms, in this regard, General Assembly resolution 67/265, which provided for the reinscription of
French Polynesia on the list of Non-Self-Governing Territories, and takes careful note of an independent
self-governance assessment of the Territory, presented to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) on 4 October 2016,219 that the Territory did not meet the full measure of self-government;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration
and in order to advise the Special Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter
on efforts to promote self-government in French Polynesia, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate
visiting and special missions to the Territory;
6. Also calls upon the administering Power to facilitate a visiting mission to the Territory, and requests the
Chair of the Special Committee to take all the steps necessary to that end;
7. Regrets that the administering Power has not responded to the request to submit information on French
Polynesia under Article 73 e of the Charter since the reinscription of the Territory by the General Assembly in 2013;
8. Reaffirms that an obligation exists on the part of the administering Power to transmit information under
Chapter XI of the Charter, and requests the administering Power to transmit to the Secretary-General such information
on French Polynesia as called for under the Charter;
_______________
219

See A/C.4/71/SR.3, paras. 71–72.

425

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

9. Urges the administering Power to ensure the permanent sovereignty of the people of French Polynesia
over their natural resources, including marine resources and undersea minerals, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
10. Takes note of the efforts made by the administering Power concerning the recognition and compensation
of victims of nuclear tests, and in that regard encourages the administering Power to take steps to this effect;
11. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide continuous updates on the environmental,
ecological, health and other impacts of the 30-year period of nuclear testing in French Polynesia, in follow-up to the
report of the Secretary-General on the matter,217 prepared pursuant to paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution
71/120;
12. Calls upon the administering Power to intensify its dialogue with French Polynesia in order to facilitate
rapid progress towards a fair and effective self-determination process, under which the terms and timelines for an act
of self-determination would be agreed;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Non-Self-Governing Territory
of French Polynesia and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/104
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)220

74/104. Question of Guam
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam and examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,221
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Guam,222 which contained the information
requested by the General Assembly in resolution 72/102 of 7 December 2017, and other relevant information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of Guam and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of 15 December
1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,223 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including Guam,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second224 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of Guam require flexible, practical
and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial size, geographical
location, size of population or natural resources,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
221
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
222
A/AC.109/2019/9.
223
Resolution 1514 (XV).
224
A/56/61, annex.
220

426

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active
involvement and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case
basis, and that the views of the people of Guam in respect of their right to self-determination should be ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of Guam and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United States of America as
the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including the representatives of
the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory,
Aware of the importance both to Guam and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected and
appointed representatives of Guam in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of Guam with their inalienable right to
self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case
basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee225 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,226
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
_______________
225
226

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.

427

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting with concern that a plebiscite on self-determination has been brought to a halt, which followed the
ruling227 of a federal court in the United States, the administering Power, holding that the plebiscite could not be
limited to native inhabitants, and noting also that there is an ongoing appeals process,
Noting, in this regard, the statement made by a representative of the Governor of Guam at the 2019 Caribbean
regional seminar concerning the implications of the judicial case in the light of the nature and essence of the Charter
of the United Nations and resolution 1514 (XV),
Cognizant of the efforts made by the Guam Commission on Decolonization for the Implementation and
Exercise of CHamoru Self-Determination to promote in the Territory the holding of a plebiscite on self-determination
and to advance its education campaign on each of the three political status options, and recalling that more than 11,000
native inhabitants have been registered in the Guam decolonization registry to vote in the plebiscite,
Recalling that the administering Power approved a grant to support the self-determination education campaign
in the Territory in March 2016,
Recalling also that, in a referendum held in 1987, the registered and eligible voters of Guam endorsed a draft
Guam Commonwealth Act that would establish a new framework for relations between the Territory and the
administering Power, providing for a greater measure of internal self-government for Guam and recognition of the
right of the CHamoru people of Guam to self-determination for the Territory,
Aware that negotiations between the administering Power and the territorial Government on the draft Guam
Commonwealth Act ended in 1997 and that Guam has subsequently established a non-binding plebiscite process for
a self-determination vote by the eligible CHamoru voters,
Cognizant of the importance of the administering Power implementing its programme of transferring surplus
federal land to the Government of Guam,
Noting a call for reform in the programme of the administering Power with respect to the thorough,
unconditional and expeditious transfer of land property to the people of Guam,
Aware that the federal lawsuit by the administering Power over the CHamoru Land Trust programme was filed
in September 2017, and noting the ruling228 issued on 21 December 2018,
Noting the expressed desire of the territorial Government for a visiting mission by the Special Committee, as
extended during the 2019 session of the Special Committee,
Aware of the existing concerns of the Territory regarding the potential social, cultural, economic and
environmental impacts of the planned transfer of additional military personnel of the administering Power to the
Territory,
Recalling the concerns expressed by the Territory on this subject before the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) at the seventy-second session of the General Assembly,
Recalling also the statement made by the Speaker of the thirty-third Guam legislature before the Fourth
Committee at the seventieth session of the General Assembly that the most acute threat to the legitimate exercise of
the decolonization of Guam was the incessant militarization of the island by its administering Power, and noting the
concern expressed regarding the effect of the escalating military activities and installations of the administering Power
on Guam,
Recalling further its resolution 57/140 of 11 December 2002, in which it reiterated that military activities and
arrangements by administering Powers in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration should not
run counter to the rights and interests of the peoples of the Territories concerned, especially their right to selfdetermination, including independence, and called upon the administering Powers concerned to terminate such
activities and to eliminate the remaining military bases in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly,
_______________
227
228

428

District Court of Guam, Davis v. Guam et al., decision of 8 March 2017.
District Court of Guam, United States v. Guam et al., decision of 21 December 2018.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling its resolution 35/118 of 11 December 1980 and the territorial Government’s concern that immigration
into Guam has resulted in the indigenous CHamorus becoming a minority in their homeland,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Noting the elections in the Territory that were held in November 2018,229
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Guam to self-determination, in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of Guam, there is no alternative to the principle of
self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights
conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of Guam to determine freely their future political status
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government
and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the Territory in
order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the legitimate
political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions and decisions;
4. Welcomes the ongoing work of the Guam Commission on Decolonization for the Implementation and
Exercise of CHamoru Self-Determination on a self-determination vote, as well as its public education efforts;
5. Stresses that the decolonization process in Guam should be compatible with the Charter, the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;230
6. Calls once again upon the administering Power to take into consideration the expressed will of the
CHamoru people as supported by Guam voters in the referendum of 1987 and as subsequently provided for in Guam
law regarding CHamoru self-determination efforts, encourages the administering Power and the territorial
Government to enter into negotiations on the matter, and stresses the need for continued close monitoring of the overall
situation in the Territory;
7. Requests the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to transfer
land to the original landowners of the Territory, to continue to recognize and to respect the political rights and the
cultural and ethnic identity of the CHamoru people of Guam and to take all measures necessary to address the concerns
of the territorial Government with regard to the question of immigration;
8. Also requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, in that regard calls upon the relevant United
Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested, and welcomes the recent outreach work by
the territorial Government;
9. Further requests the administering Power to cooperate in establishing programmes for the sustainable
development of the economic activities and enterprises of the Territory, noting the special role of the CHamoru people
in the development of Guam;
10. Stresses the importance of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples being apprised of the views and
wishes of the people of Guam and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of
the existing political and constitutional arrangements between Guam and the administering Power;
11. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
_______________
229
230

See A/AC.109/2019/9, paras. 2–4.
Resolution 217 A (III).

429

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in Guam, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special missions to the
Territory;
12. Also calls upon the administering Power to facilitate a visiting mission to the Territory, and requests the
Chair of the Special Committee to take all the steps necessary to that end;
13. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
14. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,231 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
15. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation and the impact of militarization on the environment, and
once again requests the specialized agencies concerned to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to
provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their prevailing rules of procedure;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the environmental impact of the military activities
of the administering Power in the Territory, as relevant information becomes available;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of Guam and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/105
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)232

74/105. Question of Montserrat
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Montserrat and examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,233
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Montserrat234 and other relevant information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of Montserrat and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of 15 December
1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
233
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
234
A/AC.109/2019/10.
231
232

430

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,235 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including Montserrat,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second236 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of Montserrat require flexible,
practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial size,
geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active
involvement and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case
basis, and that the views of the people of Montserrat in respect of their right to self-determination should be
ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of Montserrat and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate sources,
including the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory,
Aware of the importance both to Montserrat and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected and
appointed representatives of Montserrat in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of Montserrat with their inalienable right
to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case
basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee237 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
_______________
Resolution 1514 (XV).
A/56/61, annex.
237
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
235
236

431

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,238
Noting the statements made by the Premier of Montserrat before the Special Committee in June 2018 and at the
2018 Pacific regional seminar, in which he expressed the view that the previous request made for the removal of
Montserrat from the agenda of the Special Committee should be reversed,
Noting also the information provided by the Premier that Montserrat could not achieve its development goals if
its economic dependency continued, compounded by ongoing financial challenges, and that securing funding for
rebuilding key infrastructure lost and helping evacuees from the 1995 volcanic crisis required an intervention from
the Special Committee as a neutral partner,
Noting further the request made by the Premier for a visiting mission of the Special Committee to the Territory,
which could also include meetings with evacuees in Antigua and Barbuda, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America,
Welcoming the consultations conducted between the Chair of the Special Committee and the United Kingdom
to that end and also the cooperation of the United Kingdom in facilitating the dispatching of a visiting mission to
Montserrat,
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Noting with concern the continuing consequences of the 1995 volcanic eruption, which led to the evacuation of
three quarters of the population of the Territory to safe areas of the island and to areas outside the Territory and which
continues to have enduring consequences for the economy of the island,
Acknowledging the continuing assistance provided to the Territory by States members of the Caribbean
Community, in particular Antigua and Barbuda, which has offered safe refuge and access to educational and health
facilities, as well as employment for thousands who have left the Territory,
Noting the continuing efforts of the administering Power and the territorial Government to deal with the
consequences of the volcanic eruption,
Recalling the importance of improving the infrastructure and accessibility of Montserrat, as conveyed by the
Premier of Montserrat to the Chair of the Special Committee in their meeting on 11 May 2015,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Cognizant of the Territory’s membership in the Caribbean Overseas Countries and Territories Council,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Montserrat to self-determination, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of Montserrat, there is no alternative to the principle
of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights
conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of Montserrat to determine freely their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the
_______________
238

432

See resolution 65/119.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Recalls the 2010 Constitution of Montserrat and the work of the territorial Government with respect to
moving forward to consolidate the gains provided for in the Constitution;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
6. Welcomes the Territory’s participation in the work of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States and the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean;
7. Encourages the Territory to continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, including regional seminars;
8. Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as regional and other organizations, to continue to provide assistance to the Territory in
alleviating the consequences of the volcanic eruption;
9. Stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the people of
Montserrat and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of the existing political
and constitutional arrangements between Montserrat and the administering Power;
10. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in Montserrat, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special missions to
the Territory;
11. Stresses the importance of the invitation extended by the territorial Government for a visiting mission by
the Special Committee, calls upon the administering Power to facilitate such a mission, and requests the Chair of the
Special Committee, in collaboration with members of the Bureau, to continue consultations with the United Kingdom
with a view to dispatching such a mission to Montserrat;
12. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
13. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,239 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
14. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
_______________
239

Resolution 70/1.

433

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

15. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of Montserrat and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/106
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)240

74/106. Question of New Caledonia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019
relating to New Caledonia,241
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960, and stressing
principle VI of the annex to resolution 1541 (XV),
Recalling also the provisions of the Nouméa Accord,242 which, inter alia, underscores the importance of the
transfer of powers and skills in a timely manner from the administering Power to the people of New Caledonia,
Reaffirming that the natural resources are the heritage of the peoples of the Non‑Self-Governing Territories,
including the indigenous populations,
Concerned about any activities aimed at exploiting the natural and human resources of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New Caledonia by the French authorities, in
cooperation with all sectors of the population, to promote equitable political, economic and social development in the
Territory, including measures in the area of environmental protection, in order to provide a framework for its peaceful
progress to self-determination,
Recalling the decision taken by the Committee of Signatories to the Nouméa Accord in March 2018, in which
4 November 2018 was set as the date for a self-determination referendum in New Caledonia and the question to be
asked was defined as “Do you want New Caledonia to accede to full sovereignty and become independent?”,
Welcoming with appreciation the peaceful conduct of a self-determination referendum in New Caledonia on
4 November 2018, in accordance with the Nouméa Accord,
Recalling the report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples on the situation of Kanak
people in New Caledonia, submitted to the Human Rights Council at its eighteenth session, held from 12 to
30 September and on 21 October 2011,243 following his visit to the Territory in February 2011, and stressing the
importance of addressing concerns related to the human rights of indigenous Kanak people, including in eliminating
the existing inequalities between the three provinces of the Territory,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia and neighbouring countries of
the South Pacific region, including through the hosting of New Caledonian delegates in the French diplomatic and
consular missions in the region,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
241
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. IX.
242
A/AC.109/2114, annex.
243
A/HRC/18/35/Add.6, annex.
240

434

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recalling the conclusions of the nineteenth Melanesian Spearhead Group Leaders Summit, under the historic
inaugural chairmanship of the Front de libération nationale kanak et socialiste, held in Nouméa from 19 to 21 June
2013, including the Leaders Declaration of the Group reaffirming the strong commitment and support, including
technical assistance, for the self-determination of New Caledonia, in accordance with the Charter and the Nouméa
Accord,
Recalling also the admission of New Caledonia as a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum at the fortyseventh Pacific Islands Forum, convened in Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, from 8 to 10 September 2016,
Recalling further the exchange of letters between the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the
Melanesian Spearhead Group secretariat on the sharing of information on New Caledonia,
Mindful that New Caledonia has entered the most seminal phase of the Nouméa Accord process, a period that
requires continued close monitoring by the United Nations of the situation in the Territory in order to help the people
of New Caledonia to exercise their right to self-determination in accordance with the objectives set out in the Charter
and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,244
Recalling the Charter of the Kanak people, common base of the fundamental values and principles of the Kanak
civilization, which was proclaimed in April 2014 by the customary authorities, Great Chiefs, Chiefs, Presidents of
District Councils and Presidents of the Clan Chiefs Councils, as the sole traditional custodians of the Kanak people
of New Caledonia, and noting the concern of the Customary Senate that their interests should be adequately heard by
the administering Power and territorial Government on matters of importance to the indigenous people of New
Caledonia,
Welcoming with appreciation the dispatch of two United Nations visiting missions to New Caledonia in 2014
and 2018, which included visits to Paris, as well as the release of the respective reports of the visiting missions of the
Special Committee,245
Noting with gratitude the strengthened cooperation of the administering Power with regard to the work of the
Special Committee relating to New Caledonia, including its facilitation of the 2014 and 2018 visiting missions, as
well as the conduct of a self-determination referendum in New Caledonia on 4 November 2018, in accordance with
the Nouméa Accord,
Acknowledging the successful conduct by New Caledonia of provincial elections on 12 May 2019,
Recalling the information presented to the Pacific and the Caribbean regional seminars on the implementation
of the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, held in Nadi, Fiji, from 21 to 23 May 2014, and
in Managua, from 19 to 21 May 2015, on the situation in the Territory, including on the issues related to the 2014
elections,
Recalling also the recommendations adopted by the Pacific regional seminar, held in Managua from 31 May to
2 June 2016, which are annexed to the report of the Special Committee for 2016,246
Taking note of the information provided by the administering Power at the Caribbean regional seminars held in
Grand Anse, Grenada, from 2 to 4 May 2019, and in Kingstown from 16 to 18 May 2017, as well as by New
Caledonian parties at the latter seminar on developments in the Territory, including on the referendum on
self-determination, which was held in 2018, and the recommendations adopted by the seminar in 2017, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee for 2017,247
Aware of the challenges encountered in the 2014 provincial electoral process, particularly with regard to the
work of the special administrative commissions in updating the special electoral roll, the non-existence of the
supplementary electoral roll from 1998 and the unavailability of the 1998 general electoral roll prior to 2014, and their
_______________
Resolution 1514 (XV).
A/AC.109/2014/20/Rev.1 and A/AC.109/2018/20.
246
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/71/23).
247
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/72/23).
244
245

435

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

potential impact on the referendum on self-determination, and taking note of the positive progress made since 2014
on the electoral process for the self-determination referendum,
Welcoming the invitation from the administering Power to the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department
of Political Affairs of the Secretariat to dispatch an electoral expert mission to New Caledonia in May 2016 to observe
the work of the special administrative commissions and the advisory committee of experts for the establishment and
revision of the special electoral list, including, in particular, for the self-determination referendum in New Caledonia
in 2018, consistent with the Nouméa Accord,
Welcoming also the transmission by the administering Power to the Special Committee of the final report of the
electoral expert mission to New Caledonia conducted in 2016, as well as of the list of measures implemented by the
administering Power to follow up on the recommendations of the mission,
Acknowledging with appreciation the meeting of the Committee of Signatories to the Nouméa Accord held in
Paris on 27 March 2018, and the decision of the Committee to hold the self-determination referendum for New
Caledonia on 4 November 2018,
Welcoming the self-determination referendum question “Do you want New Caledonia to accede to full
sovereignty and become independent?”, formulated and adopted by the Committee of Signatories in Paris in
March 2018,
Noting the concerns of the people of New Caledonia regarding the importance of and need for clarity through
an educational campaign by the administering Power concerning the potential referendum outcomes,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of the Territory in gaining a better
understanding of the options for self-determination,
1. Reaffirms its approval of the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019
relating to New Caledonia;241
2. Reiterates its endorsement of the reports, observations, conclusions and recommendations of the United
Nations visiting missions to New Caledonia conducted in 2014 and 2018;245
3. Expresses its appreciation to the administering Power and the Government of New Caledonia for the close
cooperation and assistance extended to the visiting missions;
4. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of New Caledonia to determine freely and fairly their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples244 and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government and
appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the Territory in order
to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the legitimate political
status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions
and decisions;
5. Notes the continuing concerns expressed regarding the challenges encountered in the provincial elections
process with respect to the persistent varying interpretations of the restricted electorate provisions and the voter
registration appeal process, and encourages efforts by the administering Power and the people of New Caledonia to
address in an amicable and peaceful manner the concerns of all stakeholders under the existing relevant laws in the
Territory and in France, while also respecting and upholding the spirit and letter of the Nouméa Accord;242
6. Welcomes the peaceful conduct of a self-determination referendum on 4 November 2018, in accordance
with the Nouméa Accord, and takes note of its outcome, reflecting 56.67 per cent against full sovereignty and
independence and 43.33 per cent in favour, and the provisions of the Nouméa Accord with regard to additional
referendums on self-determination;
7. Expresses the view that adequate measures for conducting the upcoming consultations on access to
full sovereignty, including a just, fair, credible and transparent electoral roll, as provided in the Nouméa Accord,
436

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

are essential for the conduct of a free, fair and genuine act of self-determination consistent with the Charter and
United Nations principles and practices;
8. Welcomes, in that respect, the continuous high-level political dialogue and commitment in good faith
undertaken by the parties in the framework of the Committee of Signatories to the Nouméa Accord to establish the
parameters for the conduct of a conclusive act of self-determination, including the setting of an electoral roll, as
provided in the Accord;
9. Recalls the outcome of the twelfth meeting of the Committee of Signatories, held on 3 October 2014,
which, inter alia, stressed the commitment of the administering Power to enable the people of New Caledonia to
decide their future status in a fair, credible, democratic and transparent self-determination process consistent with the
Nouméa Accord;
10. Notes with interest the convening of the extraordinary meetings of the Committee of Signatories held in
Paris on 5 June 2015 and subsequently on 2 November 2017 and 27 March 2018, regarding the New Caledonia
self-determination process, including, in particular, the electoral roll for the referendum and related issues;
11. Calls upon France, the administering Power, in the light of the observations, conclusions and
recommendations of the visiting missions, to consider further strengthening the education programme to inform the
people of New Caledonia about the nature of self-determination so that they may be better prepared to face a future
decision on the matter, and requests the Special Committee to provide all available assistance in that regard;
12. Commends the observations, conclusions and recommendations of the visiting missions to the
Government of France, as the administering Power, and the Government of New Caledonia for appropriate action;
13. Notes with appreciation the facilitation by the administering Power of visiting missions to the Territory
before the 2018 self-determination referendum, and encourages continued cooperation with the Special Committee
with regard to additional referendums;
14. Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of the people of New Caledonia and within the framework
of the Nouméa Accord, to maintain their dialogue in a spirit of harmony and mutual respect in order to continue to
promote a framework for the peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all
options are open and which would safeguard the rights of all sectors of the population, based on the principle that it is
for the people of New Caledonia to choose how to determine their destiny;
15. Reaffirms its resolutions 68/87 of 11 December 2013 and 69/97 of 5 December 2014, in which the General
Assembly, inter alia, reaffirmed that in the absence of a decision by the Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that
Territory;
16. Welcomes the actions taken by the administering Power to continue to transmit to the Secretary-General
information as required under Article 73 e of the Charter, particularly the submission on 11 December 2018 on the
most recent developments in New Caledonia;
17. Notes the continuing concerns expressed by the Kanak people regarding their underrepresentation in
governmental and social structures, incessant migratory flows and the impact of mining on the environment, and the
importance of addressing them in a timely manner;
18. Urges the administering Power to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable right
of the people of New Caledonia to their natural resources and to establish and maintain control over the future
development of those resources, and requests the administering Power to take all steps necessary to protect the
property rights of the people of New Caledonia;
19. Commends the “Cadres for the future” programme, and encourages further enhancement of the training
and capacity-building of high-level executives in the public and private sectors in the Territory, particularly in view of
the ongoing transfer of powers from the Government of France to New Caledonia, while ensuring that the transfer of
powers is undertaken in a manner consistent with the Nouméa Accord;
20. Recalls the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Human Rights Council on the rights of indigenous peoples on the situation of Kanak people in New Caledonia,243
437

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

made in the light of relevant international standards, to assist with ongoing efforts to advance the rights of the Kanak
people in the context of the implementation of the Nouméa Accord and the United Nations-supported decolonization
process;
21. Requests the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to provide economic, social and other assistance to New Caledonia and to continue to do so, as appropriate,
after it exercises its right to self-determination;
22. Welcomes the strengthening of the economic and social rebalancing initiatives undertaken by the
administering Power, and urges its continuation in all areas and communities of the Territory, especially for the
well-being of the Kanak indigenous people;
23. Stresses the importance of ensuring the timely transfer of competencies from the administering Power to
New Caledonia, provided under the Nouméa Accord;
24. Encourages the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of New Caledonia, to
ensure and enhance safeguards for and guarantees of the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to own, access,
use and manage their natural resources, including proprietary rights for their future development;
25. Recalls the provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the effect that New Caledonia may become a member or
associate member of certain international organizations, and notes the continuing strengthening of ties between New
Caledonia and both the European Union and the European Development Fund;
26. Also recalls the accession of the Front de libération nationale kanak et socialiste to the Chair of the
Melanesian Spearhead Group, the hosting, for the first time in New Caledonia, in June 2013, of the meetings of
officials and leaders of the Group, the successful completion of the chairmanship of the Group by the Front de
libération nationale kanak et socialiste, in June 2015, and the opening, in February 2013, of the Front de libération
nationale kanak et socialiste unit at the headquarters of the Group secretariat in Port Vila;
27. Acknowledges the contribution of the Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre to the protection of the
indigenous Kanak culture of New Caledonia;
28. Welcomes the cooperative attitude of other States and Territories in the region towards New Caledonia, its
economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international affairs;
29. Takes note of the information shared by participants from New Caledonia at the Pacific and the Caribbean
regional seminars on the implementation of the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism held
since May 2014, including on measured progress made in the social, economic, political and environmental spheres
and more focused efforts, particularly on the rebalancing initiatives and electoral roll concerns, necessary for the
long-term shared mutual benefit of all New Caledonians, and urges the administering Power and the Government of
New Caledonia to devote appropriate attention to addressing these issues;
30. Acknowledges the peaceful conduct of provincial elections in New Caledonia on 12 May 2019, the
preceding municipal elections and the subsequent efforts to form a new Government of New Caledonia, and
encourages constructive engagement by all stakeholders in further developing New Caledonia for all, including by
respecting and upholding the Nouméa Accord;
31. Recalls the decision of the administering Power to invite the Electoral Assistance Division of the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs of the Secretariat to conduct a mission in order to observe the work
of the special administrative commissions and the advisory committee of experts for the establishment and revision
of the special electoral list, and looks forward to examining its recommendations, and further encourages the
administering Power to facilitate the work undertaken in this regard;
32. Stresses the importance of the agreement between the signatories to the Nouméa Accord that the progress
made in the emancipation process shall be brought to the attention of the United Nations;
33. Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New Caledonia as a result of the signing
of the Nouméa Accord;
34. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of the question of the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of New Caledonia and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
438

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 74/107
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)248

74/107. Question of Pitcairn
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Pitcairn and examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,249
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Pitcairn250 and other relevant information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of Pitcairn and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of 15 December
1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,251 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including Pitcairn,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second252 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of Pitcairn require flexible,
practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial size,
geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active
involvement and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case
basis, and that the views of the people of Pitcairn in respect of their right to self-determination should be ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of Pitcairn and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate sources,
including the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
249
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
250
A/AC.109/2019/12.
251
Resolution 1514 (XV).
252
A/56/61, annex.
248

439

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Aware of the importance both to Pitcairn and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected and
appointed representatives of Pitcairn in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of Pitcairn with their inalienable right to
self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee253 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,254
Noting with serious concern that the Territory last participated in the activities of the Special Committee in 2004,
Taking into account the unique character of Pitcairn in terms of population, area and access,
Aware that the administering Power and the territorial Government have implemented a governance structure
to strengthen administrative capacity in the Territory, based on consultations with the people of the Territory,
Recalling that the administering Power and the territorial Government developed and reviewed a five-year
strategic development plan, covering the period from 2014 to 2018, that set out the views and aspirations of the people
of the Territory for the socioeconomic development of the Territory,
Aware of the assessment made in 2013 that the population of the Territory needs to be boosted if the Territory is
to have a sustainable future and of the approval by the Pitcairn Island Council of an immigration policy and a
repopulation plan, covering the period from 2014 to 2019, designed to promote immigration and repopulation and
bring people with the necessary skills and commitment to Pitcairn,
Noting with concern the findings contained in the final report on the survey commissioned by the Pitcairn Island
Council to ascertain whether members of the diaspora had any interest in returning to the Territory and the factors
conditioning a decision,255
Recalling that a marine protected area was established around Pitcairn in September 2016,256
Welcoming the measures taken by the administering Power to improve accessibility to the Territory with the
introduction of enhanced transport and shipping services,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Noting the elections for the Island Council and Deputy Mayor that were held in November 2017,257
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.
255
See A/AC.109/2015/5, para. 14.
256
See A/AC.109/2017/12, para. 40.
257
See A/AC.109/2018/12, “The Territory at a glance”.
253
254

440

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Pitcairn to self-determination, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of Pitcairn, there is no alternative to the principle of
self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights
conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of Pitcairn to determine freely their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the
Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Welcomes all efforts by the administering Power and the territorial Government that would further devolve
operational responsibilities to the Territory, with a view to gradually expanding self-government, including through
the training of local personnel;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
6. Also requests the administering Power to continue its assistance for the improvement of the economic,
social, educational and other conditions of the population of the Territory and to continue its discussions with the
territorial Government on how best to support socioeconomic and environmental security in Pitcairn, including as
regards demographic matters;
7. Stresses that the Territory should continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, including regional seminars, in order to provide the Committee with up-to-date information regarding
the decolonization process;
8.
island;

Welcomes the work carried out on the preparation of the five-year strategic development plan for the

9. Stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the people of
Pitcairn and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of the existing political
and constitutional arrangements between Pitcairn and the administering Power;
10. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in Pitcairn, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special missions to the
Territory;
11. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
12. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,258 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
_______________
258

Resolution 70/1.

441

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
13. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of Pitcairn and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/108
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)259

74/108. Question of Saint Helena
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Saint Helena and examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,260
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on Saint Helena261 and other relevant information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of Saint Helena and in conformity with the clearly defined
principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV) of 15 December
1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,262 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including Saint Helena,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second263 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of Saint Helena require flexible,
practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to territorial size,
geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
260
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
261
A/AC.109/2019/13.
262
Resolution 1514 (XV).
263
A/56/61, annex.
259

442

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active
involvement and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case
basis, and that the views of the people of Saint Helena in respect of their right to self-determination should be
ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of Saint Helena and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate
sources, including the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the
Territory,
Aware of the importance both to Saint Helena and to the Special Committee of the participation of elected and
appointed representatives of Saint Helena in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of Saint Helena with their inalienable right
to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on a case-by-case
basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee264 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,265
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Taking note of the statement made by a representative of the Legislative Council of Saint Helena at the
Caribbean regional seminar held in Managua from 19 to 21 May 2015,
Recalling the extension by the administering Power to Saint Helena of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women266 in March 2017,
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.
266
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
264
265

443

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Noting with serious concern that the Territory last participated in the activities of the Special Committee in 2015,
Taking into account the unique character of Saint Helena in terms of its population, geography and natural
resources,
Aware of the efforts of the administering Power and the territorial Government to improve the socioeconomic
conditions of the population of Saint Helena, in particular in the areas of employment, transport and communications
infrastructure, and of the adoption of the Sustainable Economic Development Plan 2018–2028,
Aware also of the completion of the construction of the airport in the Territory and the commencement in
October 2017 of commercial air service, and recalling the concerns expressed by a representative of the Legislative
Council of Saint Helena about the potential impacts of the construction of the airport, such as the growing number of
expatriate families settling in the Territory and the lack of a specific plan for the operation of an air route or sea link
between Saint Helena and neighbouring islands,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Noting the general election that was held in July 2017,267
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Saint Helena to self-determination, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of Saint Helena, there is no alternative to the principle
of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant human rights
conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of Saint Helena to determine freely their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education programmes for the
Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in conformity with the
legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) and other
relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Stresses the importance of the 2009 Constitution of the Territory and the further development of
democratic and good governance;
5. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
6. Requests the administering Power and relevant international organizations to continue to support the
efforts of the territorial Government to address the socioeconomic development challenges of the Territory;
7. Stresses that the Territory should continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, including regional seminars, in order to provide the Committee with up-to-date information regarding
the decolonization process;
8. Also stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the
people of Saint Helena and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of the
existing political and constitutional arrangements between Saint Helena and the administering Power;
9. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
_______________
267

444

See A/AC.109/2018/13, “The Territory at a glance”.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in Saint Helena, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and special missions
to the Territory;
10. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
11. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,268 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
12. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of Saint Helena and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/109
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)269

74/109. Question of Tokelau
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Tokelau,
Taking note of the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019
relating to Tokelau,270
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Non-Self-Governing Territories, in particular General Assembly resolution 73/118 of 7 December 2018,
Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand as the administering Power
with regard to the work of the Special Committee relating to Tokelau and its readiness to permit access by United
Nations visiting missions to the Territory,
Noting with appreciation also the collaborative contribution to the development of Tokelau by New Zealand
and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
270
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. XI.
268
269

445

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Bearing in mind that, as a small island Territory, Tokelau exemplifies the situation of most remaining Non-SelfGoverning Territories and that, as a case study pointing to successful cooperation for decolonization, Tokelau has
wider significance for the United Nations as it seeks to complete its work in decolonization,
Recalling the status of Tokelau as an associate member of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and of the Pacific Islands Forum,
Acknowledging the World No Tobacco Day Award for the western Pacific region granted to Tokelau in 2017 by
the World Health Organization for its policy entitled “Tobacco-Free Tokelau by 2020”, and expressing hope that this
could contribute to the well-being of the Territory and its peoples,
Cognizant that New Zealand and Tokelau signed, on 21 November 2003, a document entitled “Joint statement
of the principles of partnership”, which sets out the rights and responsibilities of the two partners,
Bearing in mind the decision of the General Fono at its meeting in November 2003, following extensive
consultations undertaken in all three villages, to explore formally with New Zealand the option of self-government in
free association, its decision in August 2005 to hold in February 2006 a referendum on self-determination on the basis
of a draft constitution for Tokelau and a draft treaty of free association with New Zealand, and its subsequent decision
to hold a further referendum in October 2007, and bearing in mind also that the two referendums did not produce the
two-thirds majority of valid votes cast required by the General Fono to change the status of Tokelau from that of a
Non-Self-Governing Territory under the administration of New Zealand,
Recalling the holding of free and fair elections in the Territory in January 2017, and noting the most recent
change of the Ulu-o-Tokelau during its seventh General Fono, on 12 March 2019, in the lead-up to the general
elections to be held in Tokelau in January 2020,
Noting the 2013 constitutional consultations, to be further considered by the Constitution Committee, which
were driven by the people of Tokelau and which aimed at developing a model of government structure that is culturally
appropriate and sensitive to their current situation, culminating in the approval and ratification of the national symbol
of the Territory, along with the constitution, national anthem and national flag,
Cognizant of the statement made by the Ulu-o-Tokelau at the Pacific regional seminar on the implementation
of the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, held in Nadi, Fiji, from 21 to 23 May 2014, and
also of the written statement for the Pacific regional seminar held in Saint George’s from 9 to 11 May 2018 that the
self-determination process of the Territory could not be addressed in isolation from the threat of climate change, the
rise in sea level and the challenges to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,271 and bearing in mind the
intention of Tokelau to articulate its development and other priorities in the National Strategic Plan for 2016–2020,
including consideration of the issue of self-determination and how it would prepare for a possible referendum on
self-determination in cooperation with the administering Power,
Recalling the official launch in April 2017 of the climate change strategy of Tokelau, entitled “Living with
change: an integrated national strategy for enhancing the resilience of Tokelau to climate change and related hazards,
2017–2030”, and the implementation plan for the first five years of the strategy, from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2022,
and welcoming the launch of the Tokelau national greenhouse gas inventory report on 11 April 2019,
Recalling also the announcement of the administering Power that, as requested by the Government of Tokelau,
it had submitted a formal declaration to the United Nations to extend the territorial application of both the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change272 and the Paris Agreement273 to Tokelau,
Recalling further the statements made by the representatives of the Government of New Zealand, as the
administering Power, on 22 June 2018, at a session of the Special Committee, and at the Caribbean regional seminar
held in Grand Anse, Grenada, in May 2019, which underlined the shared vision with Tokelau of building stronger
governance and more effective management of public services, finances and infrastructure assets, with emphasis on
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
273
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
271
272

446

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

quality health care and education, enhancing inter-atoll connectivity, including the vessel to support search and rescue
missions, medical evacuations and general transport between the atolls, which entered into service in April 2019,
1. Acknowledges the decision of the General Fono in 2008 that consideration of any future act of
self-determination by Tokelau will be deferred and that New Zealand and Tokelau will devote renewed effort and
attention to ensuring that essential services and infrastructure on the atolls of Tokelau are enhanced and strengthened,
thereby ensuring an enhanced quality of life and opportunities for the people of Tokelau;
2. Welcomes the progress made towards the devolution of power to the three taupulega (village councils)
since 2004, and notes that further discussion is planned on the recommendations in the report on the devolution review,
compiled in 2012;
3. Notes with appreciation that Tokelau and New Zealand remain firmly committed to the ongoing
development of Tokelau for the long-term benefit of the people of Tokelau, with particular emphasis on the further
development of facilities on each atoll that meet their current requirements, including investment to connect Tokelau
to an undersea fibre-optic cable for faster and more reliable Internet services, improved maritime transport
infrastructure and services, quality health care and education and support for the fisheries sector;
4. Recalls the consideration by Tokelau of its National Strategic Plan for 2016–2020, which prioritizes good
governance, human development, infrastructure development, sustainability and climate change adaptation, and notes
the completion by Tokelau of the Plan, which determines development and other priorities for the 2016–2020 period,
and the Plan’s focus on infrastructure development to support service delivery, including through transport and
telecommunications solutions;
5. Acknowledges the ongoing and consistent commitment of New Zealand to meeting the social and
economic requirements of the people of Tokelau, including through new shipping service assets and shipping
infrastructure development, and budget support for the delivery of education services ranging from early childhood
education to foundation courses for tertiary study, as well as the support and cooperation of the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Health Organization;
6. Commends the completion by Tokelau in 2013 of the Tokelau Renewable Energy Project with the support
of the administering Power and the receipt by the Government of the Renewable Energy Award granted by the New
Zealand Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority;
7. Also commends Tokelau for the recent measures taken to safeguard the health of its peoples through its
“Tobacco-Free Tokelau by 2020” policy, and encourages the necessary support for its implementation from the
administering Power, the United Nations system and relevant stakeholders;
8. Acknowledges the need of Tokelau for continued support from the international community and its desire
to become part of the discussions on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,271 the impacts of climate change
and the protection of the environment and oceans, and in this regard encourages, as appropriate, assistance towards
the implementation of the climate change strategy of Tokelau, entitled “Living with change: an integrated national
strategy for enhancing the resilience of Tokelau to climate change and related hazards, 2017–2030”, and the associated
plan, also acknowledges the efforts of the administering Power to include in its national reporting to the secretariat of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change272 the climate mitigation action taken by Tokelau,
and notes with appreciation the launch of the Tokelau national greenhouse gas inventory report on 11 April 2019 as a
milestone achievement;
9. Recalls with satisfaction the establishment and operation of the Tokelau International Trust Fund to
support the ongoing needs of Tokelau, and calls upon Member States and international and regional agencies to
contribute to the Fund and thereby lend practical support to Tokelau in overcoming the problems of smallness,
isolation and lack of resources;
10. Welcomes the cooperative attitude of the other States and territories in the region towards Tokelau and
their support for its economic and political aspirations and its increasing participation in regional and international
affairs, and in this regard notes the successful chairmanship by Tokelau of the tenth annual ministerial meeting of the
Forum Fisheries Committee of the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency, held in Tokelau on 1 and 2 July 2014, the
representation of the Agency by the Ulu‑o‑Tokelau at the third International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, held in Apia from 1 to 4 September 2014, and the signing by Tokelau of the Pacific Islands Development
447

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Forum Charter on 27 April 2016 so as to become the twelfth member of the Forum, and the recent participation of
Tokelau, represented by the Ulu-o-Tokelau, as an associate member in the forty-ninth Pacific Islands Forum Leaders
Meeting, held in Nauru in September 2018;
11. Calls upon the administering Power and United Nations agencies to continue to provide assistance to
Tokelau as it further develops;
12. Recognizes the positive actions taken by the administering Power to transmit to the Secretary-General
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations information regarding the political, economic and social
situation of Tokelau;
13. Commends the renewed strong commitment of both Tokelau and New Zealand to continuing to work
together in the interests of Tokelau and its people;
14. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine the question of the Non-SelfGoverning Territory of Tokelau and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/110
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)274

74/110. Question of the Turks and Caicos Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Turks and Caicos Islands and examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,275
Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the Turks and Caicos Islands276 and other
relevant information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands and in conformity with the
clearly defined principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 1541 (XV)
of 15 December 1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,277 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the Turks and
Caicos Islands,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second278 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands
require flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to
territorial size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
275
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
276
A/AC.109/2019/15.
277
Resolution 1514 (XV).
278
A/56/61, annex.
274

448

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active
involvement and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case
basis, and that the views of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands in respect of their right to self-determination
should be ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of the Turks and Caicos Islands and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the administering Power and to receive information from other
appropriate sources, including the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people
of the Territory,
Aware of the importance both to the Turks and Caicos Islands and to the Special Committee of the participation
of elected and appointed representatives of the Turks and Caicos Islands in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands with their
inalienable right to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination, on
a case-by-case basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee279 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,280
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
_______________
279
280

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.

449

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Taking note of the statement made by a representative appointed by the Government of the Turks and Caicos
Islands at the Caribbean regional seminar held in Managua from 19 to 21 May 2015,
Noting with serious concern that the Territory last participated in the activities of the Special Committee in 2015,
Recalling the dispatch of the United Nations special mission to the Turks and Caicos Islands in 2006 at the
request of the territorial Government and with the concurrence of the administering Power,
Recalling also the endorsement by the Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community of the report of the
Community’s fact-finding mission to the Turks and Caicos Islands in 2013, which called for, inter alia, a referendum
on self-determination and a mechanism for amending the Constitution,
Recalling further that, in March 2014, the Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community received an
update on the situation in the Turks and Caicos Islands, which they will continue to monitor, and that they expressed
their support for the full restoration of democracy in the Territory on terms driven by its people,
Expressing its concern at the devastating damage and impact caused in the Territory by Hurricane Irma and
Hurricane Maria in 2017,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Recalling the general election that was held in December 2016, and welcoming the election of the first female
Premier of the Territory,281
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands to self-determination, in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of the Turks and Caicos Islands, there is no alternative
to the principle of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the relevant
human rights conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands to determine freely
their future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with
the territorial Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education
programmes for the Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in
conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution
1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Takes note of the positions and repeated calls of the Caribbean Community and the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries in support of a democratically elected territorial Government and of the full restoration
of democracy in the Territory as decided by its people;
5. Notes the continuing debate on constitutional reform within the Territory, and stresses the importance of
participation by all groups and interested parties in the consultation process;
6. Stresses the importance of having in place in the Territory a constitution that reflects the aspirations and
wishes of its people, based on the mechanisms for popular consultation;
7. Requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
8. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
9. Stresses that the Territory should continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, including regional seminars, in order to provide the Committee with up-to-date information regarding
the decolonization process;
_______________
281

450

See A/AC.109/2017/15, para. 16.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

10. Welcomes the continuing efforts made by the territorial Government addressing the need for attention to
be paid to the enhancement of socioeconomic development across the Territory;
11. Stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the people of
the Turks and Caicos Islands and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature and scope of the
existing political and constitutional arrangements between the Turks and Caicos Islands and the administering Power;
12. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in the Turks and Caicos Islands, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and
special missions to the Territory;
13. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
14. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,282 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as an
international financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
15. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
16. Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and regional organizations to provide all the assistance necessary to the Territory, support the recovery
and rebuilding efforts and enhance capabilities for emergency preparedness and risk reduction, in particular in the
aftermath of Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria that impacted the Territory in 2017;
17. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the Turks and Caicos Islands and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/111
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/418, para. 39)283

74/111. Question of the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States Virgin Islands and examined the relevant chapter of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,284
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
284
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. X.
282
283

451

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Taking note of the working paper prepared by the Secretariat on the United States Virgin Islands285 and other
relevant information,
Recognizing that all available options for self-determination of the Territory are valid as long as they are in
accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people of the United States Virgin Islands and in conformity with
the clearly defined principles contained in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and other resolutions of the Assembly,
Expressing concern that 59 years after the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,286 there still remain 17 Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the United States
Virgin Islands,
Conscious of the importance of continuing the effective implementation of the Declaration, taking into account
the target set by the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by 2020 and the plans of action for the Second287 and
Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Recognizing that the specific characteristics and the aspirations of the people of the United States Virgin Islands
require flexible, practical and innovative approaches to the options for self-determination, without any prejudice to
territorial size, geographical location, size of population or natural resources,
Convinced that the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory should continue to guide the
development of their future political status and that referendums, free and fair elections and other forms of popular
consultation play an important role in ascertaining the wishes and aspirations of the people,
Concerned by the use and exploitation of the natural resources of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by the
administering Powers for their benefit, by the use of the Territories as international financial centres to the detriment
of the world economy and by the consequences of any economic activities of the administering Powers that are
contrary to the interests of the people of the Territories, as well as to resolution 1514 (XV),
Convinced that any negotiations to determine the status of the Territory must take place with the active
involvement and participation of the people of the Territory, under the auspices of the United Nations, on a case-by-case
basis, and that the views of the people of the United States Virgin Islands in respect of their right to self-determination
should be ascertained,
Noting the continued cooperation of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the local and regional levels,
including participation in the work of regional organizations,
Mindful that, in order for the Special Committee to enhance its understanding of the political status of the people
of the United States Virgin Islands and to fulfil its mandate effectively, it is important for it to be apprised by the United
States of America as the administering Power and to receive information from other appropriate sources, including
the representatives of the Territory, concerning the wishes and aspirations of the people of the Territory,
Aware of the importance both to the United States Virgin Islands and to the Special Committee of the
participation of elected and appointed representatives of the United States Virgin Islands in the work of the Committee,
Recognizing the need for the Special Committee to ensure that the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
actively pursue a public awareness campaign aimed at assisting the people of the United States Virgin Islands with
their inalienable right to self-determination and in gaining a better understanding of the options for self-determination,
on a case-by-case basis,
Mindful, in that connection, that the holding of regional seminars in the Caribbean and Pacific regions and at
Headquarters, with the active participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, provides a
helpful means for the Special Committee to fulfil its mandate and that the regional nature of the seminars, which
alternate between the Caribbean and the Pacific, is a crucial element in the context of a United Nations programme
for ascertaining the political status of the Territories,
_______________
A/AC.109/2019/16.
Resolution 1514 (XV).
287
A/56/61, annex.
285
286

452

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Welcoming the Caribbean regional seminar on the theme “Implementation of the Third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism: accelerating decolonization through renewed commitment and pragmatic measures”,
held by the Special Committee in Grand Anse, Grenada, and hosted by the Government of Grenada from 2 to 4 May
2019, as a significant and forward-looking event, which enabled the participants to assess progress made and address
challenges faced in the decolonization process, review the existing working methods of the Committee and renew its
commitment to implementing its historic task,
Recognizing the importance of the conclusions and recommendations adopted by the seminar, which are
annexed to the report of the Special Committee288 and which outline the findings of the seminar, including, especially,
the way forward for the decolonization process within the context of the proclamation by the General Assembly of
the period 2011–2020 as the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,289
Noting the statement made by the Lieutenant Governor, as a representative of the Government of the United
States Virgin Islands, at the 2019 Caribbean regional seminar,
Welcoming the re-engagement of the Territory with the Special Committee,
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some Territories by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Food Programme, as well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development
Bank, the Caribbean Community, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Pacific Islands Forum and the
agencies of the Council of Regional Organizations in the Pacific,
Aware of the fifth attempt of the Territory to review the existing Revised Organic Act, which organizes its
internal governance arrangements, as well as its requests to the administering Power and the United Nations system
for assistance to its public education programme,
Cognizant that a draft constitution was proposed in 2009 and subsequently forwarded to the administering
Power, which in 2010 requested the Territory to consider its objections to the draft constitution,
Cognizant also that the Fifth Revision Convention, established and convened in 2012, was mandated to ratify
and approve the final revised draft constitution,
Expressing its concern about the extended time spent on the constitutional review process, and stressing the
importance of the Special Committee receiving updated information in due time regarding the status of the drafting
of the constitution,
Stressing the importance of regional ties for the development of a small island Territory,
Expressing its concern at the devastating damage and impact caused in the Territory by Hurricane Irma and
Hurricane Maria in 2017,
Noting the general election that was held in November 2018,290
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination, in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Also reaffirms that, in the process of decolonization of the United States Virgin Islands, there is no
alternative to the principle of self-determination, which is also a fundamental human right, as recognized under the
relevant human rights conventions;
3. Further reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the United States Virgin Islands to determine freely
their future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and in that connection calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with
the territorial Government and appropriate bodies of the United Nations system, to develop political education
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
See resolution 65/119.
290
See A/AC.109/2019/16, para. 2.
288
289

453

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

programmes for the Territory in order to foster an awareness among the people of their right to self-determination in
conformity with the legitimate political status options, based on the principles clearly defined in Assembly resolution
1541 (XV) and other relevant resolutions and decisions;
4. Welcomes the proposal of a draft constitution emanating from the Territory in 2009, as a result of the work
of the United States Virgin Islands Fifth Constitutional Convention, for review by the administering Power, and
requests the administering Power to assist the territorial Government in achieving its political, economic and social
goals, in particular the successful conclusion of the internal Constitutional Convention exercise;
5. Requests the administering Power to facilitate the process for approval of the proposed constitution and
its implementation, once agreed upon in the Territory, and to regularly provide the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples with relevant updates in this regard;
6. Also requests the administering Power to assist the Territory by facilitating its work concerning public
educational outreach efforts, consistent with Article 73 b of the Charter, and in that regard calls upon the relevant
United Nations organizations to provide assistance to the Territory, if requested;
7. Welcomes the establishment of the Office of Self-Determination and Constitutional Development in the
University of the Virgin Islands, with funding from the administering Power, to address the issue of self-determination,
including political status and constitutional education;
8.

Recalls the closing of the Hovensa plant in 2012, which had a negative economic impact on the Territory;

9. Reiterates its call for the inclusion of the Territory in regional programmes of the United Nations
Development Programme, consistent with the participation of other Non-Self-Governing Territories;
10. Welcomes the active participation of the Territory in the work of the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean;
11. Stresses that the Territory should continue to participate in the activities of the Special Committee,
including regional seminars, in order to provide the Committee with up-to-date information regarding the
decolonization process;
12. Also stresses the importance of the Special Committee being apprised of the views and wishes of the
people of the United States Virgin Islands and enhancing its understanding of their conditions, including the nature
and scope of the existing political and constitutional arrangements between the United States Virgin Islands and the
administering Power;
13. Calls upon the administering Power to participate in and cooperate fully with the work of the Special
Committee in order to implement the provisions of Article 73 e of the Charter and the Declaration and in order to
advise the Committee on the implementation of the provisions under Article 73 b of the Charter on efforts to promote
self-government in the United States Virgin Islands, and encourages the administering Power to facilitate visiting and
special missions to the Territory;
14. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development and to preserve the cultural identity of the Territory, and requests the administering Power to take
steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
15. Takes into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,291 including the Sustainable
Development Goals, stresses the importance of fostering the economic and social sustainable development of the
Territory by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all,
reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and
promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia,
economic, social and human development, while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and
resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges, and strongly urges the administering Power to refrain from
_______________
291

454

Resolution 70/1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

undertaking any kind of illicit, harmful and unproductive activities, including the use of the Territory as international
financial centre, that are not aligned with the interest of the people of the Territory;
16. Requests the Territory and the administering Power to take all measures necessary to protect and conserve
the environment of the Territory against any degradation, and once again requests the specialized agencies concerned
to monitor environmental conditions in the Territory and to provide assistance to the Territory, consistent with their
prevailing rules of procedure;
17. Calls upon the administering Power, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and regional organizations to provide all the assistance necessary to the Territory, support the recovery
and rebuilding efforts and enhance capabilities for emergency preparedness and risk reduction, in particular in the
aftermath of Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria that impacted the Territory in 2017;
18. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine the question of the United States Virgin Islands and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/112
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 178 to 3, with 2 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/418, para. 39)292
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: France, Togo

74/112. Dissemination of information on decolonization
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019
relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in the
field of decolonization,293
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in particular General Assembly resolution 73/122 of
7 December 2018,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
293
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23), chap. III.
292

455

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing the need for flexible, practical and innovative approaches towards reviewing the options for
self-determination for the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories, with a view to implementing the plan of action
for the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,
Reiterating the importance of dissemination of information as an instrument for furthering the aims of the
Declaration, and mindful of the role of world public opinion in effectively assisting the peoples of Non-Self-Governing
Territories to achieve self-determination,
Recognizing the role played by the administering Powers in transmitting information to the Secretary-General,
in accordance with the terms of Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
Stressing the importance of the visiting missions of the Special Committee in contributing substantially to the
dissemination of information on decolonization,
Recognizing that the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat, through the United Nations
information centres, must play a bigger role, in accordance with resolutions and decisions of the United Nations, in
the dissemination of information at the regional level on the activities of the United Nations,
Recalling the issuance by the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in consultation with the
United Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and the Special Committee, of an information
leaflet on assistance programmes available to the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Aware of the role of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on decolonization,
1. Approves the activities in the field of dissemination of information on decolonization undertaken by the
Department of Global Communications and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs of the Secretariat,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization, and encourages the
continued updating and wide dissemination of the information leaflet on what the United Nations can do to assist
Non-Self-Governing Territories, published in accordance with General Assembly resolution 61/129 of 14 December
2006, and updated for the United Nations website on decolonization;
2. Considers it important to continue and expand its efforts to ensure the widest possible dissemination of
information on decolonization, with particular emphasis on the options for self-determination available for the peoples
of Non-Self-Governing Territories, and to this end requests the Department of Global Communications, through the
United Nations information centres in the relevant regions, to actively engage and seek new and innovative ways to
disseminate material to the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to further enhance the information provided on the United Nations
decolonization website and to continue to include the full series of reports of the regional seminars on decolonization,
the statements and scholarly papers presented at those seminars and links to the full series of reports of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, and stresses that the Department of Global Communications and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs continue to be jointly responsible for maintaining and enhancing the United
Nations decolonization website;
4. Requests the Department of Global Communications to continue its efforts to update web-based
information on the assistance programmes available to the Non‑Self-Governing Territories;
5. Requests the Department of Global Communications and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs to implement the recommendations of the Special Committee and to continue their efforts to take measures
through all of the media available, including publications, radio, television, the Internet and social media, to give
publicity to the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and, inter alia:
(a) To develop procedures to collect, prepare and disseminate, particularly to the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, basic material on the issue of self-determination of the peoples of the Territories;
(b)

To seek the full cooperation of the administering Powers in the discharge of the tasks referred to above;

(c) To explore further the idea of a programme of collaboration with the decolonization focal points of
territorial Governments, particularly in the Pacific and Caribbean regions, to help to improve the exchange of
information;

456

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

(d) To encourage the involvement of non-governmental organizations in the dissemination of information on
decolonization;
(e) To encourage the involvement of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the dissemination of information
on decolonization;
(f)

To report to the Special Committee on measures taken in the implementation of the present resolution;

6. Requests the Department of Global Communications to webcast the meetings of the Special Committee
at its substantive sessions from within existing resources;
7. Requests all States, including the administering Powers, to accelerate the dissemination of information
referred to in paragraph 2 above;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to examine this question and to report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/113
Adopted at the 47th plenary meeting, on 13 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 134 to 3, with 46 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/418, para. 39)294
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Ukraine

74/113. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2019,295
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all its subsequent resolutions concerning the implementation of
the Declaration, the most recent of which was resolution 73/123 of 7 December 2018, as well as the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council,
Bearing in mind its resolution 65/119 of 10 December 2010, by which it declared the period 2011–2020
the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and the need to examine ways and means
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report of the Fourth Committee was submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
295
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/74/23).
294

457

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

to ascertain the wishes of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories on the basis of resolution 1514 (XV)
and other relevant resolutions on decolonization,
Recognizing that the eradication of colonialism has been one of the priorities of the United Nations and continues
to be one of its priorities for the decade that began in 2011,
Regretting that measures to eliminate colonialism by 2010, as called for in its resolution 55/146 of 8 December
2000, have not been successful,
Reiterating its conviction of the need for the eradication of colonialism, as well as racial discrimination and
violations of basic human rights,
Noting with satisfaction the continued efforts of the Special Committee in contributing to the effective and
complete implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations on decolonization,
Stressing the importance of the formal participation of all administering Powers in the work of the Special
Committee with regard to the relevant Territories under their administration in accordance with Article 73 of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the cooperation and active participation of certain administering Powers in the work of
the Special Committee, and encouraging the others also to do so,
Noting that the Caribbean regional seminar was held in Grand Anse, Grenada, from 2 to 4 May 2019,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 1514 (XV) and all other resolutions and decisions on decolonization, including its
resolution 65/119, by which it declared the period 2011–2020 the Third International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, and calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with those resolutions, to take all steps necessary
to enable the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to exercise fully as soon as possible their right to
self-determination, including independence, on a case-by-case basis;
2. Reaffirms once again that the existence of colonialism in any form or manifestation, including economic
exploitation, is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;296
3. Reaffirms its determination to continue to take all steps necessary to bring about the complete and speedy
eradication of colonialism and the faithful observance by all States of the relevant provisions of the Charter, the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights;
4. Affirms its support once again for the aspirations of the peoples under colonial rule to exercise their right
to self-determination, including independence, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations on
decolonization;
5. Calls upon the administering Power of each Territory on the agenda of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to cooperate fully in the work of the Special Committee and to participate formally in its future sessions
and seminars;
6. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee to develop and
finalize, as soon as possible, a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing
Territories to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on
decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
7. Recalls with satisfaction the professional, open and transparent conduct of both the February 2006 and the
October 2007 referendums to determine the future status of Tokelau, monitored by the United Nations;
_______________
296

458

Resolution 217 A (III).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to seek suitable means for the immediate and full
implementation of the Declaration and to carry out the actions approved by the General Assembly regarding the
Second and Third International Decades for the Eradication of Colonialism in all Territories that have not yet exercised
their right to self-determination, including independence, and in particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals to bring about an end to colonialism and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
(b) To continue to examine the implementation by Member States of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions on decolonization;
(c) To continue to examine the political, economic and social situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
and to recommend to the General Assembly, as appropriate, the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the
populations of those Territories to exercise their right to self-determination, including independence, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(d) To develop and finalize, as soon as possible and in cooperation with the administering Power and the
Territory in question, a constructive programme of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the Special Committee and the relevant resolutions on
decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(e) To continue to dispatch visiting and special missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories in accordance
with the relevant resolutions on decolonization, including resolutions on specific Territories;
(f) To conduct seminars, as appropriate, for the purpose of receiving and disseminating information on the
work of the Special Committee, and to facilitate participation by the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in
those seminars;
(g) To take all steps necessary to enlist worldwide support among Governments, as well as national and
international organizations, for the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration and the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
(h)

To observe annually the Week of Solidarity with the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories;

9. Calls upon the administering Powers to continue to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge
of its mandate and, inter alia, to facilitate visiting missions of the Committee to the Territories on a case-by-case basis
and in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions on specific Territories;
10. Reaffirms that the United Nations visiting missions to the Non-Self-Governing Territories, where
applicable, are an effective means of ascertaining the situation of the peoples of the Territories, in accordance with
relevant United Nations resolutions on specific Territories, and therefore requests the Special Committee to undertake
at least one visiting mission a year;
11. Recalls that the plan of action for the Second International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism,297
updated as necessary, represents an important legislative authority for the attainment of self-government by the
Non-Self-Governing Territories, and that the case-by-case assessment of the attainment of self-government in each
Territory can make an important contribution to this process;
12. Calls upon all States, in particular the administering Powers, as well as the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system, to give effect within their respective spheres of competence to the
recommendations of the Special Committee for the implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions
of the United Nations;
13. Calls upon the administering Powers to ensure that economic and other activities in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories under their administration do not adversely affect the interests of the peoples but instead promote
development, and to assist them in the exercise of their right to self-determination;
_______________
297

A/56/61, annex.

459

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

14. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned to terminate military activities and eliminate military
bases in the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration in compliance with the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly;
15. Urges the administering Powers to take effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable
rights of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to their natural resources and to establish and maintain
control over the future development of those resources, and requests the relevant administering Powers to take all
steps necessary to protect the property rights of the peoples of those Territories;
16. Urges all States, directly and through their action in the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system, to provide moral and material assistance, as needed, to the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories, and requests the administering Powers to take steps to enlist and make effective use
of all possible assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the strengthening of the economies of those
Territories;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to provide economic, social and other assistance to the Non-Self-Governing Territories and to continue to do
so, as appropriate, after they exercise their right to self-determination, including independence;
18. Requests the Secretary-General, President pro tempore of the Special Committee, to meet informally at
least once a year with the Chair and the Bureau of the Committee during the intersessional period, in order to explore
innovative ways of using his good offices to help to advance the decolonization agenda on a case-by-case basis;
19. Approves the report of the Special Committee covering its work during 2019,295 in which the programme
of work for 2020 is outlined, in particular the Pacific regional seminar and a visiting mission to one of the Territories
on its agenda, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions on specific Territories;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to review the resources at the disposal of the Special
Committee in order to ensure that the Committee has the funding, facilities and services commensurate with its
envisioned yearly programmes, as mandated in relevant General Assembly resolutions, including, especially, in
paragraph 8 of its resolution 73/123.

460

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/197.

Information and communications technologies for sustainable development..............................................................463

74/198.

International Year of Creative Economy for Sustainable Development, 2021 .............................................................471

74/199.

Promoting investments for sustainable development ................................................................................................474

74/200.

Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries ................479

74/201.

International trade and development........................................................................................................................480

74/202.

International financial system and development .......................................................................................................483

74/203.

External debt sustainability and development ..........................................................................................................490

74/204.

Commodities.........................................................................................................................................................496

74/205.

Financial inclusion for sustainable development ......................................................................................................502

74/206.

Promotion of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and strengthen good practices on assets
return to foster sustainable development ..................................................................................................................505

74/207.

Follow-up to and implementation of the outcomes of the International Conferences on Financing
for Development....................................................................................................................................................510

74/208.

Oil slick on Lebanese shores...................................................................................................................................513

74/209.

International Day of Awareness of Food Loss and Waste ..........................................................................................516

74/210.

Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone management for achieving sustainable development.................518

74/211.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central America .......................................................................521

74/212.

International Day of Clean Air for blue skies ...........................................................................................................526

74/213.

Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of environmental effects related to waste originating
from chemical munitions dumped at sea..................................................................................................................527

74/214.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central Asia .............................................................................530

74/215.

Agricultural technology for sustainable development ...............................................................................................533

74/216.

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development ..................................................................................................................................539

74/217.

Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States .........................................................................543

74/218.

Disaster risk reduction............................................................................................................................................546

74/219.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind ............................................................554

74/220.

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa ...................................................................................560

74/221.

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution to sustainable development ................564

74/222.

Report of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United Nations Environment Programme .......................573

461

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/223.

Education for sustainable development in the framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ...............577

74/224.

Harmony with Nature ............................................................................................................................................581

74/225.

Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all............................................................585

74/226.

Combating sand and dust storms.............................................................................................................................591

74/227.

Sustainable mountain development .........................................................................................................................595

74/228.

Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence .................601

74/229.

Science, technology and innovation for sustainable development ..............................................................................605

74/230.

Culture and sustainable development ......................................................................................................................611

74/231.

Development cooperation with middle-income countries .........................................................................................618

74/232.

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries .............................................623

74/233.

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries .......................................631

74/234.

Implementation of the Third United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027) ...............................635

74/235.

Women in development .........................................................................................................................................643

74/236.

Human resources development ...............................................................................................................................655

74/237.

Eradicating rural poverty to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development .............................................661

74/238.

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system ........................................................................665

74/239.

South-South cooperation ........................................................................................................................................667

74/240.

Natural plant fibres and sustainable development .....................................................................................................668

74/241.

International Tea Day .............................................................................................................................................671

74/242.

Agriculture development, food security and nutrition ...............................................................................................673

74/243.

Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources.................................................683

462

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 74/197
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/378, para. 12)1

74/197. Information and communications technologies for sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/218 of 20 December 2018 on information and communications technologies for
sustainable development, as well as previous resolutions on the issue,2
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/24 of 23 July 2019 on the assessment of the
progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society, as well as previous resolutions on the issue,3
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador, from 17 to 20 October 2016,4
Recognizing the role of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development as the United Nations
focal point for science, technology and innovation for development and as a forum in the examination of science and
technology questions and the role of science and technology as enablers for the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the advancement of understanding of science and technology policies, particularly in
respect of developing countries, and the formulation of recommendations and guidelines on science and technology
matters for development within the United Nations system,
Recognizing also the Commission on Science and Technology for Development as the United Nations focal
point in the system-wide follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society,
Recognizing further the role of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism, which includes the multi-stakeholder
forum on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, the inter-agency task team on
science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals and the online platform, as a tool to
facilitate multi-stakeholder collaboration and partnerships among Member States, civil society, the private sector, the
scientific community, United Nations entities and other stakeholders in order to support the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolutions 56/183, 57/238, 59/220, 60/252, 62/182, 63/202, 64/187, 65/141, 66/184, 67/195, 68/198, 69/204, 70/184, 71/212 and 72/200.
3
Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/46, 2008/3, 2009/7, 2010/2, 2011/16, 2012/5, 2013/9, 2014/27, 2015/26, 2016/22, 2017/21
and 2018/28.
4
Resolution 71/256, annex.
1
2

463

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the Declaration of Principles and the Plan of Action adopted by the World Summit on the Information
Society at its first phase, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003,5 and endorsed by the General Assembly,6 and
the Tunis Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society adopted by the Summit at its second phase,
held in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005,7 and endorsed by the Assembly,8
Recalling also the references to information and communications technologies contained in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and reiterating calls for close alignment between
the World Summit on the Information Society process and the 2030 Agenda, as well as other relevant
intergovernmental outcomes,
Recalling further the outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall
review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society,9 held in New York
on 15 and 16 December 2015, in which it took stock of the progress made in the implementation of the outcomes of
the World Summit, addressed potential information and communications technology gaps and identified areas for
continued focus,
Reaffirming its common desire and commitment to the World Summit on the Information Society vision as laid
out in the Geneva Declaration of Principles,
Reaffirming also the outcome of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review of the
implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society, which provides an overview of
implementation action lines, challenges, vision and priority areas, and recognizing the need for people to have media
and information literacy skills, which are important in order to fully participate in an inclusive information society,
Recognizing that information and communications technologies present new opportunities and challenges and
that there is a pressing need to address the major impediments that developing countries face in accessing new
technologies, stressing the need to address prevailing challenges to bridge the digital divides, both between and within
countries and between women and men, and between girls and boys, and to harness information and communications
technologies for development, and recalling the need to emphasize quality of access to bridge digital and knowledge
divides, using a multidimensional approach that includes speed, stability, affordability, language, training, capacitybuilding, local content and accessibility for persons with disabilities,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the progress made in the implementation of and follow-up
to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and international levels,10
Taking note also of the report on the economic impact of broadband in the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States, jointly prepared by the Office of the High Representative
for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States and the
International Telecommunication Union, as well as the United Nations E-Government Survey prepared by the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat,
Noting the call for the continuation of annual reports on the implementation of the outcomes of the World
Summit on the Information Society, through the Commission on Science and Technology for Development, to the
Economic and Social Council, and reaffirming the role of the Commission, as set forth in Council resolution 2006/46,
in assisting the Council as the focal point in the system-wide follow-up, in particular the review and assessment of
progress made in implementing the outcomes of the World Summit,
Noting also the holding of the twenty-second session of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development in Geneva from 13 to 17 May 2019, and looking forward to the twenty-third session, which will have
as priority themes “Harnessing rapid technological change for inclusive and sustainable development” and “Exploring

_______________
See A/C.2/59/3, annex.
See resolution 59/220.
7
See A/60/687.
8
See resolution 60/252.
9
Resolution 70/125.
10
A/74/62-E/2019/6.
5
6

464

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

space technologies for sustainable development and the benefits of international research collaboration in this
context”, thus providing a platform for all stakeholders to share experiences and pursue partnerships for capacitybuilding,
Taking note of the report of the High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation, entitled “The age of digital
interdependence”, submitted to the Secretary-General on 10 June 2019,
Noting the holding of the World Summit on the Information Society Forum, jointly organized annually by the
International Telecommunication Union, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations Development Programme,
Taking note of the report of the Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development entitled The State of
Broadband 2019: Broadband as a Foundation for Sustainable Development, which provides an evaluation of the
progress made towards achieving the Broadband Commission’s advocacy targets for broadband and the state of
broadband development worldwide, with the acknowledgement that 2019 is the first year when more than half of the
world’s population will be connected to the Internet, noting the need to bridge digital divides, and recalling the report
of the special session of the Commission, entitled “Working together to connect the next 1.5 billion by 2020”,
Recognizing the fact that information and communications technologies are critical enablers of economic
development and investment, with consequential benefits for employment and social welfare, by lowering barriers to
economic participation, and that the increasing pervasiveness of information and communications technologies within
society has had profound impacts on the ways in which Governments deliver services, businesses relate to consumers
and citizens participate in public and private life,
Taking note of the Digital Economy Report 2019 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
which examines the scope for value creation and capture in the digital economy by developing countries and gives
special attention to opportunities for these countries to take advantage of the data-driven economy as producers and
innovators, and notes that platformization and the monetization of the rapidly expanding volume of digital data are
increasingly driving value creation, while acknowledging the risk that digitalization may contribute to rising inequality
and further consolidation rather than to more inclusive development,
Noting the tax challenges arising from digitalization of the economy and the importance of ensuring that tax is
paid where value is created, and noting also international efforts to address this issue,
Stressing, however, that recent progress notwithstanding, important and growing digital divides remain between
and within developed and developing countries in terms of the availability, affordability and use of information and
communications technologies and access to broadband, stressing also the urgent need to close digital divides,
including with regard to such issues as the affordability of the Internet, and to ensure that the benefits of information
and communications technologies, including new technologies, are available to all, in this regard reaffirming its
commitment to significantly increasing access to information and communications technologies and striving to
provide universal and affordable access to the Internet in the least developed countries by 2020, and noting the many
efforts to help to bridge digital divides and expand access, including the Connect 2030 Agenda for Global
Telecommunication/Information and Communications Technologies Development, including Broadband, for
Sustainable Development,
Stressing also the necessity for all forms of development cooperation, including aid flows, to promote digital
transformation,
Recalling the Working Group on the Digital Gender Divide of the Broadband Commission for Sustainable
Development and the recommendations for action in bridging the gender digital divide contained in its progress report,
and taking note of the report of the Working Group on Education of the Broadband Commission entitled “Digital
skills for life and work”,
Recognizing that realizing gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls will make a crucial
contribution to progress across all of the Sustainable Development Goals, and emphasizing the need to target science,
technology and innovation strategies to address the empowerment of women and girls and to reduce inequalities,
including the gender digital divide,
Noting with great concern the fact that a gender digital divide persists in women’s access to and use of
information and communications technologies, including in education, employment and other areas of economic and

465

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

social development, and in this regard welcoming the many initiatives that focus on access, skills and leadership to
promote the equal participation of women and girls in the digital age, such as the International Girls in ICT Day of
the International Telecommunication Union and the Global Partnership for Gender Equality in the Digital Age, known
as the Equals Partnership,
Recognizing the need to focus on capacity development policies and sustainable support to further enhance the
impact of activities and initiatives at the national and local levels aimed at providing advice, services and support,
with a view to building an inclusive, people-centred and development-oriented information society,
Noting that a range of topics continues to emerge on issues related to the access to and use and applications of
information and communications technologies and their effects on economic, social and environmental dimensions
of sustainable development,
Reaffirming that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected online, and emphasizing that
progress towards the vision of the World Summit on the Information Society should be considered not only as a
function of economic development and the spreading of information and communications technologies but also as a
function of progress with respect to the realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Reaffirming also that Internet governance, including the process towards enhanced cooperation and the
convening of the Internet Governance Forum, should continue to follow the provisions set forth in the outcomes of
the summits held in Geneva and Tunis,
Recalling the efforts undertaken by the host countries in organizing the meetings of the Internet Governance
Forum, held in Athens in 2006, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 2007, in Hyderabad, India, in 2008, in Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt, in 2009, in Vilnius in 2010, in Nairobi in 2011, in Baku in 2012, in Bali, Indonesia, in 2013, in Istanbul, Turkey,
in 2014, in João Pessoa, Brazil, in 2015, in Guadalajara, Mexico, in 2016, in Geneva in 2017, in Paris in 2018 and in
Berlin in 2019,
Recalling also the convening of the Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation, based on the proposal by the
Chair of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development regarding the structure and composition of
the Working Group, as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 70/125 of 16 December 2015 and endorsed
by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2017/21, and taking note of its work,
Noting that information and communications technologies can help to accelerate progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, and noting also that, inter alia, the International Telecommunication Union has an
important role in supporting Member States in the implementation of the Goals,
Noting also the convening of the World Telecommunication Development Conference by the International
Telecommunication Union in Buenos Aires, from 9 to 20 October 2017, under the theme “Information and
communications technology for Sustainable Development Goals”,
Noting further that technological change includes new and powerful tools for development, and mindful of its
impacts, opportunities and challenges and that Governments, the private sector, international organizations, civil
society and the technical and academic communities should take into account the social, economic, ethical, cultural
and technical issues related to rapid technological advancements in order to deepen their understanding of how to
harness their potential to support the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming the value and principles of multi-stakeholder cooperation and engagement that have characterized
the World Summit on the Information Society process since its inception, and recognizing that the effective
participation, partnership and cooperation of Governments, the private sector, civil society, international organizations,
the technical and academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders, within their respective roles and
responsibilities, especially with balanced representation from developing countries, have been and continue to be vital
in developing the information society,
Conscious of the challenges faced by States in preventing and combating the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes, including by terrorists, and emphasizing the need to continue
international cooperation in this regard and to reinforce technical assistance and capacity-building activities, at their
request, for the prevention, prosecution and punishment of such use in accordance with national and international law,

466

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Recognizes that information and communications technologies have the potential to provide new solutions
to development challenges, particularly in the context of globalization, and can foster sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth and sustainable development, competitiveness, access to information and knowledge,
trade and development, poverty eradication and social inclusion that will help to expedite the integration of all
countries, especially developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, into the global economy;
2. Welcomes the remarkable evolution and diffusion of information and communications technologies,
underpinned by the contributions of both the public and private sectors, which have seen penetration into almost all
corners of the globe, created new opportunities for social interactions, enabled new business models and contributed
to economic growth and development in all other sectors, while noting the unique and emerging challenges related to
their evolution and diffusion;
3. Recognizes the potential of information and communications technologies to achieve the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development11 and other internationally agreed development goals, noting that they can accelerate
progress across all 17 Sustainable Development Goals, accordingly urges all Governments, the private sector, civil
society, international organizations, the technical and academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders to
integrate information and communications technologies into their approaches to implementing the Goals, and requests
United Nations system entities facilitating the World Summit on the Information Society action lines to review their
reporting and workplans to support the implementation of the 2030 Agenda;
4. Reaffirms its commitment to bridging digital and knowledge divides, recognizes that its approach must be
multidimensional and include an evolving understanding of what constitutes access, emphasizing the quality of that
access, and acknowledges that speed, stability, affordability, language, local content and accessibility for persons with
disabilities are now core elements of quality and that high-speed broadband is already an essential enabler of
sustainable development;
5. Stresses the important role played by the private sector, civil society and technical communities in
information and communications technologies;
6. Encourages strengthened and continuing cooperation between and among stakeholders from both
developed and developing countries, within their respective roles and responsibilities, to ensure the effective
implementation of the outcomes of the Geneva5 and Tunis7 phases of the World Summit on the Information Society,
through, inter alia, the promotion of national, regional and international multi‑stakeholder partnerships, including
public-private partnerships, and the promotion of national and regional multi-stakeholder thematic platforms in a joint
effort and dialogue with developing countries, including the least developed countries, development partners and
actors in the information and communications technologies sector;
7. Welcomes the operationalization of the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries, and invites
Member States, as well as international organizations, foundations and the private sector, to provide voluntary
financial contributions and technical assistance to ensure its full and effective implementation;
8. Notes the progress that has been made by United Nations system entities in cooperation with national
Governments, regional commissions and other stakeholders, including non-governmental organizations and the
private sector, in the implementation of the action lines contained in the outcome documents of the World Summit on
the Information Society, and encourages the use of those action lines for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
9. Also notes that the digital economy is an important and growing part of the global economy and that
connectivity is correlated with increases in gross domestic product, and recognizes the critical importance of
expanding the participation of all countries, in particular developing countries, in the digital economy;

_______________
11

Resolution 70/1.

467

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Encourages countries to take advantage of capacity-building mechanisms and opportunities from the
entire United Nations system in this regard;
11. Urges a continued focus on maximizing development gains from e‑commerce, through initiatives such as
eTrade for All, launched by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which provides a new
approach to trade development through electronic exchanges by allowing developing countries to more easily
navigate the supply of technical assistance for building capacity in e‑commerce readiness and by enabling donors to
have a clear picture of the programmes that they could fund;
12. Recognizes in this regard that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development has initiated and
implemented rapid e-trade readiness assessments of the least developed countries in cooperation with other donors
and organizations in order to raise awareness of the opportunities and challenges related to leveraging e‑commerce in
the least developed countries;
13. Welcomes the holding of the third session of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on e-Commerce and
the Digital Economy, its report12 and the establishment of a working group on measuring e-commerce and the digital
economy in 2018;13
14. Also welcomes the holding of the first Africa e-Commerce Week, from 10 to 14 December 2018, in
Nairobi, and e-Commerce Week, from 1 to 5 April 2019, with the theme “From digitalization to development”, and
looks forward to the first Asia e-Commerce Week, to be held in the United Arab Emirates in 2020;
15. Further welcomes the work of the Information for All Programme of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, which aims to assist Member States in formulating policies to bridge digital
divides and ensure equitable knowledge societies, and also welcomes the holding of Global Media and Information
Literacy Week from 24 to 31 October 2019;
16. Recognizes that, despite recent progress and significant gains, there is still uneven growth in access to and
the use of information and communications technologies, and expresses concern over the substantial continued digital
and broadband divides between and within developed and developing countries, including the fact that there are
122 mobile broadband subscriptions per 100 people in developed countries, compared with 75 in developing countries
and 33 in the least developed countries, and that the cost of access is higher in developing countries in relation to
average household income, resulting in a lack of affordable access to information and communications technologies;
17. Also recognizes the importance of broadband access to all developing countries, and calls upon all
stakeholders, including the international community, to support further actions, including investment, to improve
broadband access and connectivity in these countries;
18. Further recognizes the importance of broadband connectivity to users in rural and remote areas, and in
this regard notes that small and non-profit community operators, as appropriate and among others, can provide these
services through, inter alia, appropriate regulatory measures that allow them to gain access to basic infrastructure;
19. Encourages research and development, and the development of viable strategies that could result in further
competitiveness, investment and rapid reductions in the cost of information and communications technologies, and
urges all relevant stakeholders to address the growing digital divides between and within countries through, inter alia,
strengthened enabling policy environments at all levels, legal and regulatory frameworks conducive to increased
investment and innovation, public-private partnerships, universal access strategies and international cooperation to
improve affordability, education, capacity-building, multilingualism, cultural preservation, investment and
technology transfer on mutually agreed terms;
20. Recognizes that a gender digital divide persists and that the proportion of women using the Internet is
17 per cent lower than that of men worldwide and 43 per cent lower in the least developed countries, notes with
concern that, while the gender digital divide has narrowed in many regions since 2013, it has widened overall, in
particular in the least developed countries and in Africa, in this regard calls upon all stakeholders to ensure the full
participation of women in the information society and women’s access to information and communications
technologies for development, including new technologies, in this respect reiterates its request for relevant United

_______________
12
13

468

TD/B/EDE/3/3.
See TD/B/EDE/1/3, chap. I, para. 12.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations system entities, including the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), to support the implementation and monitoring of the action lines contained in the outcome documents
of the World Summit on the Information Society by enhancing the emphasis on gender equality and women’s
empowerment, and reaffirms the commitment to ensuring women’s full participation in decision-making processes
related to information and communications technologies;
21. Notes the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional
level, facilitated by the regional commissions, as observed in the report of the Secretary-General on the progress made
in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit at the regional and international levels;10
22. Encourages the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, within their
respective mandates and strategic plans, to contribute to the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on
the Information Society, and emphasizes the importance of allocating adequate resources in this regard;
23. Acknowledges the extension of the mandate of the Internet Governance Forum through 2025, as set out in
the outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review of the implementation
of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society;9
24. Recognizes the importance of the Internet Governance Forum and its mandate as a forum for multistakeholder dialogue on various matters, as reflected in paragraph 72 of the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society,7
including discussion of public policy issues related to key elements of Internet governance, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to submit, as part of his annual reporting on the progress made in the implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and international levels,
information on the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Working Group on Improvements to the Internet Governance Forum,14 in particular those on enhancing the
participation of developing countries;
25. Stresses the need for the enhanced participation of Governments and stakeholders from all developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries, in all meetings of the Internet Governance Forum, and in this
regard invites Member States, as well as other relevant stakeholders, to support the participation of Governments and
all other stakeholders from developing countries in the Forum itself, as well as in the preparatory meetings;
26. Notes the work of the Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation, established by the Chair of the
Commission on Science and Technology for Development as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution
70/125, to develop recommendations on how to further implement enhanced cooperation as envisioned in the Tunis
Agenda, and also notes that the Working Group ensured the full involvement of Governments and other relevant
stakeholders, in particular from developing countries, taking into account all their diverse views and expertise;
27. Also notes that the Working Group held five meetings between September 2016 and January 2018 at
which it discussed inputs from Member States and other stakeholders, as stipulated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 70/125;
28. Recalls the report of the Chair of the Working Group,15 which includes references to the full texts of all
proposals and contributions, and expresses its gratitude to the Chair and all participants who submitted inputs and
contributed to the work of the Working Group;
29. Welcomes the good progress made by the Working Group in many areas and the fact that consensus
seemed to emerge on some issues, while significant divergence of views in a number of other issues persisted, and in
that regard regrets that the Working Group could not find agreement on recommendations on how to further
implement enhanced cooperation as envisioned in the Tunis Agenda;
30. Recognizes the importance of enhanced cooperation in the future, to enable Governments, on an equal
footing, to carry out their roles and responsibilities in international public policy issues pertaining to the Internet, and
notes the need for continued dialogue and work on the implementation of enhanced cooperation as envisioned in the
Tunis Agenda;

_______________
14
15

A/67/65-E/2012/48 and A/67/65/Corr.1-E/2012/48/Corr.1.
See E/CN.16/2018/CRP.3.

469

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

31. Encourages the use of and engagement with forums and expertise available within relevant United
Nations bodies, such as the Commission on Science and Technology for Development, by all relevant stakeholders
to promote global digital cooperation;
32. Recognizes that a lack of access to affordable and reliable technologies and services remains a critical
challenge in many developing countries, in particular African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries, small island developing States, middle-income countries, countries in situations of conflict,
post-conflict countries and countries affected by natural disasters, and that all efforts should be deployed to reduce the
price of information and communications technologies and broadband access, bearing in mind that deliberate
interventions, including through research and development and technology transfer on mutually agreed terms, may
be necessary to spur the development of lower-cost connectivity options;
33. Also recognizes that information and communications technologies present new opportunities and
challenges and that there is a pressing need to address the major impediments that developing countries face in
engaging with and accessing new technologies, such as an appropriate enabling environment, sufficient resources,
infrastructure, education, capacity, investment and connectivity, as well as issues related to technology ownership,
setting standards and technology flows, and in this regard urges all stakeholders to consider ensuring appropriate
financing of digital development and adequate means of implementation, including strengthened capacity-building of
developing countries, particularly the least developed countries, towards a digitally empowered society and
knowledge economy;
34. Further recognizes the need to harness the potential of information and communications technologies as
critical enablers of sustainable development and to overcome digital divides, and stresses that capacity-building for
the productive use of such technologies should be given due consideration in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development;16
35. Notes that, while a solid foundation for capacity-building in information and communications
technologies has been laid in many areas with regard to building the information society, there is still a need for
continuing efforts to address the ongoing challenges, especially for developing countries and the least developed
countries, and draws attention to the positive impact of broadened capacity development that involves institutions,
organizations and entities dealing with information and communications technologies and Internet governance issues;
36. Recognizes the importance of assisting developing countries, in particular the least developed countries,
to address the challenges and opportunities in relation to the use of the Internet and e-commerce to develop their
international trade capacities, among other things;
37. Also recognizes the importance of the free flow of information and knowledge, as the amount of
information distributed worldwide grows and the role of communication becomes all the more important, and
acknowledges that the mainstreaming of information and communications technologies in school curricula, open
access to data, the fostering of competition, the creation of transparent, predictable, independent and non-discriminatory
regulatory and legal systems, proportionate taxation and licensing fees, access to finance, the facilitation of publicprivate partnerships, multi-stakeholder cooperation, national and regional broadband strategies, efficient allocation of
the radio frequency spectrum, infrastructure-sharing models, community-based approaches and public access
facilities have in many countries facilitated significant gains in connectivity and sustainable development;
38. Calls upon all stakeholders to keep the goal of bridging digital divides, in their different forms, an area of
priority concern, to put into effect sound strategies that contribute to the development of e-government and to continue
to focus on pro‑poor information and communications technology policies and applications, including access to
broadband at the grass-roots level, with a view to narrowing the digital divides among and within countries and, in
turn, building information and knowledge societies;
39. Notes the commitments made in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and recognizes that official
development assistance and other concessional financial flows for information and communications technologies
can make significant contributions to development outcomes, in particular where they can reduce the risk

_______________
16

470

Resolution 69/313, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of public and private investment, and increase the use of information and communications technologies to
strengthen good governance and tax collection;
40. Invites all relevant stakeholders to support more comprehensively those countries that are trailing in the
digital economy in order to reduce the digital divides, strengthen the international enabling environment for value
creation and build capacities in both the private and public sectors;
41. Recognizes the critical importance of private sector investment in information and communications
technology infrastructure, content and services, encourages Governments to create legal and regulatory frameworks
conducive to increased investment and innovation, and also recognizes the importance of public-private partnerships,
universal access strategies and other approaches to that end;
42. Welcomes the holding of the fourth annual Economic and Social Council forum on financing for
development follow-up, takes note of its intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and recommendations,17 looks
forward to further advancement in the follow-up process, and welcomes the work of the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Financing for Development, the progress made in operationalizing the three components of the Technology
Facilitation Mechanism and the holding of the fourth annual multi-stakeholder forum on science, technology and
innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals;
43. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
44. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, through the
Commission on Science and Technology for Development and the Economic and Social Council, an action-oriented
report on the status of the implementation of and follow-up to the present resolution, taking into account the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the review process of the World Summit on
the Information Society, the summary by the Co-Chairs of the multi-stakeholder forum on science, technology and
innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals18 and other relevant processes, as part of his annual report on the
progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society at the regional and international levels;
45. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Information and
communications technologies for sustainable development”, unless otherwise agreed.
RESOLUTION 74/198
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/379, para. 17)19

74/198. International Year of Creative Economy for Sustainable Development, 2021
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations, including the purposes and principles contained therein
Recommitting, and the functions and powers of the United Nations system, especially in promoting international
cooperation in the economic, social, cultural, educational and health fields,

_______________
See E/FFDF/2019/3, sect. I.
E/HLPF/2019/6.
19
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eswatini, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, Uzbekistan and Viet Nam.
17
18

471

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recognizing the need to promote sustained and inclusive economic growth, foster innovation and provide
opportunities, benefits and empowerment for all and respect for all human rights,
Recalling its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the proclamation
of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years
and anniversaries, including paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for the proclamation of
international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, in which it is stated that an international day or year should not
be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Recognizing that the creative economy, known as the “orange economy” in a number of countries, involves,
inter alia, knowledge-based economic activities and the interplay between human creativity and ideas, knowledge and
technology, as well as cultural values or artistic, cultural heritage and other individual or collective creative
expressions,
Recalling the Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which states
that the organization, as part of its purposes and functions, will maintain, increase and diffuse knowledge by
encouraging cooperation among the nations in all branches of intellectual activity, and noting the report of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on culture and sustainable development,20 in which it is
stated that cultural and creative industries should be part of economic growth strategies,
Recognizing the ongoing need to support developing countries and countries with economies in transition in
diversifying production and exports, including in new sustainable growth areas, including creative industries,
Recommitting to sustaining and supporting developing countries’ economies to transition progressively to higher
productivity through high-value-added sectors, by promoting diversification, technological upgrading, research and
innovation, including the creation of quality, decent and productive jobs, including through the promotion of cultural
and creative industries, sustainable tourism, performing arts and heritage conservation activities, among others,
Recognizing that the international community should support national efforts of developing countries to increase
their participation in and benefit from dynamic sectors and to foster, protect and promote their creative industries,
including by way of strategies to appropriately protect and enforce intellectual property,
Acknowledging that creative industries can help to foster positive externalities while preserving and promoting
cultural heritages and diversity, as well as enhance developing countries’ participation in and benefit from new and
dynamic growth opportunities in world trade,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the International
Labour Organization, the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation, the World Intellectual Property
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other entities of the United Nations
system to promote the creative economy for sustainable development,
Noting with appreciation the efforts to promote the creative economy in various international and regional
conferences, including the first World Conference on Creative Economy, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 6 to
8 November 2018, and the Global Summit on the Orange Economy, held in Medellín, Colombia, on 9 and
10 September 2019, and looking forward to the convening of the second World Conference on Creative Economy, to
be held in the United Arab Emirates in 2020, while taking note of the outcome document, the Bali Agenda for Creative

_______________
20

472

See A/69/216.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Economy, and recognizing the role of the creative economy in supporting the Sustainable Development Goals and
that the protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights can bolster and enhance the creative economy,
Acknowledging that innovation is essential for harnessing the economic potential of each nation and the
importance of supporting mass entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, which create new momentum for
economic growth and job creation and expand opportunities for all, including women and youth,
Recognizing the role of the creative economy in creating full and productive employment and decent work,
supporting entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, encouraging the formalization and growth of micro-, small
and medium-sized enterprises, stimulating innovation, empowering people, promoting social inclusion, and reducing
poverty,
Highlighting that the creative economy encourages creativity and innovation in attaining inclusive, equitable
and sustainable growth and development, while facilitating life transitions and supporting women, youth, migrants
and older persons, as well as empowering people in vulnerable situations,
Stressing the importance of appropriate national policies aimed at promoting the diversity of cultural expression
and advancing creativity for sustainable development,
Emphasizing the resilient growth in international trade in creative industries, including the trade of creative
goods and services, and its contribution to the global economy, and recognizing the economic and cultural values of
the creative economy,
Reaffirming that all workers should have access to lifelong learning and that all learners should acquire the
knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development, including, among others, through education for
sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls, the promotion of a culture of peace and non‑violence, global citizenship and the appreciation of cultural
diversity and of culture’s contribution to sustainable development,
Recognizing the need to optimize the economic, social and cultural benefits stemming from the creative
economy by creating an enabling environment for the promotion of the creative economy, such as the development
of digital technology, innovative and digital economy, e-commerce, building relevant digital infrastructure and
connectivity for supporting sustainable development, increased public and private sector investment in creative
industries and the development of relevant legal frameworks,
Stressing that the creative economy can contribute to the three dimensions of sustainable development and the
achievement of the 2030 Agenda, including by fostering economic growth and innovation, eradicating poverty,
creating full and productive employment and decent work for all, improving the quality of life and empowerment of
women and young people and reducing inequality within and among countries,
Stressing the importance of regular, reliable and comparable data on the contribution of the creative economy
to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
1.

Decides to declare 2021 the International Year of Creative Economy for Sustainable Development;

2. Encourages all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other international and
regional organizations, as well as civil society, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, academics and
individuals, to observe the International Year in an appropriate manner and in accordance with national priorities, in
order to raise awareness, promote cooperation and networking, encourage the sharing of best practices and
experiences, enhance human resource capacity and promote an enabling environment at all levels as well as tackle
the challenges of creative economy;
3. Invites the United Nations system and all relevant stakeholders to contribute to and support the
International Year;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States,
organizations of the United Nations system and other international and regional organizations, as well as civil society,
including non‑governmental organizations, individuals and the private sector, and encourages the Secretary-General
to invite United Nations entities to work together and support the implementation of the International Year of Creative
Economy in a synergetic effect;
473

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions;
6. Requests the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and in consultation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and relevant entities of the United Nations
system, to inform the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session of the implementation of the present resolution,
through a dedicated section of the Creative Economy Outlook, elaborating in particular on how the resolution is
aligned with and advances the 2030 Agenda, including recommendations on concrete actions that would help Member
States and the United Nations system to accelerate their efforts in the implementation of the Agenda.
RESOLUTION 74/199
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/379, para. 17)21

74/199. Promoting investments for sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Emphasizing that success in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and the eradication of poverty in all
its forms and dimensions depends on the creation of enabling environments at all levels,
Recognizing that a revitalized global partnership will facilitate an intensive global engagement in support of the
implementation of all of the Goals and their targets, bringing together Governments, civil society, the private sector,
the United Nations system and other actors and mobilizing all available resources,
Recalling that in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, it was acknowledged that the implementation
of sustainable development will depend on the active engagement of both the public and private sectors and other
relevant international organizations, including international financial institutions and multilateral development banks,
Noting the convening of the sixth World Investment Forum, in Geneva from 22 to 26 October 2018, welcoming
the second Sustainable Development Goals Investment Fair, held in New York from 15 to 17 April 2019, and noting
the establishment of the Global Investors for Sustainable Development Alliance by the Secretary-General,
Taking note of the World Investment Report 2019, the Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2019, the
Global Sustainable Development Report and the outcome document of the 2019 Economic and Social Council forum
on financing for development follow-up,22

_______________
21
22

474

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
See E/FFDF/2019/3.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the work of the United Nations in the area of investments for sustainable development, including the
World Investment Forum of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the Sustainable Development
Goals Investment Fair and the Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up,
Noting also all initiatives at the global, regional and local levels that are aimed at scaling up the mobilization of
public and private finance towards investing for the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
in its three dimensions and deepening international cooperation,
Noting further the potential of impact investment for the financing of sustainable development in supporting
national development policies, plans, priorities and needs in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recognizing that achieving the Sustainable Development Goals will require a shift towards long-term
investment horizons, in this regard encouraging investors to take measures to incentivize greater long-term
investment, and recognizing also that international public and private finance for development complemented by other
innovative financing mechanisms, including blended finance, can play an important role in upscaling our collective
efforts to cover the finance needs to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recognizing also that entrepreneurship can help achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
underlining the importance of advancing sustainable consumption and production patterns, and stressing the need to
promote sustainable and innovative financing opportunities and mechanisms to unlock new capital for sustainable
investment and upscale sustainable business models, with a special focus on micro-, small and medium-sized
enterprises,
Emphasizing that national development efforts need to be supported by an enabling international economic
environment, including coherent and mutually supporting world trade, monetary and financial systems, and
strengthened and enhanced global economic governance, and in this regard stressing that the likelihood of an increase
in global foreign direct investment is further tempered by a series of risk factors,
Emphasizing also that achieving the Sustainable Development Goals is not possible without private and public
investment, including long-term foreign investment, which can be mobilized when there is an enabling environment
at all levels,
Recognizing the importance of corporate sustainability, including reporting on environmental, social and
governance impacts, as appropriate, to help to ensure transparency and accountability and avoid practices that
counteract efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals,
Reaffirming the commitment to significantly increase investments to close the gender gap and strengthen
support for institutions in relation to gender equality and the empowerment of women at the global, regional and
national levels,
Noting with concern that investments critical to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals remain
underfunded, and recognizing that additional public and private investment and financing at the national and
international levels will be required to meet the large investment needs, associated with gaps, for achieving the Goals,
including in quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure to support economic development and human
well-being, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all,
Recognizing that international public finance, including official development assistance, is important to the
efforts of developing countries to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, including through its capacity to
catalyse additional resource mobilization from other sources, public and private, as it can support improved tax
collection and help to strengthen domestic enabling environments and build essential public services,
Emphasizing that the call for the contribution by the private sector to Sustainable Development Goals financing
is not a substitute for but rather an important complement to public financing,
Noting with concern that foreign direct investment has been on a weak trajectory since 2015 and that, although
foreign direct investment flows to developing countries increased slightly in 2018, they remain unequally distributed
among regions and groups of countries, with Africa, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States receiving small or negligible levels of foreign direct investment,

475

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Stressing that transparency and inclusion in the international financial, monetary and trading systems and solid
institutions at all levels and the design and implementation of policies, including capital market regulations, where
appropriate, that promote incentives along the investment chain, that are aligned with long-term performance and
sustainability indicators and that reduce volatility, are essential for investment promotion, sustained economic growth,
poverty eradication and employment creation in developing countries, and in this regard stressing the need for further
international support as well as competitive investment climates at all levels for developing countries to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals,
Recognizing that socially and environmentally responsible and accountable national and international private
business activity, investment, entrepreneurship and innovation, including equal access for women and youth, are
major drivers of productivity, inclusive economic growth and job creation, in order to leave no one behind,
Noting the role of the United Nations Development Programme Istanbul International Centre for Private Sector
in Development in its engagement with the private sector to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and promote
inclusive markets and sustainable business development,
Recognizing the importance of investments in technological industry and the digital economy to promote
connectivity and digital partnerships, and that development and transfer of technology is a powerful driver of
sustainable development and that there is a need to foster linkages between multinational companies and the
domestic public and private sectors, as appropriate, to facilitate technology development and transfer on mutually
agreed terms,
1. Emphasizes that promoting investments in value addition and in the processing of natural resources and
productive diversification ensures more inclusive and sustainable development, and in this regard encourages
accelerated national efforts and the strengthening of international cooperation in areas that support policies and
programmes that increase public and private, domestic and international investments for structural change in the
economies of developing countries;
2. Encourages the promotion of sustainable and innovative financing opportunities and mechanisms to
unlock new capital for sustainable investment and upscale sustainable business models, with a special focus on small
and medium-sized enterprises;
3. Notes with concern that many of the least developed countries and small island developing States continue
to be largely sidelined by foreign direct investment that could help to diversify their economies, despite improvements
in their investment climates;
4. Also notes with concern the gap in access to capital for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, in
particular for businesses led by women, young entrepreneurs and persons with disabilities, and recognizes that
financial markets can be a powerful vehicle for economic growth and poverty alleviation, including when they support
businesses that have a sustainable development impact and when access to credit is inclusive across all segments of
an economy;
5. Recognizes that foreign direct investment can have positive spillovers, such as know-how and technology,
including through establishing linkages with domestic suppliers, as well as encouraging the integration of local
enterprises, in particular micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises in developing countries, into regional and global
value chains;
6. Emphasizes that foreign direct investment may have different impacts on sustainable development goals
and underlines the need to strengthen the alignment of foreign direct investment with national policies and sustainable
development strategies;
7. Recognizes the need to develop and strengthen policies and, where appropriate, enhance regulatory
frameworks to better align private sector incentives with sustainable development goals, including incentivizing the
private sector to adopt sustainable practices, and foster long-term quality investment;
8. Encourages national and international efforts to integrate sustainability into the financial system and thus
to further re-orient capital flows towards investments that are sustainable from an economic, social and environmental
perspective;

476

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

9. Also encourages financial actors at all levels to work towards the establishment of inclusive, representative
and responsible financial practices, including practices related to transparency, disclosure and standards, as
appropriate;
10. Welcomes the progress made by many countries in strengthening the enabling environment for private
sector businesses and investments, but notes that more can be done to create competitive business and investment
climates, including by increasing efforts to combat corruption, that are well placed to attract private sector investment
and participation in support of sustainable development;
11. Reiterates that greater gender equality in the distribution of economic resources can provide the means for
women to generate income and creates positive multiplier effects for the achievement of inclusive, equitable and
sustainable economic growth, and in this regard reiterates the need for targeted actions and investments;
12. Recognizes the importance of private sector engagement with national, international and intergovernmental
organizations, Member States and other relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, in their efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, in an effective, accountable and consultative manner;
13. Notes the importance of sustainable corporate practices, including integrating environmental, social and
governance factors into company reporting, as appropriate, with countries deciding on the appropriate balance of
voluntary and mandatory rules, and encourages businesses to adopt principles for responsible business and
investing;
14. Acknowledges the importance of corporate sustainability reporting, encourages companies, especially
publicly listed and large companies, to integrate sustainability and due diligence information into their reporting
cycles, encourages industry, interested Governments and relevant stakeholders, with the support of the United Nations
system, as appropriate, to enhance existing models and develop new models for best practice and to facilitate action
for the integration of sustainability reporting, taking into account experiences from already existing frameworks and
paying particular attention to the needs of developing countries, including for capacity-building, and welcomes in this
context the collaboration of the United Nations Global Compact with the Global Reporting Initiative and the World
Business Council for Sustainable Development;
15. Calls upon Member States to reduce tensions and other risk factors and to foster environments that are
conducive to scaling-up long-term and sustainable investments, characterized by, inter alia, open, transparent and
non-discriminatory investment policies;
16. Notes with concern the growing number of slum dwellers and the adverse effects on their health, safety
and livelihood opportunities, and in this regard encourages targeted investments to ensure affordable and adequate
housing as well as sustained investment for Sustainable Development Goal targets in these sectors by 2030;
17. Emphasizes that the private sector can contribute to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development23 in many ways, including through applying creative and innovative solutions to solving sustainable
development challenges, the alignment of its business models with the Sustainable Development Goals, and
supporting the efforts of the public sector in, inter alia, disaster risk reduction, climate action and skills development,
in accordance with national plans and policies;
18. Welcomes the growing interest among investors in taking sustainability issues into account in their
investment decisions, but acknowledges that further work is needed to analyse, monitor and measure its contribution
to the Sustainable Development Goals and maximize its positive developmental impact;
19. Acknowledges that reducing disaster risk, as outlined in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030,24 is a cost-effective investment in preventing future losses, and encourages Member States to
develop standards and regulations for disaster risk-informed public and private sector investments and to ensure that
pipeline and bankable projects include disaster risk assessments;

_______________
23
24

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/283, annex II.

477

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

20. Encourages Member States to achieve sustainable development in its three dimensions in an innovative,
integrated, transparent, inclusive and equitable manner, which requires sufficient, sustainable and predictable
investment through both the public and the private sectors;
21. Invites all relevant stakeholders to explore the possibilities of taking sustainability factors into account in
credit rating assessments and to strengthen credit markets to promote the growth of micro-, small and medium-sized
enterprises, in particular those owned by women;
22. Recognizes the growing momentum around sustainable investment and finance, and invites private
companies to adopt sustainable practices that foster long-term value;
23. Stresses the need to take stock of public and private initiatives to measure investment impacts on the
Sustainable Development Goals, identify their similarities and differences, and lay out potential gaps;
24. Welcomes in this regard the request, in the outcome document of the 2019 Economic and Social Council
forum on financing for development follow-up, to the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development to
further its analysis on the impact and metrics for measurement of the contribution of private sector investments and
instruments to the Sustainable Development Goals at the global level,22 and encourages international support for
Member States, according to national circumstances and priorities, to voluntarily develop practical tools on measuring
and collecting timely and reliable data on the private sector contribution towards the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals at the national level, as appropriate;
25. Emphasizes that international public finance plays an important role in complementing the efforts of
countries to mobilize public resources domestically and that official development assistance, as a critical source for
development finance, helps developing countries to secure sufficient public resources to invest in sectors that could
accelerate the delivery of the transformational ambition of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and notes
in this regard the need to intensify efforts to meet respective commitments, focusing the most concessional resources
on those with the greatest needs and least ability to mobilize other resources;
26. Notes the potential of blended finance, including its ability to crowd in, leverage or catalyse additional
financing, and stresses that projects should be aligned with national priorities, have long-lasting development impact
and be in the public interest, while recognizing that for different Sustainable Development Goal investment areas,
different types of finance may represent the most effective financing modalities;
27. Encourages Member States to promote shareholder and consumer engagement that may encourage
companies to take into account consumers’ sustainability preferences;
28. Calls upon development partners to continue to support efforts to strengthen policy frameworks to
incentivize finance for productive investment, including building capacity to access available financing, particularly
in the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and African
countries, and taking into account the specific challenges faced by middle-income countries;
29. Emphasizes the need for technical assistance and capacity-building support for investment promotion and
developing project pipelines and bankable projects, in particular for developing countries;
30. Calls upon the United Nations system and all relevant stakeholders to support the capacity-building of
developing countries in their efforts to close the Sustainable Development Goals investment gaps, especially at the
country programme level, on the use of public finance to leverage private investment for projects benefiting
sustainable development;
31. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to inform the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session of the implementation of the
present resolution, based on their ongoing research, through a dedicated section of the World Investment Report, with
a special focus on the gaps and challenges faced and the progress made in promoting investments for sustainable
development as well as concrete recommendations for the advancement of investment for the implementation of the
2030 Agenda, and looks forward to the continuing consideration of these issues in the forthcoming reports of the InterAgency Task Force on Financing for Development;
32. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”, a sub-item entitled “Promoting investments for sustainable development”.
478

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 74/200
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 122 to 2, with 51 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/379/Add.1, para. 21)25
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/200. Unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,26 which states, inter alia, that no State may use or
encourage the use of unilateral economic, political or any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to
obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights,
Bearing in mind the general principles governing the international trading system and trade policies for
development contained in relevant resolutions, rules and provisions of the United Nations and the World Trade
Organization,
Recalling its resolutions 44/215 of 22 December 1989, 46/210 of 20 December 1991, 48/168 of 21 December
1993, 50/96 of 20 December 1995, 52/181 of 18 December 1997, 54/200 of 22 December 1999, 56/179 of
21 December 2001, 58/198 of 23 December 2003, 60/185 of 22 December 2005, 62/183 of 19 December 2007,
64/189 of 21 December 2009, 66/186 of 22 December 2011, 68/200 of 20 December 2013, 70/185 of 22 December
2015 and 72/201 of 20 December 2017,
Gravely concerned that the use of unilateral coercive economic measures adversely affects the economies and
the development efforts of developing countries in particular and has a general negative impact on international
economic cooperation and on worldwide efforts to move towards a non-discriminatory and open multilateral trading
system,
Recognizing that such measures constitute a flagrant violation of the principles of international law as set forth
in the Charter, as well as the basic principles of the multilateral trading system,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States that are
members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018).
26
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
25

479

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;27

2. Urges the international community to adopt urgent and effective measures to eliminate the use of unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures that are not authorized by relevant organs of the United Nations, that are
inconsistent with the principles of international law or the Charter of the United Nations or that contravene the basic
principles of the multilateral trading system and that affect, in particular, but not exclusively, developing countries;
3. Calls upon the international community to condemn and reject the imposition of the use of such measures
as a means of political and economic coercion against developing countries that impedes the full achievement of
economic and social development;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the imposition of unilateral economic measures as a means of
political and economic coercion and to study the impact of such measures on the affected countries, including the
impact on trade and development;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, with a particular focus on the impacts of unilateral economic
measures on the achievement of sustainable development.
RESOLUTION 74/201
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 176 to 2, with no abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/379/Add.1, para. 21)28
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: None

74/201. International trade and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/178 of 21 December 2001, 57/235 of 20 December 2002, 58/197 of 23 December
2003, 59/221 of 22 December 2004, 60/184 of 22 December 2005, 61/186 of 20 December 2006, 62/184 of
19 December 2007, 63/203 of 19 December 2008, 64/188 of 21 December 2009, 65/142 of 20 December 2010,
66/185 of 22 December 2011, 67/196 of 21 December 2012, 68/199 of 20 December 2013, 69/205 of 19 December
2014, 70/187 of 22 December 2015, 71/214 of 21 December 2016, 72/202 of 20 December 2017 and 73/219 of
20 December 2018,

_______________
A/74/264.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Kazakhstan, and the State of Palestine (on behalf of
the States that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
27
28

480

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recognizing the need to ensure that the benefits of trade are more widely shared,
Reaffirming World Trade Organization decision WT/MIN(15)/48-WT/L/982 of 19 December 2015 on the
implementation of preferential treatment in favour of services and service suppliers of least developed countries and
increasing their participation in services trade and decision WT/L/508/Add.1 of 25 July 2012 on accession by the least
developed countries, encouraging progress on the implementation of the World Trade Organization work programme
on small economies, which supports their efforts towards sustainable development, as also reflected in the outcome
document of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,29 and stressing that Aid for Trade and targeted trade-related capacity-building are
essential to integrating developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States, into the international trading system,
Recognizing the critical role of women as producers and traders and the need to address their specific challenges
in order to facilitate their equal and active participation in domestic, regional and international trade,
Recognizing also that multilateral rules and disciplines are the best guarantee against protectionism and are
fundamental to the transparency, predictability and stability of international trade,
Noting the commitments to working to ensure that bilateral, regional and plurilateral trade agreements
complement the multilateral trading system, recognizing that they can play an important role in complementing global
liberalization initiatives, and in this regard welcoming the entry into force of the Agreement Establishing the African
Continental Free Trade Area, on 30 May 2019,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development30 and the report of the Secretary-General;31
2. Reaffirms that international trade is an engine for inclusive growth and poverty eradication and that it
contributes to the promotion of sustainable development, structural transformation and industrialization, particularly
in developing countries;
3. Reiterates that States will not be able to achieve the ambitious Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development32 without a revitalized and enhanced global partnership and comparably ambitious means
of implementation, and that a revitalized global partnership will facilitate an intensive global engagement in support

_______________
Resolution 69/15, annex.
A/74/15 (Part I) and A/74/15 (Part II).
31
A/74/221.
32
Resolution 70/1.
29
30

481

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, bringing together Governments, civil society, the private sector, the United
Nations system and other actors and mobilizing all available resources;
4. Reaffirms the commitments made through the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development33 in, inter alia, international trade as an important action area
for sustainable development;
5. Notes with concern that the World Trade Organization is increasingly affected by insufficient progress in
multilateral trade negotiations and that it is imperative for the World Trade Organization to address issues that are at
the heart of current problems in international trade, and recognizes in this regard the need to strengthen the World
Trade Organization, with a view to ensuring the continued viability and effectiveness of its dispute settlement,
negotiating and monitoring functions;
6. Recommits firmly to promoting a universal, rules-based, open, transparent, predictable, inclusive,
non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system under the World Trade Organization, as well as
meaningful trade liberalization;
7. Emphasizes the urgent need to combat protectionism in all its forms and to rectify any trade-distorting
measures that are inconsistent with World Trade Organization rules, recognizing the right of countries, in particular
developing countries, to fully utilize flexibilities consistent with their World Trade Organization commitments and
obligations, and also emphasizes that the work of the World Trade Organization shall maintain development at its
centre, with provisions for special and differential treatment remaining integral;
8. Urges the international community to adopt urgent and effective measures to eliminate the use of unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures that are not authorized by relevant organs of the United Nations, that are
inconsistent with the principles of international law or the Charter of the United Nations or that contravene the basic
principles of the multilateral trading system and that affect, in particular, but not exclusively, developing countries;
9. Calls upon all members of the World Trade Organization to urgently conclude negotiations on fisheries
subsidies in 2019, consistent with the decision of the eleventh Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization34 and with a view to meeting the Sustainable Development Goals;
10. Underlines the importance of the Agreement on Trade Facilitation annexed to the Protocol amending the
Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization in improving transparency, expediting the
movement, release and clearance of goods, including goods in transit, and thereby reducing trade costs, and in this
regard encourages its full and effective implementation, including through enhanced support towards its
implementation;
11. Looks forward to the convening of the fifteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in Barbados from 18 to 23 October 2020;
12. Welcomes the convening of the twelfth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization in
Nur-Sultan from 8 to 11 June 2020, looks forward to achieving positive outcomes in a balanced, inclusive and
transparent way, and expresses its appreciation to the Government of Kazakhstan for hosting the meeting;
13. Reiterates the important role of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as the focal
point within the United Nations system for the integrated treatment of trade and development and interrelated issues
in the areas of finance, technology, investment and sustainable development, and in contributing to supporting the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda;
14. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on the implementation
of the present resolution and on developments in the international trading system, including concrete recommendations

_______________
33
34

482

Resolution 69/313, annex.
WT/MIN(17)/64-WT/L/1031 of 13 December 2017.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

to accelerate the implementation of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda in this regard, and decides to include in the
provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, the subitem entitled “International trade and development”.
RESOLUTION 74/202
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 179 to 1, with no abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/379/Add.2, para. 9)35
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: United States of America
Abstaining: None

74/202. International financial system and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/186 of 20 December 2000 and 56/181 of 21 December 2001, entitled “Towards a
strengthened and stable international financial architecture responsive to the priorities of growth and development,
especially in developing countries, and to the promotion of economic and social equity”, as well as its resolutions
57/241 of 20 December 2002, 58/202 of 23 December 2003, 59/222 of 22 December 2004, 60/186 of 22 December
2005, 61/187 of 20 December 2006, 62/185 of 19 December 2007, 63/205 of 19 December 2008, 64/190 of
21 December 2009, 65/143 of 20 December 2010, 66/187 of 22 December 2011, 67/197 of 21 December 2012,
68/201 of 20 December 2013, 69/206 of 19 December 2014, 70/188 of 22 December 2015, 71/215 of 21 December
2016, 72/203 of 20 December 2017 and 73/220 of 20 December 2018,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete

_______________
35

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.

483

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recalling the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up
International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,
held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008,36
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration,37 its resolution 56/210 B of 9 July 2002, in which it
endorsed the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,38 the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development,39 Agenda 21,40 the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 2141 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,42
Recalling further the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development
and its outcome document,43 recognizing the work undertaken by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the
General Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the Conference, and taking note of its
progress report,44
Recalling the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from
20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,45
Appreciating the fact that the Summit of the Group of 20 held in Hangzhou, China, on 4 and 5 September 2016,
with the broad participation of developing countries, including the Chair of the Group of 77, endorsed the Group
of 20 Action Plan on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as an important contribution to the global
implementation of the 2030 Agenda, recalling that the Summit of the Group of 20 held in Hamburg, Germany, on
7 and 8 July 2017 endorsed the Hamburg Update: Taking Forward the Group of 20 Action Plan on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, recalling also that the Summit of the Group of 20 held in Buenos Aires on 30 November
and 1 December 2018 endorsed the Buenos Aires Update: Moving Forward the Group of 20 Action Plan on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, recalling further that the Summit of the Group of 20 held in Osaka, Japan, on
28 and 29 June 2019 endorsed the Osaka Update on the Group of 20 Action Plan on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and looking forward to their implementation, while urging the Group of 20 to continue to engage in an
inclusive and transparent manner with other States Members of the United Nations in its work in order to ensure that
the initiatives of the Group of 20 complement or strengthen the United Nations system,
Noting the holding of the twenty-third Saint Petersburg International Economic Forum in Saint Petersburg,
Russian Federation, from 6 to 8 June 2019,
Recognizing that the remaining effects of the world financial and economic crisis have the potential to
undermine debt sustainability and progress towards achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including
the Sustainable Development Goals, especially in developing countries, and stressing the need to avoid the recurrence
of such crises, including by addressing the lessons learned, improving confidence, sustaining economic growth and
promoting full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including young people, older
persons and people with disabilities, and by continuing to promote global economic stability and the underlying
institutional reforms required to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals,

_______________
Resolution 63/239, annex.
Resolution 55/2.
38
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18−22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
39
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
40
Ibid., annex II.
41
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
42
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
43
Resolution 63/303, annex.
44
A/64/884.
45
Resolution 66/288, annex.
36
37

484

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Expressing concern about the adverse impact of the continuing fragility of the global economy, the slow pace
of the restoration of global growth and trade, increasing protectionism and inward-looking policies, with increasing
systemic risks that threaten financial stability, including in developing countries,
Expressing concern also at the continued decline in correspondent banking relationships, impacting the ability
to send and receive international payments, with potential consequences for the cost of remittances, financial inclusion
and international trade, among other areas, and thus for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Reaffirming the purposes of the United Nations, as set forth in its Charter, including to achieve international
cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and to be a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of common ends, and reiterating the need to strengthen
the leadership role of the United Nations in promoting development,
Recognizing the contribution of the original and reconvened Panel of Eminent Persons of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development in the context of the United Nations sustainable development pillar and United
Nations reform, as well as the contribution of the United Nations system to sustainable finance and investments in the
Sustainable Development Goals, and recognizing also the contribution of the independent team of advisers to the
Economic and Social Council dialogue on the longer-term positioning of the United Nations development system in
the context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recognizing also that adequate incentives for international investors to adopt longer-term investment strategies
can support the achievement of sustainable development and potentially reduce capital market volatility,
Emphasizing that the international financial system should bolster sustainable, inclusive and sustained economic
growth, sustainable development and job creation, promote financial inclusion and support efforts to eradicate poverty
in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, and hunger, in particular in developing countries, while
allowing for the coherent mobilization of all sources of financing for development,
Taking note of the work of the United Nations in the area of external debt sustainability and development,
Recognizing the importance of scaling up international tax cooperation, and in this regard welcoming the work
of the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters and the support to tax authorities of
developing countries through the Addis Tax Initiative, which contribute to the mobilization of domestic resources for
the Sustainable Development Goals and the curbing of illicit financial flows and tax evasion,
Recognizing also the need to reduce mechanistic reliance on credit-rating agency assessments, including in
regulations, and to promote increased competition as well as measures to avoid conflict of interest in the provision of
credit ratings in order to improve the quality of ratings, acknowledging the efforts of the Financial Stability Board and
others in this area, expressing support for establishing greater transparency requirements for evaluation standards of
credit-rating agencies, and affirming the commitment to continue ongoing work on these issues,
Acknowledging the 2016 implementation of quota and governance reforms at the International Monetary Fund
and the 2018 agreement on shareholding reforms at the World Bank Group, including a general capital increase, a
selective capital increase and a financial sustainability framework, and the conclusion of the fifteenth general quota
review of the Fund in the last quarter of 2019, and acknowledging also that, in October 2016, the Chinese renminbi
officially became the fifth currency in the special drawing rights basket, pursuant to the decision taken by the
Executive Board of the Fund in November 2015,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;46

2. Recognizes the need to continue and intensify efforts to enhance the coherence and consistency of the
international monetary, financial and trading systems, reiterates the importance of ensuring their openness, fairness
and inclusiveness in order to complement national efforts to ensure sustainable development, including strong,
sustained, balanced, inclusive and equitable economic growth, and that all men and women, in particular the poor and
vulnerable, have equal rights to economic resources and appropriate financial services, and the achievement of the

_______________
46

A/74/168.

485

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, and encourages the
international financial institutions to align their programmes and policies with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development47 in accordance with their mandates;
3. Notes that the United Nations, on the basis of its universal membership and legitimacy, provides a unique
and key forum for discussing international economic issues and their impact on development, and reaffirms that the
United Nations is well positioned to participate in various reform processes aimed at improving and strengthening the
effective functioning of the international financial system and architecture, while recognizing that the United Nations
and the international financial institutions have complementary mandates that make the coordination of their actions
crucial;
4. Recognizes the important efforts undertaken nationally, regionally and internationally to respond to the
challenges posed by the latest global financial and economic crisis, and also recognizes that more needs to be done in
order to promote the economic recovery, to manage the consequences of volatility in global financial and commodity
markets, to tackle high unemployment and rising indebtedness in many countries, as well as widespread fiscal strains,
to reinforce the banking sector, including by increasing its transparency and accountability, to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances, to reform and strengthen the international financial system and to continue and to enhance
the coordination of financial and economic policies at the international level;
5. Stresses the critical importance of a stable, inclusive and enabling global economic environment for the
advancement of sustainable development, for the reliable and effective financing of development and for the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, mobilizing public and private, as well as domestic
and international resources;
6. Notes the need for open, inclusive and transparent discussions on the modernization of official
development assistance measurement and on the proposed measure of “total official support for sustainable
development”, and reaffirms that any such measure will not dilute commitments already made;
7. Reiterates that debtors and creditors, including both public and private, must work together in a transparent
manner to prevent and resolve unsustainable debt situations and that maintaining sustainable debt levels is the
responsibility of the borrowing countries, acknowledging, however, that lenders also have a responsibility to lend in
a way that does not undermine a country’s debt sustainability, and in this regard takes note of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development principles on responsible sovereign lending and borrowing and recognizes
the applicable requirements of the International Monetary Fund debt limits policy and/or the World Bank
non-concessional borrowing policy, as well as the safeguards of the Development Assistance Committee of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in its statistical system to enhance the debt sustainability
of recipient countries, and will work towards a global consensus on guidelines for debtor and creditor responsibilities
in borrowing by and lending to sovereigns, building on existing initiatives;
8. Invites, in this regard, the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to give appropriate
consideration to the central role of maintaining and facilitating the financial and macroeconomic stability of
developing countries, including debt sustainability, and of supporting an appropriately enabling domestic and
international economic, financial and regulatory environment for the means of implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, including financial inclusion, and in this regard invites all major institutional
stakeholders, including the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to support these efforts, in accordance with their respective mandates;
9. Encourages, in this regard, the Economic and Social Council to consider, at its annual forum on financing
for development follow-up, a dedicated discussion and analysis of systemic issues and challenges, taking into account
the roles of the international financial institutions, including the International Monetary Fund, and of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in accordance with their respective mandates, pursuant to the relevant
resolutions on this matter, including its resolution 69/313 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development and the mandate of the annual forum on financing for development
follow-up set out therein;

_______________
47

486

Resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Resolves to strengthen the coherence and consistency of multilateral financial, investment, trade and
development policy and environment institutions and platforms and to increase cooperation between major
international institutions, while respecting mandates and governance structures, and commits itself to taking better
advantage of relevant United Nations forums for promoting universal and holistic coherence and international
commitments to sustainable development, building on the vision of the Monterrey Consensus,38 with a view to
supporting the implementation of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
11. Recalls that countries must have, in accordance with their specific needs and circumstances, the flexibility
necessary to implement countercyclical measures and pursue tailored and targeted responses to the various types of
shocks, including economic and financial crises, notes that, in the 2018 International Monetary Fund review of
programme design and conditionality, it was found that the number of structural conditions included in programmes
of the Fund had increased over time, and calls for the Fund to build on recent progress to further prioritize reforms
and streamline conditions to ensure that they are timely, tailored and targeted, in accordance with national
circumstances and priorities, and that they support developing countries in the face of financial, economic and
development challenges, while also noting that new and ongoing programmes should not contain unwarranted
procyclical conditionalities;
12. Notes, in this regard, the new strategy of the International Monetary Fund for engagement on social
spending, welcomes the Fund’s recognition of the adverse impacts that fiscal adjustment could have on the vulnerable,
for whom social spending is critical to achieving the commitments under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including floors, and
encourages greater collaboration on social protection finance between the Fund and international development
institutions;
13. Invites the multilateral development banks and other international development banks to continue to
provide both concessional and non-concessional, stable, long-term development finance by leveraging contributions
and capital and by mobilizing resources for developing countries from multiple sources, for example from capital
markets, and stresses that development banks should make optimal use of their resources and balance sheets,
consistent with maintaining their financial integrity, and should update and develop their policies in support of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including the Sustainable Development Goals, as appropriate;
14. Welcomes, in this regard, the ongoing work of the New Development Bank and the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank in the global development finance architecture, and encourages enhanced regional and subregional
cooperation, including through regional and subregional development banks, commercial and reserve currency
arrangements and other regional and subregional initiatives;
15. Encourages, in this regard, the multilateral development banks to continue to move forward on flexible,
concessional, fast-disbursing and front-loaded assistance that will substantially and quickly assist developing
countries facing financing gaps in their efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, taking into
consideration the individual absorptive capacities and debt sustainability of those countries, and invites shareholders
of regional development banks to ensure that they are sufficiently capitalized so as to be able to meet those needs;
16. Also encourages the multilateral development banks, within their respective mandates, to continue to
expand technical assistance, disseminate and share their knowledge and best practices and enhance the multiplier
effect of their financing by leveraging more resources from more sources, including by mobilizing private investment,
to provide innovative and integral solutions to multidimensional development problems, in particular in developing
and emerging economies;
17. Recognizes the need for the international financial institutions, as appropriate, to promote gender
mainstreaming in their policies and programmes, including macroeconomic, job creation and structural reform
policies and programmes, in accordance with relevant national priorities and strategies;
18. Urges multilateral donors and invites the international financial institutions and regional development
banks, within their respective mandates, to review and implement policies that support national efforts to ensure that
a higher proportion of resources reach women and girls, in particular in rural and remote areas, and invites multilateral
and regional development banks to agree on common indicators for analysing the gender impact of their lending;

487

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

19. Recognizes that it is important that the International Monetary Fund continue to be adequately resourced,
and supports and reiterates its commitment to further governance reform at both the Fund and the World Bank to
adapt to changes in the global economy;
20. Notes the lack of progress on a quota increase under the fifteenth general review of quotas of the
International Monetary Fund, but welcomes the political agreement reached on the review by the Board of Governors
on the occasion of the fortieth meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, held in
Washington, D.C., on 18 and 19 October 2019, as well as the support garnered for maintaining the Fund’s current
resource envelope with a doubling of the New Arrangements to Borrow and a further temporary round of bilateral
borrowing beyond 2020;
21. Recalls the commitment to revisiting the adequacy of quotas and continuing the process of International
Monetary Fund governance reform under the sixteenth general review of quotas, including a new quota formula as a
guide, with the review to be extended from 2020 to no later than 15 December 2023, and the commitment to ensuring
the primary role of quotas in Fund resources, and that any adjustment in quota shares would be expected to result in
increases in the quota shares of dynamic economies in line with their relative positions in the world economy and
hence likely in the share of emerging market and developing countries as a whole, while protecting the voice
and representation of the poorest members, and recommits itself to the broadening and strengthening of the voice and
participation of developing countries, including African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries, small island developing States, middle-income countries and countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations, in international economic decision-making, norm-setting and global economic governance;
22. Encourages Member States to work together to strengthen and improve a system in which different layers
of the global financial safety net are closely coordinated and have clear assignments of responsibilities and to consider
enhancing regional financial arrangements to help countries to weather shocks, strengthen their capacity to detect risk
and create new regional arrangements where there are not sufficient institutions in place;
23. Acknowledges the importance of the international financial institutions supporting, in line with their
mandates, the policy space of each country, while remaining consistent with relevant international rules and
commitments, in particular developing countries;
24. Reaffirms that cohesive, nationally owned sustainable development strategies, supported by integrated
national financing frameworks, will be at the heart of efforts, reiterates that each country has primary responsibility
for its own economic and social development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot
be overemphasized, expresses respect for each country’s policy space and leadership to implement policies for the
eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions and for sustainable development, while remaining consistent
with relevant international rules and commitments, at the same time recognizes that national development efforts need
to be supported by an enabling international economic environment, including coherent and mutually supporting
world trade, monetary and financial systems and strengthened and enhanced global economic governance, and that
processes to develop and facilitate the availability of appropriate knowledge and technologies globally, as well as
capacity-building, are also critical, and commits to pursuing policy coherence and an enabling environment for
sustainable development at all levels and by all actors, and to reinvigorating the Global Partnership for Sustainable
Development;
25. Recommits itself to a redoubling of its efforts to substantially reduce illicit financial flows by 2030, with a
view to eventually eliminating them, including by combating tax evasion and corruption through strengthened
national regulation and increased international cooperation;
26. Recognizes the role of special drawing rights as an international reserve asset, acknowledges that special
drawing rights allocations helped to supplement international reserves in response to the world financial and economic
crisis, thus contributing to the stability of the international financial system and global economic resilience, and
supports the continued examination of the broader use of special drawing rights as a way to enhance the resilience of
the international monetary system, including with reference to their potential role in the international reserve system;
27. Notes the rapid development of cryptoassets and the potential systemic implications of these private assets
on the functioning of the international monetary system, the ability of regulators to protect consumers and promote
financial stability and the ability of central banks to effectively use monetary policy to pursue domestic economic
objectives, encourages promoters of such assets to work with regulators on financial regulations in markets where
488

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

their assets are used, and urges regulators to carefully consider the potential implications for the international
and domestic financial system when formulating the appropriate regulatory treatment for cryptoassets in their
jurisdictions;
28. Looks forward to the results of the ongoing work by the Financial Stability Board and the Financial Action
Task Force on global stablecoins, underlining the need to appropriately address the risks associated with them and
other similar arrangements with potential systemic footprints before these projects can commence operation;
29. Notes the work by the Financial Stability Board on financial market reform, commits itself to sustaining
or strengthening frameworks for macroprudential regulation and countercyclical buffers, reaffirms the commitment
to hastening the completion of the reform agenda on financial market regulation, including assessing and if necessary
reducing the systemic risks associated with non-bank financial intermediation, markets for derivatives, securities lending
and repurchase agreements, and also reaffirms the commitment to addressing the risk created by “too‑big-to-fail”
financial institutions and to addressing cross-border elements in the effective resolution of troubled, systemically
important financial institutions;
30. Also notes that there are growing risks outside the regulatory framework, including through non-bank
financial institutions and financial technology, and calls upon financial regulators to increasingly shift towards
examining the underlying risks associated with financial activity rather than the type of financial institution;
31. Calls upon financial regulators to encourage financial institutions to explore new opportunities to improve
their ability to better manage risks, including through anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism
measures, as well as through the greater use of technology to help to address the costs and risks of operating
correspondent banking relationships;
32. Emphasizes the relevance of inclusion in the international financial system at all levels and the importance
of considering financial inclusion as a policy objective in financial regulation, in accordance with national priorities
and legislation;
33. Reiterates that effective, inclusive multilateral surveillance should be at the centre of crisis prevention
efforts, stresses the need to continue to strengthen surveillance of the financial policies of countries, and in this regard
notes the current efforts to update the surveillance approach of the International Monetary Fund to better integrate
bilateral and multilateral surveillance, along with cross-border and cross-sectoral linkages with macroeconomic and
macroprudential policies, while paying closer attention to the spillover effects from national economic and financial
policies on to the global economy;
34. Notes the potential for source countries of capital flows to use appropriate combinations of
macroeconomic, macroprudential and regulatory policies that avoid excessive leverage and large international
spillovers in the form of capital flow volatility, while still meeting domestic macroeconomic objectives, encourages
source countries to consider such policies, and calls for greater macroeconomic coordination among systemically
important economies, which can also help to address global financial market volatility;
35. Invites the international financial and banking institutions, in consultation with national Governments, to
develop tailored guidelines on how countries can attract long-term international investments, guided by the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, in line with national plans and policies, and with a view to minimizing the
adverse effects of capital market volatility;
36. Reiterates the need to resolve to reduce mechanistic reliance on credit-rating agency assessments,
including in regulations, and to promote increased competition as well as measures to avoid conflict of interest in the
provision of credit ratings;
37. Invites the international financial and banking institutions to continue to enhance the transparency and
analytical rigour of risk-rating mechanisms, noting that sovereign risk assessments should maximize the use of
objective and transparent parameters, which can be facilitated by high-quality data and analysis, and encourages
relevant institutions, including the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to continue their work on
the issue, including the potential impact of the role played by private credit rating agencies on the development
prospects of developing countries, in accordance with their mandates;
38. Recommits itself to enabling women’s full and equal participation in the economy and their equal access
to decision-making processes and leadership;
489

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

39. Welcomes efforts by new development banks to develop safeguard systems in open consultation with
stakeholders on the basis of established international standards, and encourages all development banks to establish or
maintain social and environmental safeguard systems, including on human rights, gender equality and women’s
empowerment, that are transparent, effective, efficient and time-sensitive;
40. Reiterates that States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral
economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations
that impede the full achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
41. Requests, in this regard, the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session an action-oriented report on the implementation of the present resolution with a particular focus on the decline
in correspondent banking and its effects, as well as recommendations for strengthening international cooperation to
facilitate the cross-border movement of legitimate funds;
42. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled “International financial system and development”, unless
otherwise agreed.
RESOLUTION 74/203
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/379/Add.3, para. 8)48

74/203. External debt sustainability and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/203 of 23 December 2003, 59/223 of 22 December 2004, 60/187 of 22 December
2005, 61/188 of 20 December 2006, 62/186 of 19 December 2007, 63/206 of 19 December 2008, 64/191 of
21 December 2009, 65/144 of 20 December 2010, 66/189 of 22 December 2011, 67/198 of 21 December 2012,
68/202 of 20 December 2013, 69/207 of 19 December 2014, 70/190 of 22 December 2015, 71/216 of 21 December
2016, 72/204 of 20 December 2017 and 73/221 of 20 December 2018,
Noting the work of the United Nations in this area,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement,49 and encouraging all its parties to fully implement the Agreement,
and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change50 that have not yet done so to deposit
their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
50
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
48
49

490

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development and its
outcome document,51
Recalling also the 2019 Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up, its
intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and recommendations52 and the High-level Dialogue on Financing for
Development held under the auspices of the General Assembly,
Emphasizing that debt sustainability is essential for underpinning growth, underlining the importance of debt
sustainability, debt transparency and effective debt management to the efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals, and acknowledging that debt crises are costly and disruptive, including for employment and productive
investment, and tend to be followed by cuts in public spending, including on health and education, affecting the poor
and vulnerable in particular,
Reaffirming that each country has primary responsibility for its own development, including through
maintaining its own debt sustainability, and that the role of national policies and development strategies, including in
the area of debt management, is central to the achievement of sustainable development, and recognizing that national
efforts, including to achieve development goals and to maintain debt sustainability, should be complemented by
supportive global programmes, measures and policies aimed at expanding the development opportunities of
developing countries, while taking into account national conditions and ensuring respect for national ownership,
strategies and sovereignty,
Reiterating that debt sustainability depends on a confluence of many factors at the international and national
levels, and emphasizing that country-specific circumstances and the impact of external shocks, such as volatile
commodity and energy prices, more intense and frequent natural disasters and international capital flows, should
continue to be taken into account in debt sustainability analyses,
Expressing concern about the adverse impact of the continuing fragility of the global economy and the slow
pace of the restoration of global growth and trade, including the impact on development, cognizant that the global
economy remains in a challenging phase, with many downside risks, including net negative capital flows from some
emerging and developing economies, continued low commodity prices, high unemployment, in particular among
young people, women, persons with disabilities and other people in vulnerable situations, and rising private and public
indebtedness in many developing countries, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to address systemic fragilities
and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while implementing the reforms
agreed upon to date to attend to these challenges and to make progress towards sustaining global demand,
Expressing deep concern that global growth has remained strongly dependent on unprecedented increases in
global debt stocks in the years since the global financial crisis, and, in conjunction with the fast integration of
developing countries into international financial markets, including for purposes of debt refinancing, exposes a
growing number of developing economies to highly sensitive and amplified reactions to even mildly adverse
economic developments, or the perception of such, in financial markets,
Underlining that, globally, the gross domestic product growth rate could increase significantly if every country
achieved gender equality, and recognizing that the economic and social losses owing to a lack of progress in achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls are significant,
Recognizing with concern that, by 2018, the external debt positions of many developing countries had worsened
again, with external debt stocks growing at a cumulative rate of almost 20 per cent for all developing countries over
the past three years alone and with the ratio of total external debt to gross domestic product increasing to 29.1 per cent
in 2018, compared with 23.3 per cent in 2011, and that the external debt positions of middle-income countries and
small island developing States have worsened, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General,53
Recognizing with concern also that small island developing States saw a sharp rise in 2003 in their total ratio of
external debt to gross domestic product, which increased from 19.8 per cent in 2000 to 85.6 per cent in 2003, and that

_______________
Resolution 63/303, annex.
See E/FFDF/2019/3.
53
A/74/234.
51
52

491

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

by 2010, external debt stocks had surpassed their combined gross domestic product, with the ratio reaching
118.9 per cent for small island developing States as a whole,
Recognizing with concern further that total external debt stocks in middle-income countries, excluding small
island developing States, grew by 8 per cent per annum over the period from 2009 to 2018, total external debt has
grown by over 20 per cent since 2016 and the current debt represents 26.8 per cent of their combined gross domestic
product, and that the debt of middle-income countries is not only growing at a faster pace than anticipated, but is a
more costly debt with a shorter maturity,
Recognizing the important role, on a case-by-case basis, of debt relief, including debt cancellation, as
appropriate, and debt restructuring as debt crisis prevention, management and resolution tools,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,54
reiterating that severe natural disasters and social or economic shocks can undermine a country’s debt sustainability,
and noting that public creditors have taken steps to ease debt repayment obligations through debt rescheduling and
debt cancellation following an earthquake or a tsunami and in the context of the Ebola crisis in West Africa, noting
the debt swap initiative of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Debt for Climate
Adaptation Swap, and encouraging consideration of further debt relief steps, such as the use of sovereign contingent
debt instruments, where appropriate, and/or other measures for countries affected in this regard, as feasible,
Expressing deep concern that a number of countries in special situations, in particular African countries, the
least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well as a growing
number of middle-income countries, face challenges in servicing their debt and that, in spite of international efforts, a
growing number of developing countries continue to struggle with high debt burdens and are classified, in accordance
with the debt sustainability assessments, as being in debt distress or at high risk of debt distress,
Recognizing the importance of debt sustainability for the smooth transition of countries graduating from least
developed country status, as well as those that have already graduated,
Emphasizing that international support, in the form of official development assistance and a coordinated
multilateral effort to provide low-cost, long-term development financing, as well as enhanced domestic resource
mobilization, which is the primary source of financing for development across all country classifications, are needed
to address the growing challenges to developing countries’ debt sustainability,
Taking note of the operational guidelines for sustainable financing promoted by the Group of 20, while urging
the Group to continue to engage in an inclusive and transparent manner with other States Members of the United
Nations in its work, in order to ensure that the initiatives of the Group complement or strengthen the United Nations
system, and noting the progress achieved in the implementation of the operational guidelines,
Noting the need for coordinated efforts by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to promote
responsible, transparent and sustainable lending and borrowing, including debt transparency,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;53

2. Emphasizes the special importance of timely, effective, comprehensive and durable solutions to the debt
problems of developing countries to promote their economic growth and development;
3. Recognizes the importance, in particular, of new and emerging challenges and vulnerabilities in regard to
developing country external debt sustainability arising from structural changes to overall debt composition, the rapid
growth of private sector debt in many emerging and developing countries and the growing use of new debt financing
instruments and approaches;
4. Notes the growing concerns about fast-rising corporate debt, high-risk exposure to volatile international
financial markets and fast-growing debt servicing burdens as potential triggers of financial and debt crises and the
consequent need for coordinated policy responses;

_______________
54

492

Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Stresses the need to continue to assist developing countries in avoiding a build-up of unsustainable debt
so as to reduce the risk of relapsing into another debt crisis, taking into account the challenges posed by the global
economic environment and risks for debt sustainability in some developed and developing countries;
6. Acknowledges the role played by the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income Countries, jointly
developed by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to guide borrowing and lending decisions, and
notes its operationalization in 2018 and the further enhancement of debt sustainability assessment frameworks,
consistent with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development55 and longer-term structural transformation;
7. Reiterates that no single indicator should be used to make definitive judgments about a country’s debt
sustainability, and, in view of the new challenges and vulnerabilities for developing countries’ external debt
sustainability, substantiated by the work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and recent joint
analyses of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, stresses the need for improved data collection and
quality in areas that include domestic public debt and domestic and external private debt, as well as legal and
regulatory features, such as ownership, currency denomination and jurisdiction according to national priorities;
8. Also reiterates that timely and comprehensive data on the level and composition of debt are necessary for,
inter alia, building early warning systems aimed at limiting the impact of debt crises, calls for debtor and creditor
countries to intensify their efforts to collect and release data, where appropriate, welcomes the ongoing work of
relevant institutions to apply innovative tools for monitoring financial stress in developing countries and to create a
central data registry that includes information on debt restructuring, and calls for donors to consider increasing their
support for technical cooperation programmes aimed at increasing the statistical capacity of developing countries in
that regard;
9. Encourages the United Nations system, the World Bank Group, the International Monetary Fund and
other relevant stakeholders, including the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, to continue to conduct analytical activities and to provide policy advice and technical
assistance to Governments, upon request, in the areas of managing debt, and operating and maintaining databases,
and in this regard recalls that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should continue its analytical
and policy work and technical assistance on debt issues, including the Debt Management and Financial Analysis
System Programme, so that this extends not only to improvements in the timeliness and accuracy of debt data
recording, but also to the enhanced coverage of public sector and other relevant debt data, including, in particular,
heretofore unrecorded or hidden debt instruments, contingent liabilities and more complex debt instruments;
10. Stresses the need to strengthen information-sharing and transparency among all creditors and borrowers
to make sure that debt sustainability assessments are based on comprehensive, objective and reliable data, including
an assessment of national public and private debt, in order to ensure the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals, encourages further improvement of the mutual exchange of information, on a voluntary basis, on borrowing
and lending among all creditors and borrowers, and takes note of the Paris Forum initiative, which is aimed at
gathering together sovereign creditors and debtors to share views and information, promote greater debt transparency
and preserve debt sustainability;
11. Recognizes that the long-term sustainability of debt depends on, inter alia, economic growth, the
mobilization of domestic and international resources, the export prospects of debtor countries, sustainable debt
management, sound macroeconomic policies that also support job creation, transparent and effective regulatory
frameworks and success in overcoming structural development problems and, hence, on the creation of an enabling
environment at all levels that is conducive to development, and also recognizes the need to assist developing countries
in attaining long-term debt sustainability, through coordinated policies aimed at fostering adequate debt financing and
resolution tools, such as debt relief and debt restructuring supporting sound debt management;
12. Notes with concern that some low- and middle-income developing countries that were not part of the
existing debt relief initiatives now have large debt burdens that may create constraints on mobilizing the resources
needed to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, indicating a need to consider, as appropriate, stronger debt
management initiatives for those countries, and stresses the importance of medium- and long-term debt sustainability
to deal with debt, including bilateral and non-Paris Club debt;

_______________
55

Resolution 70/1.

493

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

13. Underlines the fact that heavily indebted poor countries eligible for debt relief will not be able to enjoy
the full benefits unless all creditors, both public and private, contribute to debt workouts, as appropriate, in order to
ensure the debt sustainability of those countries, and invites creditors, both private and public, that are not yet fully
participating in debt relief initiatives to substantially increase their participation, including by providing comparable
treatment, to the extent possible, to debtor countries that have concluded sustainable debt relief agreements with
creditors;
14. Stresses the need for the international community to remain vigilant in monitoring the debt situation of
developing countries, including the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island
developing States, and to continue to take effective measures, preferably within existing frameworks, when
applicable, to address the debt problem of those countries, acknowledges that sound debt management initiatives can
play a key role in liberating resources that should be directed towards activities consistent with the eradication of
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, and with the promotion of sustained economic
growth and development and the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development
Goals, and in this regard urges countries to direct the resources freed through debt relief, in particular through debt
cancellation and reduction, towards achieving those objectives, including in the context of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, according to their national priorities and strategies;
15. Notes that countries can seek to negotiate, as a last resort, on a case-by-case basis and through existing
frameworks, agreements on temporary debt standstills between debtors and creditors in order to help to mitigate the
adverse impacts of a debt crisis and stabilize macroeconomic developments;
16. Acknowledges the efforts of, and invites creditors to provide additional flexibility to, developing countries
affected by natural disasters so as to allow them to address their national debt concerns, while taking into account their
specific economic and social situations and needs;
17. Recognizes that the detrimental impact of disasters on the debt sustainability of many least developed
countries, small island developing States and middle-income countries warrants further attention and that preserving
external debt sustainability requires ex ante financing to enable the systematic reduction of disaster risk and resiliencebuilding, as well as the disclosure of disaster risk to avoid exacerbating debt distress, when feasible, and in this regard
recognizes that many least developed countries, small island developing States and middle-income countries have
limited access to financing to invest in disaster risk reduction for resilience before and after disasters;
18. Also recognizes that, in some cases, the use of public debt and renewed external borrowing to absorb the
impact of a natural disaster could lead to higher debt servicing for developing countries and constrain their growth
and their capacity to invest in long-term resilience-building measures, and further acknowledges that, with each new
disaster, financial vulnerabilities grow and domestic response capacities weaken;
19. Further recognizes the importance of the creation of robust, nationally appropriate legal and regulatory
frameworks for sustainable national and municipal borrowing, on the basis of sustainable debt management,
supported by adequate revenues and capacities, by means of local creditworthiness, as well as expanded sustainable
municipal debt markets, when appropriate, and in this regard underlines the importance of the establishment of
appropriate financial intermediaries for urban financing, such as regional, national, subnational and local development
funds or development banks, including pooled financing mechanisms, which can catalyse public and private, national
and international financing;
20. Underlines the importance of multilateral efforts to tackle increasingly complex cross-border challenges
that have serious effects on development and debt sustainability;
21. Recognizes the role of the United Nations and of the international financial institutions, in accordance with
their respective mandates, and encourages them to continue to support global efforts towards sustained and inclusive
growth, sustainable development and the external debt sustainability of developing countries, including through
continued monitoring of global financial flows and their implications in this regard;
22. Reiterates that debtors and creditors must work together in a transparent manner to prevent and resolve
unsustainable debt situations and that maintaining sustainable debt levels is the responsibility of the borrowing
countries, acknowledges that lenders also have a responsibility to lend in a way that does not undermine a country’s
debt sustainability, and in this regard takes note of the principles on responsible sovereign lending and borrowing of
494

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, recognizes the applicable requirements of the debt limits
policy of the International Monetary Fund and/or the non-concessional borrowing policy of the World Bank and the
safeguards of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development in its statistical system to enhance the debt sustainability of recipient countries, and resolves to work
towards a global consensus on guidelines for debtor and creditor responsibilities in borrowing by and lending to
sovereigns, building on existing initiatives;
23. Calls for the intensification of efforts to prevent and mitigate the prevalence and cost of debt crises by
enhancing international financial mechanisms for crisis prevention and resolution, encourages the private sector to
cooperate in this regard, and invites creditors and debtors to further explore, where appropriate and on a mutually
agreed, transparent and case-by-case basis, the use of new and improved debt instruments such as debt swaps,
including debt for equity in Sustainable Development Goal projects, as well as debt indexation instruments;
24. Notes the holding of the twelfth session of the International Debt Management Conference in Geneva
from 18 to 20 November 2019, and encourages the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund to continue their analytical and policy work and technical assistance on
debt issues and to promote policies for responsible, sustainable and transparent sovereign borrowing and lending, as
appropriate;
25. Expresses its concern regarding the ability of non-cooperative minority bondholders to disrupt the will of
the large majority of bondholders who accept a restructuring of a debt-crisis country’s obligations, given the potential
broader implications in other countries, notes legislative steps taken by certain countries to prevent these activities and
encourage all Governments to take action, as appropriate, and, furthermore, takes note of discussions in the United
Nations on debt issues;
26. Encourages Governments to be mindful of the ability of non-cooperative minority bondholders to block
a restructuring of a debt-crisis country’s obligations, and encourages debtors and creditors to work together to draft
bond agreements accordingly;
27. Welcomes the reforms to pari passu and collective action clauses proposed by the International Capital
Market Association and endorsed by the International Monetary Fund to reduce the vulnerability of sovereigns to
holdout creditors, encourages countries to take further action to include those clauses in all their bond issuances, and
welcomes the continued work of the International Monetary Fund to monitor the uptake of the clauses and explore
options for resolving the issue with the outstanding stock of debt without such clauses;
28. Recalls that the United Nations, as a universal intergovernmental body, has provided a platform for both
creditors and debtors to discuss ways to improve external debt sustainability, notes the substantive expert debate
among the major institutional stakeholders on how to improve debt sustainability and debt restructuring during the
2019 Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up, and in this regard invites
continued ongoing cooperation among the international financial institutions, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, in particular the International Monetary Fund, relevant United Nations system entities, including the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and other relevant forums, in accordance with their respective
mandates, pursuant to the relevant resolutions on this matter;
29. Also recalls the establishment of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on Financing for Development
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, notes its meeting held in Geneva in November 2018,
at which the issue of debt sustainability was an item for deliberation, and recalls the request that the work of the
Intergovernmental Group of Experts be presented as a regular input to the forum on financing for development
follow-up, in accordance with the terms of reference of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts;
30. Reiterates the invitation to the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to give
appropriate consideration to the central role of maintaining and facilitating the financial and macroeconomic stability
of developing countries, including debt sustainability, and of supporting an appropriately enabling domestic and
international economic, financial and regulatory environment for the means of implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and in this regard invites all major institutional stakeholders, including the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to support these
efforts, in accordance with their respective mandates;

495

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

31. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system, the World Bank Group, the International
Monetary Fund and other relevant stakeholders, and international financial institutions to scale up technical assistance
in debt management, including debt data recording and reporting, and to provide greater coordination of advice, for
the delivery of such technical assistance upon request, and to ensure synergies with the full spectrum of debt
management mechanisms;
32. Invites donor countries, taking into account country-specific debt sustainability analyses, to continue their
provision of concessional and grant-based financing to developing countries, which could contribute to debt
sustainability in the medium to long term, and notes the provision by the International Monetary Fund of interest relief
to eligible developing countries in the form of zero-interest loans;
33. Invites the international community to continue efforts to increase support, including financial and
technical assistance, for institutional capacity-building in developing countries to enhance sustainable upstream and
downstream debt management as an integral part of national development strategies, including by promoting
transparent and accountable debt management systems and negotiation and renegotiation capacities and through
supporting legal advice in relation to tackling external debt litigation and debt data reconciliation between creditors
and debtors so that debt sustainability may be achieved and maintained;
34. Requests the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and invites the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, in cooperation with the regional commissions, regional development banks and
other relevant multilateral financial institutions and stakeholders, to continue and intensify cooperation in respect of
activities relating to capacity-building and to early warning monitoring systems in developing countries in the area of
debt management and debt sustainability, with a view to contributing to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
35. Calls upon all Member States and the United Nations system to take appropriate measures and actions for
the implementation of the commitments, agreements and decisions of the major United Nations conferences and
summits, in particular those related to the question of the external debt sustainability of developing countries;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session an actionoriented report on the implementation of the present resolution and to include in his report an assessment of the
potential impact of investment requirements to meet the Sustainable Development Goals on developing countries’
external debt sustainability and concrete recommendations to accelerate the implementation of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development56 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development with respect to matters of debt and debt sustainability, and decides to include in the
provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, the subitem entitled “External debt sustainability and development”, unless otherwise agreed.
RESOLUTION 74/204
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 177 to 1, with no abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/379/Add.4, para. 8)57
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic

_______________
56
57

496

Resolution 69/313, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: United States of America
Abstaining: None

74/204. Commodities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/224 of 22 December 2004, 61/190 of 20 December 2006, 63/207 of 19 December
2008, 64/192 of 21 December 2009, 66/190 of 22 December 2011, 68/203 of 20 December 2013, 70/191 of
22 December 2015 and 72/205 of 20 December 2017 on commodities,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by Heads of State and Government on
8 September 2000,58 the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted on 16 September 200559 and its resolution 60/265 of
30 June 2006 on the follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the Millennium
Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development goals,
Recalling further the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from
18 to 22 March 2002, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008,
Recalling the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development and its
outcome document,60
Recalling also the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation)61 and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,62
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement63 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change64

_______________
Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
60
Resolution 63/303, annex.
61
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
62
Resolution 66/288, annex.
63
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
64
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
58
59

497

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

that have not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where
appropriate, as soon as possible,
Noting the ongoing efforts to implement the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020, adopted in May 2011 at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries,65 the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, adopted in September 2014 at the third
International Conference on Small Island Developing States,66 and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024, adopted in November 2014 at the second United Nations Conference
on Landlocked Developing Countries,67 and recognizing the special challenges facing middle-income countries,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration68 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,69
Noting the holding of the one-day informal interactive dialogue on commodity markets in New York on 15 May
2019, from which resulted a summary that outlined the central messages and conclusions of the two interactive panels
held during the dialogue,
Reaffirming the importance of supporting Agenda 2063 of the African Union, as well as its first 10-year
implementation plan, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within
the next 50 years, its continental programme embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, and regional initiatives,
Reaffirming also that, in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, Heads of State and Government expressed concern
about the excessive volatility of commodity prices, including for food and agriculture, and its consequences for global
food security and improved nutrition outcomes, noted the Agricultural Market Information System hosted by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and called for the provision of access for small-scale artisanal
fishers to marine resources and markets, consistent with sustainable management practices as well as initiatives that
add value to outputs from small-scale fishers, and noting that, in The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World
2019: Safeguarding against Economic Slowdowns and Downturns, the Food and Agriculture Organization
highlighted that 80 per cent of the countries – 52 out of 65 – with a rise in hunger and an increase in undernourishment
during recent economic slowdowns and downturns are countries whose economies are highly dependent on primary
commodities for export and/or import,
Recalling the outcome of the fourteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,70
and taking note of the decisions and agreed conclusions on commodities adopted by the Trade and Development
Board and its subsidiary bodies,
Taking note of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Commodities and Development
Reports, its State of Commodity Dependence reports and its note on commodity dependence and the Sustainable
Development Goals, noting the role that the Conference has been playing as an institution in looking at the interaction
between commodity markets and economic development and in the elaboration of the concept of commoditydependent developing countries,
Underlining the importance of advancing sustainable consumption and production patterns,
Noting with concern that the prices of most commodities exhibited a downward trend, driven by a variety of
factors relating to supply and demand and changing inventories,
Recognizing that commodity price volatility, including excessive volatility, can have adverse impacts on both
producer and consumer countries, particularly in commodity-dependent countries, and noting with concern that this
can undermine their development efforts, as it could discourage investment, widen trade deficits and aggravate
household poverty,

_______________
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
66
Resolution 69/15, annex.
67
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
68
Resolution 69/283, annex I.
69
Ibid., annex II.
70
See TD/519, TD/519/Add.1, TD/519/Add.2 and TD/519/Add.2/Corr.1.
65

498

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting that commodity price movements have both macroeconomic and microeconomic implications for
commodity-dependent developing countries, as well as net commodity-importing developing countries, and further
noting that rises in commodity prices may contribute to improvements by exporting countries in their export and fiscal
revenue, allowing them to increase current and capital government expenditure, and that, by contrast, a decline in
commodity prices may lead to shortfalls in export and fiscal earnings and the inability of Governments to deliver basic
goods and services,
Expressing concern that the global economy has yet to recover completely and remains in a challenging phase,
notwithstanding the recent cyclical pickup in global economic activity, that growth remains weak in many countries
and includes subdued trade growth, volatile capital flows, widespread fiscal strains and unsustainable debt in some
countries, particularly developing countries, and that commodity exporters are particularly hard hit owing to their
continued adjustment to a sharp step-down in foreign earnings, recognizing that, while short-term risks are broadly
balanced, medium-term risks are still tilted to the downside, and in this regard stressing the need for continuing efforts
to address systemic fragilities and imbalances, to reform and strengthen the international financial system and to make
further progress towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand,
Recognizing the adverse impact of excessive price volatility of commodities, especially on women, girls, young
people and people in vulnerable situations,
Recognizing also that the structural constraints that women face as economic agents, including segmentation in
low-value-added or subsistence-oriented work, unequal access to productive resources, limited access to training and
skill-building due to gender segmentation in education and labour markets and a lack of resources, as well as the
heavy burden of unpaid work, make women and girls especially vulnerable to the adverse impact of excessive price
volatility of commodities,
Stressing the importance of policies to address longer-term structural issues, including structural constraints
faced by women as economic agents, to diversify commodity economies and to integrate commodity policies into
wider development and poverty eradication strategies at all levels,
Recognizing that uncertainty in global commodity markets reinforces the need to comprehensively deal with
the commodity problematique, inter alia, the demand for commodities, supply capacities, commodity revenues and
investments in commodity-dependent economies, while taking due account of the diversity of each country’s
individual situation and needs and the promotion of their sustainable development, and to strengthen the nexus
between, inter alia, trade, finance, investment in sustainable agriculture and food systems, energy and industrialization,
Noting the work on consensus-building on commodity-related issues achieved through meetings of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, including the multi-year expert meetings on commodities and
development, the Global Commodities Forum and the African Oil, Gas and Mines Trade and Finance Conference
and Exhibition,
Underlining the importance of timely, accurate and transparent information to ensure the proper functioning of
food commodity markets, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda, noting global and regional initiatives, including the
Agricultural Market Information System and its Rapid Response Forum, the joint organization data initiative and
other regional data platforms and programmes, and urging the participating international organizations, private sector
actors and Governments to ensure the public dissemination of timely and quality food market information products,
Expressing deep concern at the adverse impact of climate change and extreme weather patterns on access to,
and the utilization and prices of, agricultural commodities, while recognizing the important role of land and sustainable
land management in the climate system,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on world commodity trends and prospects;71

2. Recognizes the interlinkage between the adequate and transparent functioning of commodity markets and
the capacity of some commodity-dependent developing countries to collect appropriate fiscal revenues from
commodity exports and mobilize domestic resources to support the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals and their sustainable development, including through sustainable and inclusive economic growth,
industrialization, decent work and market diversification;

_______________
71

A/74/232.

499

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Encourages support for developing countries, according to their national plans and policies, through
technical assistance, to increase their capacity in detecting and averting trade mispricing in their commodities
sectors in order to enhance their benefits from those sectors to support the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals;
4. Reiterates the need for further efforts to address excessive commodity price volatility, in particular by
assisting producers, especially small-scale producers, including women, in accordance with national plans and
policies, in managing risk;
5. Stresses that developing countries, including African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing States, face particular challenges as lower prices for the
commodities that they produce threaten the sustainable growth and the debt positions of such countries, and therefore
notes that, in this context, economic and export diversification, value addition and industrialization can contribute to
strengthening resilience to excessive price volatility by allowing the derivation of revenue from various sources;
6. Recognizes the need to continue efforts to diversify economies, as well as to improve the regulation, where
appropriate, and the efficiency, responsiveness, functioning and transparency of financial and commodity markets
nationally, regionally and internationally;
7. Acknowledges two main diversification strategies, one being horizontal diversification to export different
types of commodities and other products to different markets, and the other being vertical diversification through
value addition, and notes that these diversification strategies can contribute to creating sustained jobs and foster an
inclusive and sustainable process of industrialization in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals;
8. Calls upon the international community to support the efforts of and foster cooperation with commoditydependent developing countries to address the factors that create structural barriers to international trade and impede,
inter alia, diversification, including tariff and non-tariff barriers, limited access to financial services resulting in scarce
resources for investing in the commodity sector, weak infrastructure, particularly regarding both the cost and
availability of transportation and storage, and lack of skills in producing and marketing alternative products;
9. Emphasizes the importance of enhanced collaboration between the public and private sectors and high
levels of investment in commodity-dependent developing countries to promote diversification and upgrade productive
structures integrated into global value chains for sustainable development;
10. Looks forward to the convening of the Twelfth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization
in Nur-Sultan from 8 to 11 June 2020;
11. Notes with concern the slow and uneven recovery from the severe economic and financial crisis of 2008,
despite the recent strengthening of global economic activity, since growth remains weak in many countries and
agricultural and other commodity prices remain depressed while inequalities are rising, and acknowledges that
international trade can play a role in achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development72 and sustainable,
robust and balanced growth for all;
12. Calls for a coherent set of policy actions at the national, regional and international levels to address
excessive price volatility and support commodity-dependent developing countries in mitigating negative impacts, in
particular by facilitating value addition and enhancing their participation in commodity and related product value
chains, by supporting large-scale diversification of these economies and by encouraging the use and further
development of market-oriented risk management tools, instruments and strategies;
13. Stresses the importance of developing and strengthening agricultural policies and strategies that recognize
and address women’s critical role in food security and improved nutrition outcomes as an integral part of both shortand long-term responses to food insecurity and malnutrition and food crises in developing countries;
14. Recognizes the potential for innovation, productivity improvements and the promotion of non-traditional
exports in most commodity-dependent developing countries, particularly in Africa, and calls for enhanced support by
the international community as well as exchanges of experience in these areas within the framework of South-South
economic cooperation;

_______________
72

500

Resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

15. Underscores the importance of increased investments in quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient
infrastructure as a means of promoting sustainable agricultural development and enhancing commodity
diversification, including value-added production, and trade, and urges the international community to assist
commodity-dependent developing countries to mainstream trade as well as sound investment and financial policies
as key elements of development strategies, based on national circumstances and development priorities, and to invest
in and support research, innovation and development of sustainable agriculture productivity;
16. Stresses that technical assistance and capacity-building aimed at improving the commodity export
competitiveness of producers are particularly important for developing countries, especially in Africa, and invites
Member States and all relevant stakeholders to provide the necessary resources for commodity-specific financial and
technical assistance, in particular for human and institutional capacity-building, including gender-responsive
measures, as well as quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure development of developing countries,
with a view to reducing their institutional bottlenecks and transaction costs and enhancing their commodity trade and
development in accordance with national development plans;
17. Also stresses that the Aid for Trade initiative should aim to help developing countries, particularly the least
developed countries, to build the supply-side capacity and trade-related infrastructure that they need to assist them to
implement and benefit from World Trade Organization agreements and, more broadly, to expand their trade;
18. Recalls the agreement to keep under regular review, by the Ministerial Conference and appropriate bodies
of the World Trade Organization, the impact of the results of the Uruguay Round on the least developed countries as
well as on the net food-importing developing countries, with a view to fostering positive measures to enable them to
achieve their development objectives, and in this regard calls for the implementation of the Marrakesh Ministerial
Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least Developed and
Net Food-Importing Developing Countries;
19. Encourages developed countries that have not already done so and developing countries declaring
themselves in a position to do so to take steps towards the goal of realizing timely implementation of duty-free and
quota-free market access on a lasting basis for all least developed countries, consistent with the Hong Kong Ministerial
Declaration adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005;
20. Strongly encourages international financial institutions and development banks to assist developing
countries, in particular commodity-dependent developing countries, in managing the effects of commodity price
volatility, including excessive volatility;
21. Reaffirms that every State has and shall freely exercise full permanent sovereignty over all its wealth,
natural resources and economic activities;
22. Recognizes the importance of increasing efficiency, effectiveness and transparency in the management of
public and private sector revenues in developed and developing countries derived from all commodities and
commodities-related industries, including final processed goods, in support of development;
23. Notes the important contributions of the Common Fund for Commodities and other international
commodities organizations, and encourages them, in cooperation with the International Trade Centre, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and other
relevant bodies, to strengthen coordination among them and to identify and implement innovative measures to enable
the sustainable contribution of the commodity sector to economic development, including ways to reduce
vulnerability to volatility in commodity prices, as well as to enhance activities in developing countries to improve
access to markets and the reliability of supply, enhance diversification and the addition of value, improve the
competitiveness of commodities, strengthen the market chain, improve market structures, broaden the export base
and ensure the effective participation of all stakeholders, on the basis of a shared understanding of the contribution of
commodities to sustainable development;
24. Stresses that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and its partners, in the spirit of
inter-agency cooperation and multi-stakeholder partnerships, within their respective mandates, should continue to
engage actively in collaborative research and analysis of the commodity problematique and related capacity- and
consensus-building activities, with a view to providing regular analysis and policy advice relevant to the sustainable
development of commodity-dependent developing countries, particularly low-income countries;

501

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

25. Looks forward to the convening of the fifteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in Barbados from 18 to 23 October 2020;
26. Emphasizes the importance of facilitating accession to the World Trade Organization, particularly for
commodity-dependent developing countries, in full compliance with its rules;
27. Underlines the urgent need for the provision of and access to trade finance to commodity-dependent
developing countries, given the tightened access to all types of credit and noting debt sustainability;
28. Welcomes the commitment to redouble efforts to substantially reduce illicit financial flows by 2030, with
a view to eventually eliminating them;
29. Stresses that revenues from commodity production and exports remain critical for developing countries,
in particular in the context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, given that developing countries need to mobilize
resources in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and that commodity prices have been decreasing
since 2011, which has put pressure on government budgets in developing countries;
30. Invites the President of the General Assembly to hold a one-day informal interactive dialogue of the
Assembly on commodity markets during the first half of 2020 to review world commodity trends and prospects and
possible strategies for economic and export diversification, as well as value addition for sustainable development,
particularly in commodity-dependent developing countries, with the aim of sharing experiences and lessons learned,
on a date and in a format to be decided by the President of the Assembly;
31. Calls upon all relevant bodies, agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other
relevant intergovernmental, global, regional and subregional organizations, in particular the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and all relevant international financial and economic institutions, within their
respective mandates, to continue to address the issue of the low industrialization and diversification of the economies
of some commodity-dependent developing countries in relation to the capacity of Member States to achieve all the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, in
collaboration with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, an action-oriented
report on the implementation of the present resolution, with a particular emphasis on recommendations and strategies
for economic and export diversification, commodity production and value addition for sustainable development, in
line with the implementation of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development,73 and, in this regard, decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under
the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled “Commodities”.
RESOLUTION 74/205
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/379/Add.5, para. 8)74

74/205. Financial inclusion for sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 70/189 of 22 December 2015 and 72/206 of 20 December 2017,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable

_______________
73
74

502

Resolution 69/313, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, inter alia, sets out policies, the adoption and
implementation of which seek to increase financial inclusion, and that the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, inter alia,
seeks to ensure that policy and regulatory environments support financial market stability, integrity and the promotion
of financial inclusion in a balanced manner and with appropriate consumer protection, working towards the
strengthening of financial literacy, capacity development for developing countries and full and equal access to formal
financial services for all, in a manner that contributes to the mobilization of domestic resources for public and private
investment in the economy and for capital formation and to greater availability of financial services in ways that spur
enterprise growth and job creation and stimulate the economy and that brings more people and businesses into the
formal economy in ways that stimulate economic growth, increase transparency and accountability and contribute to
increased tax collection,
Emphasizing the relevance of inclusion in the international financial system at all levels and the importance of
considering financial inclusion as a policy objective in financial regulation, in accordance with national priorities and
legislation,
Recommitting to promoting appropriate, affordable and stable access to credit and other financial services to
micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, in particular businesses and enterprises in the social and solidarity
economy operating in both the formal and informal sectors, as well as adequate skills development training for all,
particularly for youth, persons with disabilities, older persons, women, indigenous peoples, local communities and
entrepreneurs,
Acknowledging that the promotion of formal financial systems and services with robust risk-based regulatory
frameworks for all financial intermediation, as appropriate, as well as the rule of law and accountable and inclusive
institutions, contributes to inclusive financial systems and to effectively and comprehensively combating corruption
and curbing illicit financial flows,
Recognizing the value and principles of multi-stakeholder engagement also with regard to the development of
national financial inclusion strategies, and that multi‑stakeholder partnerships and the resources, knowledge and
ingenuity of the private sector, civil society, the scientific community, academia, philanthropy and foundations,
parliaments, local authorities, volunteers and other stakeholders will be important in mobilizing and sharing
knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, complementing the efforts of Governments and supporting
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, in particular in developing countries,
Recognizing also that many people in vulnerable situations are disproportionately excluded from financial
systems and may not have access to financial services or may be reluctant to adopt them,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Recalls the inclusion in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development75 of, inter alia, several targets
related to the promotion of financial inclusion, also recalls that the Sustainable Development Goals and associated
targets are integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development, and in this regard
looks forward to their achievement;

_______________
75

Resolution 70/1.

503

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Also recalls the inclusion in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development76 of, inter alia, several policies and actions intended to ensure a policy and regulatory
environment for the promotion of financial inclusion, and in this regard looks forward to their implementation;
3. Reaffirms its decision to give consideration, as appropriate, to financial inclusion in the follow-up and
review framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in the follow-up process of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda;
4. Takes note of the consideration given to financial inclusion in the Financing for Sustainable Development
Report 2019,77 stresses that, while financial inclusion has improved in recent years, notably owing to the growth in
mobile banking, significant gaps remain within and among developed and developing countries, and remains
concerned that, globally, 1.7 billion people do not have access to formal financial services and that, despite increased
account ownership among women, the financial inclusion gender gap remains;
5. Notes that mobile phones could continue to strengthen financial inclusion, and in this regard underlines
the need for the necessary investments, including in infrastructure, such as reliable electricity and network
connections, as well as in payment systems and other financial infrastructure, and encourages Member States to take
policy actions in accordance with national circumstances and priorities;
6. Acknowledges the important role that national financial inclusion strategies can play in identifying and
overcoming financing gaps and binding constraints, including the lack of access to finance for micro-, small and
medium-sized enterprises, notes that at least 69 countries have adopted or are in the process of developing financial
inclusion strategies, and in this regard encourages Member States to consider the convenience of adopting and
pursuing national financial inclusion strategies and gender-responsive strategies, to end the structural barriers to
women’s equal access to economic resources and to expand peer learning, experience-sharing and capacity-building
among countries and regions in this respect;
7. Recognizes that digitally enabled innovation in the financial sector has contributed significantly to the
rapid expansion of access to financial services and financial inclusion, enabling progress on the Sustainable
Development Goals and showing impacts across the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as outlined in the
Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2019, and supports concrete actions to advance digital financial
inclusion and close digital divides, including the gender digital divide, across and within countries, while improving
responsible digital financial practices and promoting regulatory responses, as appropriate, to protect consumers’
interests, financial integrity and system stability, which are mutually reinforcing and also enablers of greater financial
inclusion;
8. Also recognizes the growing importance of financial technology actors and new instruments and
platforms, including mobile banking and peer-to-peer platforms, which have enabled access to financial services for
millions of people and provided channels for smaller companies to raise risk capital, as well as the potential of big
data and artificial intelligence in this respect, encourages, in this context, Governments and regulatory agencies to
review and adjust, as appropriate, legal and regulatory frameworks to cope with the risks and maximize the benefits
associated with these new instruments, and invites countries to exchange experiences and promote peer learning in
this area and further enhance capacity-building in this regard;
9. Acknowledges that, in the absence of strong financial consumer protection, the growth-enhancing benefits
of expanded financial inclusion may be lost or severely undermined, and in this regard stresses the importance of
scaled-up action to improve financial and digital literacy and effective consumer protection for the poorest and most
vulnerable, including for women, young people, rural residents and migrants;
10. Also acknowledges the efforts and actions on financial inclusion for sustainable development undertaken
by a wide range of stakeholders working in partnership, such as the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, the Better Than
Cash Alliance, the Special Advocate of the Secretary-General for Inclusive Finance for Development and the Group
of 20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, urges them to engage in an inclusive and transparent manner with
Member States in their work, in order to ensure that their initiatives complement or strengthen the United Nations

_______________
76
77

504

Resolution 69/313, annex.
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.19.I.7.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

system, including the United Nations Capital Development Fund and the regional commissions, and encourages
enhanced coordination and cooperation with the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development;
11. Encourages the international community, including Member States, and all relevant stakeholders,
including the entities of the United Nations system, international financial institutions, other intergovernmental bodies,
regional and national development banks, domestic financial institutions, credit unions, multi‑stakeholder
partnerships and relevant non-governmental organizations, as appropriate, to further develop financial literacy and
financial education programmes that include an emphasis on the impact of finance on sustainable development, as
appropriate, in order to ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to access financial services,
in particular women and girls, farmers and those working in micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises;
12. Encourages Member States and all relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, in the context of a renewed and
strengthened Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, led by Governments, to further efforts to reduce the
transaction costs of migrant remittances to less than 3 per cent by 2030 and eliminate remittance corridors with costs
higher than 5 per cent by 2030, considering that there was no improvement in 2018 and that the global average is still
about 7 per cent, to support national authorities in addressing the most significant obstacles to the continued flow of
remittances, such as the trend of banks withdrawing services, and to work towards expanding access to and the volume
of remittances through regulated and transparent channels, and in this regard highlights the potential of financial
technology services to offer alternative channels and reduce remittance costs;
13. Looks forward to the continuing consideration of financial inclusion in the forthcoming reports of the
Inter-Agency Task Force on financing for sustainable development, as appropriate and in accordance with existing
mandates, as well as in the annual report of the Secretary-General on progress towards the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals, and to the further consideration of financial inclusion for sustainable development
at the 2020 Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up;
14. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to leave no
one behind and commit to taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most
vulnerable countries and to reach the furthest behind first;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled “Financial inclusion for sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 74/206
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/379/Add.6, para. 8)78

74/206. Promotion of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and strengthen good
practices on assets return to foster sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

_______________
78

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Rapporteur of the Committee.

505

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the United Nations Convention against Corruption,79 which is the most comprehensive and
universal instrument on corruption, and recognizing the need to continue to promote its ratification or accession
thereto and its full and effective implementation, including full support for the Mechanism for the Review of
Implementation of the Convention,
Reaffirming the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,80
Recalling its resolutions 65/169 of 20 December 2010, 71/213 of 21 December 2016, 72/207 of 20 December
2017 and 73/222 of 20 December 2018,
Recalling also its resolutions 71/208 of 19 December 2016, 72/196 of 19 December 2017 and 73/186 of
17 December 2018,
Taking note of the 2019 report of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development,81
Recognizing that making progress on reducing illicit financial flows could contribute to the achievement of other
goals and targets in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Taking note of the report of the High-level Panel on Illicit Financial Flows from Africa and its relevant
contributions in increasing knowledge of the sources of illicit financial flows, and reiterating its invitation to other
regions to carry out similar exercises,
Taking note also of the policy recommendations of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on Financing for
Development of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,82
Reiterating its deep concern about the impact of illicit financial flows, in particular those caused by tax evasion,
corruption and transnational organized crime, on the economic, social and political stability and development of
societies, and especially on developing countries and their progress in financing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,
Bearing in mind in this regard that there are different sources of illicit financial flows and that a separate analysis
of each source is more beneficial in designing policy responses to prevent illicit financial flows,
Noting with appreciation the ongoing efforts by regional organizations and other relevant international forums
to strengthen cooperation in preventing and combating illicit financial flows, as well as new initiatives taken by
Governments and the private sector to mobilize the financial sector in the collective fight against illicit financial flows,
Recognizing that combating illicit financial flows is an essential development challenge, noting that developing
countries are particularly susceptible to the negative impact of illicit financial flows, and emphasizing that illicit
financial flows reduce the availability of valuable resources for financing for development,
Recognizing also the importance of studying the potential relationship between combating illicit financial flows
and attaining debt sustainability,
Recognizing further that the challenge posed by the increasing scope and complexity of illicit financial flows
and the need for the recovery and return of stolen assets requires strengthened international cooperation,
Recognizing that numerous technical, legal and practical challenges are to be addressed in order to facilitate the
repatriation of proceeds of crime to countries from where they were originally stolen,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.
Ibid., vol. 2225, No. 39574.
81
Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2019 (United Nations publications, Sales No. E.19.I.7).
82
See TD/B/EFD/1/3.
79
80

506

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing also that global knowledge of the importance of combating illicit financial flows and enhancing
the return of assets is rapidly increasing, as is the political will to recover illicitly acquired assets by both requesting
and requested States, and noting that, while many challenges remain unresolved, tackling them effectively requires a
holistic approach that recognizes the different types of illicit financial flows and their impact on sustainable
development,
Reaffirming the importance of chapter V of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, and underlining
that the recovery and return of stolen assets pursuant to that chapter is a fundamental principle of the Convention,
Recognizing the work carried out by the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention
against Corruption, and in particular its Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group on Asset Recovery, to
advance the full implementation of chapter V of the Convention,
Noting the efforts to promote the exchange of information and synergies between the open-ended
intergovernmental expert meetings to enhance international cooperation under the United Nations Convention against
Corruption and the Working Group on International Cooperation established by the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
Recalling the work of the Platform for Collaboration on Tax, which is to intensify collaboration and coordination
on tax issues between the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank Group and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, including on formalizing regular discussions among the
four international organizations on the implementation of standards for international tax matters and on the
strengthening of their ability to provide capacity-building support to developing countries,
Recognizing the important work undertaken by academia and civil society, including the International Centre
for Asset Recovery and the U4 Anti-Corruption Resource Centre, in assisting Member States in understanding the
challenges associated with the return of stolen assets under chapter V of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption,
Noting the work of the 135-member Inclusive Framework on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting, which provides
a forum for collaboration for tackling tax avoidance, improving the coherence of international tax rules and ensuring
a more transparent and fair tax environment,
Noting also international developments on the implementation of the Standard for Automatic Exchange of
Financial Account Information in Tax Matters under a common reporting standard developed by the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, and now involving 102 countries, as well as the role of the 158 members
of the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes, which enables cooperation on
an equal footing,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Welcomes the focus on combating illicit financial flows, inter alia, at the High-level Dialogue on Financing
for Development, held on 26 September 2019, acknowledges that combating illicit financial flows contributes to
domestic resource mobilization, and calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within their
respective mandates and resources, to continue their consideration of the negative impact of illicit financial flows on
financing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,83 to further explore policy responses to the phenomenon
and to coordinate their efforts in this regard;
2. Also welcomes the high-level meeting on international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and
strengthen good practices on assets return, convened by the President of the General Assembly at Headquarters on
16 May 2019, and looks forward to continued discussions on this issue, building on the momentum created by the
meeting;
3. Reaffirms its commitment to strive to eliminate safe havens that create incentives for the transfer abroad
of stolen assets and illicit financial flows;

_______________
83

Resolution 70/1.

507

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Also reaffirms its commitment to strengthen regulatory frameworks at all levels in accordance with
international standards and to further increase the transparency and accountability of financial institutions and the
corporate sector, as well as public administrations;
5. Notes with concern that proceeds emanating from offences established under the United Nations
Convention against Corruption79 have yet to be disposed of in favour of the requesting States parties, their prior
legitimate owners and victims of the crimes, and decides to deter, detect, prevent and counter corruption, increase
transparency and promote good governance;
6. Reaffirms the need for Member States to effectively implement and enforce existing obligations under the
United Nations Convention against Corruption, as a critical part of combating illicit financial flows;
7. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of Member States to enhance knowledge and broaden understanding of the
challenges and opportunities involved in international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and strengthen
good practices on assets return consistent with the United Nations Convention against Corruption so as to foster
sustainable development;
8. Acknowledges that combating illicit financial flows requires a range of actions that includes deterring,
detecting, preventing and countering such flows in source, transit and destination countries;
9. Recalls that new technologies can both increase efficiency in revenue collection and strengthen the efforts
to combat illicit financial flows, expresses concern that virtual assets are being used for illicit activities, and in this
regard encourages Member States and other relevant organizations to take measures in line with international
standards, where applicable, to prevent and counter their illicit use;
10. Notes that international cooperation in combating illicit financial flows is a work in progress that must
continue to be pursued, and encourages all countries to develop effective tools and create a policy environment for
combating illicit financial flows, in accordance with the existing relevant international frameworks, including the
United Nations Convention against Corruption;
11. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocols thereto,84 and urges States parties to those Conventions and Protocols to make efforts towards their effective
implementation;
12. Encourages countries and relevant multilateral and international organizations to continue their efforts to
provide, upon request, technical assistance and capacity-building assistance to developing countries, as well as to
support African and other regional initiatives, in order to improve their capacity to prevent, detect and combat illicit
financial flows and strengthen good practices on assets return to foster sustainable development;
13. Notes with appreciation the first meeting of the Global Forum on Asset Recovery, held in December 2017,
supported by the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative, a joint initiative of the World Bank and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, and welcomes the adoption of the Global Forum on Asset Recovery communiqué;
14. Notes the second International Expert Meeting on the Return of Stolen Assets, held in Addis Ababa from
7 to 9 May 2019, and encourages the continuation of its work in advancing efforts to strengthen the recovery and
return of stolen assets in support of sustainable development;
15. Encourages further efforts by relevant national and international actors to mitigate transfer pricing not in
line with the arm’s length principle and trade misinvoicing;
16. Calls upon all countries to work together to eliminate base erosion and profit shifting and to ensure that
all companies, including multinationals, pay taxes to the Governments of countries where economic activity occurs
and value is created, in accordance with national and international laws and policies;

_______________
84

508

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

17. Also calls upon all countries to cooperate, in accordance with applicable bilateral or multilateral
agreements, in the areas of mutual legal assistance and administrative assistance in tax matters, as well as the automatic
exchange of financial account information;
18. Recognizes that measures aimed at combating illicit financial flows often require cooperation between law
enforcement agencies, and encourages Member States, where applicable and subject to their domestic legal system,
and in line with their treaty obligations, to cooperate in this regard;
19. Stresses that anti-corruption measures should be an integral part of national development policies and
strategies and that all jurisdictions should consider undertaking further research, policy development and
programming, as appropriate, to address corruption;
20. Encourages closer public-private sector collaboration to better tackle corruption, and stresses that further
research, policy development and programming should help in reaching this goal;
21. Notes that various jurisdictions have introduced mechanisms to increase beneficial ownership
transparency, including, inter alia, beneficial ownership registries of legal entities and legal arrangements, such as
companies, trusts and limited liability partnerships, and invites all jurisdictions to consider establishing appropriate
mechanisms, in line with international standards, where applicable;
22. Encourages States parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption to make full use of the
asset recovery tools set forth in chapter V of the Convention, including mechanisms for the enforcement of foreign
restraining and confiscation orders, as a means of significantly reducing the expenses that a State party may normally
incur in pursuing asset recovery;
23. Calls upon all States parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, in particular requesting
and requested States parties, to cooperate to recover the proceeds of crime, as defined in the Convention, and to fulfil
their obligation to ensure the return or disposal of such proceeds, in accordance with article 57 of the Convention;
24. Recognizes the importance of enhanced capacity for data collection and analysis to combat illicit financial
flows, emphasizing the need to increase the exchange of data within national government institutions as well as from
international institutions;
25. Emphasizes the importance of the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
coordination with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other institutions, to develop a
methodology to produce estimates of the total value of inward and outward illicit financial flows;
26. Invites the President of the General Assembly, the President of the Economic and Social Council and the
Secretary-General to give appropriate consideration to the importance of combating illicit financial flows and
strengthening good practices on assets return to foster sustainable development, and in this regard invites all relevant
international institutions to support these efforts, in accordance with their respective mandates;
27. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
28. Looks forward to the inclusion, in the 2020 report of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for
Development, of an analysis of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and strengthen good
practices on assets return to foster sustainable development, pursuant to the mandate of the Task Force, and also looks
forward to the deliberations of the Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up on
efforts to combat illicit financial flows;
29. Requests the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in consultation
with relevant entities of the United Nations system, including the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to
inform the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session of the implementation of the present resolution, through a
dedicated section of the Sustainable Development Goals Pulse report and of the Trade and Development Report,
elaborating in particular on the challenges that Member States experience in combating illicit financial flows and
recovering and returning stolen assets and on the options available to help to accelerate the elimination of illicit
509

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

financial flows and to return stolen assets, in line with commitments contained in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for Development85 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled “Promotion of international cooperation to combat illicit
financial flows and strengthen good practices on assets return to foster sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 74/207
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/380, para. 11)86

74/207. Follow-up to and implementation of the outcomes of the International Conferences on Financing
for Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 70/192 of 22 December 2015, 71/217 of 21 December 2016, 72/208 of 20 December
2017 and 73/223 of 20 December 2018 on the follow‑up to and implementation of the outcomes of the International
Conferences on Financing for Development and its resolution 70/299 of 29 July 2016 on the follow-up and review of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,87 supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and
creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and
solidarity,
Recalling the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from
18 to 22 March 2002, the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008, and the third
International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa from 13 to 16 July 2015,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also the Paris Agreement88 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change89

_______________
Resolution 69/313, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
87
Resolution 70/1.
88
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
89
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
85
86

510

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

that have not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where
appropriate, as soon as possible,
Reiterating the affirmation in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda that achieving gender equality, empowering all
women and girls and attaining the full realization of their human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive
and equitable economic growth and sustainable development,
Reaffirming the importance of addressing the diverse needs of and challenges faced by countries in special
situations, in particular African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States and countries in conflict and post-conflict situations, as well as the specific challenges faced
by middle-income countries,
Taking note of the holding of preparatory meetings for the Economic and Social Council forum on financing for
development follow-up, such as the annual retreat of the Group of Friends of Monterrey,
Welcoming the convening of the fourth annual Economic and Social Council forum on financing for
development follow-up from 15 to 18 April 2019,
Recalling the intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and recommendations of the forum,90 which decided that
the fifth Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up would convene from
20 to 23 April 2020 and would include the special high-level meeting of the Council with the Bretton Woods
institutions, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and also
that the 2020 forum would consider and report in its outcome document on the need to hold a follow-up conference,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision 2017/206 of 5 October 2016,
Noting the sixth biennial high-level meeting of the Development Cooperation Forum, held in New York on
21 and 22 May 2018, and its outcomes,91
Welcoming the High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development held on 26 September 2019, back-to-back
with the high-level political forum on sustainable development under the auspices of the General Assembly,
Taking note of the establishment by the Secretary-General of the Global Investors for Sustainable Development
Alliance and the publication of the road map for financing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and looking
forward to further updates on the implementation of the strategy of the Secretary-General for financing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (2018–2021),
Welcoming the outcome document of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation, held in Buenos Aires from 20 to 22 March 2019,92
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
Recommitting to ensuring that no country or person is left behind and to focusing our effort where the challenges
are greatest, including by ensuring the inclusion and participation of those who are furthest behind,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;93

2. Emphasizes the need to work towards the full and timely implementation of the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development;94

_______________
See E/FFDF/2019/3.
See E/2018/73.
92
Resolution 73/291, annex.
93
A/74/260.
94
Resolution 69/313, annex.
90
91

511

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Takes note of the report of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development,95 and notes that
progress, though uneven, has been reported in all seven action areas of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, while
acknowledging that many implementation gaps persist;
4. Welcomes the intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and recommendations of the 2019 Economic and
Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up,90 urges their full, effective and timely implementation,
and looks forward to staying engaged so as to assess progress, identify obstacles and challenges in the implementation
of the financing for development outcomes and in the delivery of the means of implementation, promote the sharing
of lessons learned from experiences at the national and regional levels, address new and emerging topics of relevance
to the implementation of this agenda as the need arises and provide policy recommendations for action by the
international community in substantive intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and recommendations at the
2020 forum;
5. Also welcomes in this regard the further development of integrated national financing frameworks, in
support of nationally owned sustainable development strategies, in order to further implement the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, aimed at effectively mobilizing and aligning a wide range of financing sources and instruments with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and making use of the full potential of all means of implementation;
6. Looks forward to the summary by the President of the Economic and Social Council of the 2020 Economic
and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up, as well as the summary by the President of the
General Assembly of the High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development, held on 26 September 2019;96
7. Emphasizes that timely and adequate planning for the 2020 Economic and Social Council forum on
financing for development follow-up is of paramount importance to its substantive work and outcome;
8. Invites the President of the Economic and Social Council to take into consideration the deliberations of
the 2019 High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development, in the preparation of the 2020 Economic and Social
Council forum on financing for development follow-up;
9. Recalls that decisions relating to the Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development
follow-up are to be contained within the forum’s intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and recommendations;
10. Takes note of the work of the Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters and the
initial contributions made by India to the voluntary trust fund, by Norway to a multi-donor project aimed at supporting
the work of the Committee, its subcommittees and related capacity development activities, as well as the contributions
by the European Union and other countries in support of the Committee’s subsidiary bodies, and urges Member States
to come forward to contribute more to the trust fund in order to further support the participation of developing
countries;
11. Looks forward to the holding of the 2020 Global Infrastructure Forum in Washington, D.C., on the
sidelines of the annual meetings of the Boards of Governors of the World Bank Group and the International Monetary
Fund, invites the multilateral development banks to provide a briefing to Member States on the outcome of the Global
Infrastructure Forum, and reiterates that the Global Infrastructure Forum is mandated to identify and address
infrastructure and capacity gaps in developing countries, particularly in the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries, small island developing States and African countries;
12. Welcomes the progress made in operationalizing the three components of the Technology Facilitation
Mechanism, and looks forward to the prompt establishment of the online platform as part of the Mechanism;
13. Also welcomes the operationalization of the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries, and
invites Member States, as well as international organizations, foundations and the private sector, to provide increased
voluntary financial contributions and technical assistance to ensure its full and effective implementation;
14. Notes with appreciation the convening of the fourth annual multi‑stakeholder forum on science,
technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals in New York on 14 and 15 May 2019, whose

_______________
95
96

512

Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2019 (United Nations publications, Sales No. E.19.I.7).
A/74/559.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Co-Chairs’ summary97 served as an input to the high-level political forum on sustainable development and
highlighted, inter alia, the promotion of networking and matchmaking among relevant stakeholders, especially
innovators, funders and other supporters, to bridge the technology gap for the Sustainable Development Goals;
15. Recalls that the Addis Ababa Action Agenda provides a global framework for financing sustainable
development and is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, supports and complements it
and helps to contextualize the means of implementation targets with concrete policies and actions, the implementation
of which requires following up on, that relate to its seven action areas, namely domestic public resources; domestic
and international private business and finance; international development cooperation; international trade as an engine
for development; debt and debt sustainability; addressing systemic issues and science, technology, innovation and
capacity-building; and data, monitoring and follow-up;
16. Reiterates that States will not be able to achieve the ambitious Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development without a revitalized and enhanced global partnership and comparably ambitious means of
implementation, and reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and
commit to taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and
to reach the furthest behind first;
17. Notes the policy recommendations of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on Financing for
Development of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and that the agreed policy recommendations
serve as an input to the Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up in accordance with
the terms of reference of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session an actionoriented report, which also takes into account the 2019 High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development,
presenting emerging challenges and key accelerators that may be relevant for future discussion in the framework of
the Economic and Social Council forum on financing for development follow-up;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Follow-up to
and implementation of the outcomes of the International Conferences on Financing for Development”.
RESOLUTION 74/208
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 162 to 7, with 7 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/381, para. 57)98
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining: Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Guatemala, Honduras, Papua New Guinea, Tonga, Vanuatu

_______________
See E/HLPF/2019/6.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States that are
members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018).
97
98

513

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

74/208. Oil slick on Lebanese shores
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 61/194 of 20 December 2006, 62/188 of 19 December 2007, 63/211 of 19 December
2008, 64/195 of 21 December 2009, 65/147 of 20 December 2010, 66/192 of 22 December 2011, 67/201 of
21 December 2012, 68/206 of 20 December 2013, 69/212 of 19 December 2014, 70/194 of 22 December 2015,
71/218 of 21 December 2016, 72/209 of 20 December 2017 and 73/224 of 20 December 2018 on the oil slick on
Lebanese shores,
Reaffirming the outcome of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, especially principle 7
of the Declaration of the Conference,99 in which States were requested to take all possible steps to prevent pollution
of the seas,
Emphasizing the need to protect and preserve the marine environment in accordance with international law,
Taking into account the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,100 especially principle 16, in
which it was stipulated that the polluter should, in principle, bear the cost of pollution, and taking into account also
chapter 17 of Agenda 21,101
Noting with great concern the environmental disaster caused by the destruction by the Israeli Air Force on
15 July 2006 of the oil storage tanks in the direct vicinity of the Jiyah electric power plant in Lebanon, resulting in an
oil slick that covered the entirety of the Lebanese coastline, extended to the Syrian coastline and hindered efforts to
achieve sustainable development, as already highlighted by the General Assembly in its resolutions 61/194, 62/188,
63/211, 64/195, 65/147, 66/192, 67/201, 68/206, 69/212, 70/194, 71/218, 72/209 and 73/224,
Noting that the Secretary-General expressed grave concern at the lack of any acknowledgement on the part of
the Government of Israel of its responsibilities vis-à-vis reparations and compensation to the Government and people
of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic affected by the oil spill,
Recalling that, in paragraph 5 of its resolution 73/224, it reiterated its request to the Government of Israel to
assume responsibility for prompt and adequate compensation to the Government of Lebanon and other countries
directly affected by the oil slick, such as the Syrian Arab Republic, whose shores have been partially polluted, and
recognizing the conclusion of the Secretary-General that this request of the General Assembly has yet to be
implemented,
Acknowledging that the Secretary-General concluded that this oil spill is not covered by any of the international
oil spill compensation funds and thus merits special consideration, and recognizing that further consideration needs
to be given to the option of securing the relevant compensation from the Government of Israel,
Acknowledging also the conclusions on measuring and quantifying the environmental damage set out in the
report of the Secretary-General,102
Noting again with appreciation the assistance offered by donor countries and international organizations for the
clean-up operations and the early recovery and reconstruction of Lebanon through bilateral and multilateral channels,
including the Athens Coordination Meeting on the response to the marine pollution incident in the Eastern
Mediterranean, held on 17 August 2006, as well as the Stockholm Conference for Lebanon’s Early Recovery, held on
31 August 2006,

_______________
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972 (A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1), part one,
chap. I.
100
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
101
Ibid., annex II.
102
A/74/225.
99

514

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Acknowledging that the Secretary-General has welcomed the agreement of the Lebanon Recovery Fund to host
the Eastern Mediterranean oil spill restoration trust fund, under its existing mechanism, and expressing concern that
to date no contributions have been made to the trust fund,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;102

2. Reiterates, for the fourteenth consecutive year, its deep concern about the adverse implications of the
destruction by the Israeli Air Force of the oil storage tanks in the direct vicinity of the Lebanese Jiyah electric power
plant for the achievement of sustainable development in Lebanon;
3. Considers that the oil slick has heavily polluted the shores of Lebanon and partially polluted Syrian shores
and consequently has had serious implications for livelihoods and the economy of Lebanon, owing to the adverse
implications for natural resources, biodiversity, fisheries and tourism, and for human health in the country;
4. Acknowledges the conclusions in the report of the Secretary-General, in which he stated that studies show
that the value of the damage to Lebanon amounted to 856.4 million United States dollars in 2014, and requests the
Secretary-General to urge United Nations bodies and agencies and other relevant organizations involved in the initial
assessment of the relevant environmental damage to undertake, within existing resources, a further study, building on,
inter alia, the initial work of the World Bank presented in the report of the Secretary-General submitted to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session,103 with a view to measuring and quantifying the environmental damage
sustained by neighbouring countries;
5. Reiterates its request in this regard to the Government of Israel to assume responsibility for prompt and
adequate compensation to the Government of Lebanon for the aforementioned damage and to other countries directly
affected by the oil slick, such as the Syrian Arab Republic, whose shores have been partially polluted, for the costs of
repairing the environmental damage caused by the destruction, including the restoration of the marine environment,
in particular in the light of the conclusion contained in the report of the Secretary-General that there remains grave
concern at the lack of implementation of the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly on the
subject vis-à-vis reparations and compensation to the Government and people of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic affected by the oil spill;
6. Reiterates its appreciation for the efforts of the Government of Lebanon and those of Member States,
regional and international organizations, regional and international financial institutions, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector in the initiation of clean-up and rehabilitation operations on the polluted shores,
and encourages Member States and the above-mentioned entities to continue their financial and technical support to
the Government of Lebanon towards achieving the completion of clean-up and rehabilitation operations, with the aim
of preserving the ecosystem of Lebanon and that of the Eastern Mediterranean basin;
7. Welcomes the agreement of the Lebanon Recovery Fund to host the Eastern Mediterranean oil spill
restoration trust fund, based on voluntary contributions, to provide assistance and support to the States directly and
adversely affected in their integrated environmentally sound management, from clean-up to safe disposal of oily
waste, of this environmental disaster resulting from the destruction of the oil storage tanks at the Jiyah electric power
plant;
8. Notes that in his report the Secretary-General urged Member States, international organizations,
international and regional financial institutions, non‑governmental organizations and the private sector to intensify
their support for Lebanon in this matter, particularly for recovery and rehabilitation activities on the Lebanese coast,
reiterates its invitation to States and the international donor community to make voluntary financial contributions to
the trust fund, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to mobilize international technical and financial
assistance in order to ensure that the trust fund has sufficient and adequate resources;
9. Recognizes the multidimensionality of the adverse impact of the oil slick, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution under the item entitled “Sustainable development”.

_______________
103

A/62/343.

515

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 74/209
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381, para. 57)104

74/209. International Day of Awareness of Food Loss and Waste
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of this Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for the
proclamation of international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, in which it is stated that an international day or
year should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Recalling resolution 11/2019 adopted by the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations at its forty-first session, held in Rome from 22 to 29 June 2019,105
Recalling also resolution 4/2 of 15 March 2019 of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United
Nations Environment Programme, on promoting sustainable practices and innovative solutions for curbing food loss
and waste,106
Recalling further that the ministerial declaration of the 2018 high-level political forum on sustainable
development107 called upon all stakeholders to adopt a sustainable food systems approach and to develop effective
strategies and innovations to reduce food losses and waste,
Reaffirming the commitment to achieve sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and recognizing that the urgent need to reduce the large
quantities of food loss and waste taking place worldwide is clearly addressed in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including in Sustainable Development Goal 12, and specifically target 12.3,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development calls for halving per capita global food waste at
the retail and consumer levels and reducing food losses along production and supply chains, including post-harvest
losses, by 2030,
Recalling also the global launch of the United Nations Decade of Family Farming (2019–2028), held in Rome
on 29 May 2019, and stressing the important role of family farms in the production of more than 80 per cent of the
world’s food in terms of value,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Myanmar,
Nepal, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
105
See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document 2019/REP, appendix H.
106
UNEP/EA.4/Res.2.
107
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/73/3), chap. VI, sect. F.
104

516

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling further that, in The State of Food and Agriculture in the World 2019: Moving Forward on Food Loss
and Waste Reduction, produced by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, food loss is defined
as the decrease in the quantity or quality of food resulting from decisions and actions by food suppliers in the chain,
excluding retail, food service providers and consumers, and food waste as the decrease in the quantity or quality of
food resulting from decisions and actions by retailers, food services and consumers,
Noting that, according to an initial estimate in 2011, one third of the food produced annually in the world for
human consumption, equivalent to some 1.3 billion tons, was lost or wasted, while over 821 million people suffered
from chronic undernourishment and nearly 151 million children under five years of age had stunted growth in 2018,108
Noting also that the first estimates for the food loss index, as presented in The State of Food and Agriculture in
the World 2019, measure food loss from post-harvest until – but not including – the retail level and indicate that around
14 per cent of food produced globally in 2016 was lost,
Recalling that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations leads international efforts to defeat
hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition and is mandated to raise levels of nutrition and reduce food losses and food
waste, taking into account sustainable production and consumption practices,
Noting the urgent need to address the issue of food loss and waste worldwide and the risks that this implies for
climate change, agriculture sustainability, human livelihoods and food supplies,
Noting also that the 2018 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations study, Gender and Food
Loss in Sustainable Food Value Chains: A Guiding Note, found that, in order to be effective and have a long-lasting
impact, food loss reduction strategies and interventions should go beyond technological solutions by bringing to the
forefront the underlying sociocultural factors of food value chains and mainstream a gender perspective,
Recognizing the fundamental role of sustainable food production that promotes food security and nutrition for
the world’s growing population and contributes to poverty alleviation, hunger eradication and human health,
Recognizing also the importance of addressing issues related to food loss and waste at all stages of the supply
chain from producer to end user and of working towards sustainable consumption and production, including through
collaboration with relevant stakeholders,
Recognizing further the food loss and waste happening in storing, transport and process, and in this regard
inviting Member States and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen the capacity-building of developing countries to
adopt innovative approaches and technology in combating food loss and waste,
Recognizing that efforts at the national and regional levels already exist to combat food loss and waste and that
these efforts need to be sustained and supported in conjunction with civil society, the private sector and academia,
Acknowledging the urgent need to raise awareness at all levels and to promote and facilitate actions for the
elimination of food loss and waste across the world and its importance for the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals,
Recognizing that the observance of an International Day of Awareness of Food Loss and Waste by the
international community would contribute significantly to raising awareness of the importance of the problem and its
possible solutions at all levels and would promote global efforts and collective action towards meeting target 12.3 of
the Sustainable Development Goals,
1.

Decides to designate 29 September as the International Day of Awareness of Food Loss and Waste;

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, other international and regional
organizations and civil society, including non‑governmental organizations, individuals and other relevant
stakeholders, to observe the International Day, in an appropriate manner and in accordance with national priorities,
including through education and activities aimed at raising awareness of the importance of reducing food loss and
waste and the contribution of these actions to sustainable development;

_______________
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, The State of Food and Agriculture, 2019: Moving Forward on Food Loss and
Waste Reduction (Rome, 2019).
108

517

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to facilitate the observance of the
International Day, in collaboration with the United Nations Environmental Programme and other relevant
organizations, mindful of the provisions contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67
of 25 July 1980;
4. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions, including from the private sector;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders for appropriate observance.
RESOLUTION 74/210
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381, para. 57)109

74/210. Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone management for achieving sustainable
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,110 Agenda 21,111 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,112 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development113 and the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)114 and
the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we
want”,115 as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development116 and
the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference
on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,117
Reaffirming the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,118 which provides the legal framework for
ocean activities, and emphasizing its fundamental character, conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely
interrelated and need to be considered as a whole through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral approach,
Recalling the ecosystem approach advocated in the Convention on Biological Diversity,119 which is described
as a strategy for the integrated management of land, water and living resources that promotes conservation and
sustainable use in an equitable way,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Equatorial
Guinea, France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Monaco, Morocco, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay and Uzbekistan.
110
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
111
Ibid., annex II.
112
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
113
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
114
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
115
Resolution 66/288, annex.
116
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18−22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
117
Resolution 63/239, annex.
118
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
119
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
109

518

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want” and, inter alia, the commitments concerning the coastal and marine environment contained
therein,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming further its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement120 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully implement
the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change121 that have not yet
done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as
possible,
Noting with concern the findings contained in the special reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C and The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate,
Recalling the importance of strengthening the sustainable management and protection of the marine and coastal
ecosystems, of restoring, where necessary, the resilience of coastal ecosystems to avoid adverse impacts and of
achieving healthy and productive oceans,
Recalling also the commitments contained in Agenda 21, including those related to the integrated management
and sustainable development of coastal areas, while noting that integrated coastal management under national
jurisdiction has been widely recognized since then, which offers the opportunity to strengthen international
cooperation in this field,
Stressing the importance of the priorities outlined in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030,122 in particular with regard to building resilience and reducing disaster risk in coastal management,
Noting that coastal hazards preparedness, responses and recovery are important components of integrated
coastal zone management,
Recognizing the work on integrated coastal zone management conducted by the United Nations Environment
Programme and the regional seas conventions and action plans,
Recalling resolutions related to integrated coastal zone management adopted by the United Nations
Environment Assembly of the United Nations Environment Programme, including resolution 2/10 on oceans and
seas123 and resolution 4/11 on the protection of the marine environment from land-based activities,124
Noting that area-based management approaches, including integrated coastal zone management, are used to
deliver a range of polices that align with the Sustainable Development Goals and associated targets and that can
include societal engagement, conservation, the sustainable management of natural resources, food security and
climate change adaptation,

_______________
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
122
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
123
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/71/25), annex.
124
UNEP/EA.4/Res.11.
120
121

519

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing the contribution of the integrated coastal zone management approach in the promotion of
sustainable development in various areas, including sustainable tourism,
Recognizing also that integrated coastal zone management can contribute to poverty eradication,
Noting that coastal and marine resources contribute significantly to the economy and that maintaining a highquality coastal and marine environment provides ecosystem functions and services in support of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and, in particular, Sustainable Development Goal 14,
Noting also various initiatives to address threats and problems in coastal and marine areas that originate from
land-based activities and may have a negative impact on coastal and marine ecosystems,
Recognizing the efforts and actions that Member States, together with other stakeholders, are undertaking to
address the threats and problems for coastal and marine areas originating from land-based activities,
1. Emphasizes that the use and implementation of the integrated coastal zone management approach and
other area-based management approaches can contribute significantly towards the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals and their targets;125
2. Also emphasizes that coastal areas are an essential ecological and economic resource and that their
management and planning from a sustainable development perspective need an integrated management approach;
3. Underlines that integrated coastal zone management is a dynamic process for the sustainable management
and use of coastal zones, taking into account at the same time the fragility of coastal ecosystems and landscapes, the
diversity of activities and uses, their interactions, the maritime orientation of certain activities and uses and their impact
on both the marine and land parts;
4. Encourages Member States to consider the definition and implementation of an integrated coastal zone
management approach, including through appropriate national planning tools and an ecosystem approach that
integrates land, sea and watershed areas;
5. Also encourages Member States to consider strengthening, or where applicable establishing, coordinating
mechanisms for the integrated management and sustainable development of coastal and marine areas and their
resources, at the local, national and regional levels;
6. Further encourages Member States to take concrete measures to integrate poverty eradication, quality,
reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, sustainable transport, science, technology and innovation into
integrated coastal zone management;
7. Stresses the importance of policies and plans for disaster risk reduction to build resilience and reduce the
impacts and costs of natural disasters, also stresses the importance of biodiversity preservation and nature-based
solutions, and encourages Member States to incorporate these elements as part of their approach to integrated coastal
zone management;
8. Also stresses the importance of promoting coordination at the national and local levels with regard to
coastal areas, with the aim of ensuring policy coherence, as well as the effectiveness of coastal management measures,
while ensuring the participation of all relevant stakeholders, including people in vulnerable situations;
9. Emphasizes the importance of partnerships, of bringing together multi‑stakeholder actors to enable the
integration of different interests and knowledge into planning processes or strategies and of helping to ensure that
area-based management approach design is based on the best available science;
10. Also emphasizes that international and regional cooperation, including North-South, South-South and
triangular cooperation, and through capacity-building and technical support for developing counties and publicprivate partnerships, are an important factor in promoting the integrated coastal zone management approach by, inter
alia, promoting peer learning and cooperation, developing the necessary coastal systematic observation, research and
information management systems and developing technologies, the science-policy interface and technological

_______________
125

520

See resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

capacities, as well as building effective linkages among global, regional, subregional and national processes, as
appropriate, to advance the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals;
11. Calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme and other relevant United Nations entities, within
their mandates and existing resources, to support the efforts of Member States in promoting and implementing the
integrated coastal zone management approach, as well as in mobilizing partnerships and initiatives at the local,
national and regional levels;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session an actionoriented report on the implementation of the present resolution, within existing resources, and decides to include in
the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a sub-item
entitled “Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone management for achieving sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 74/211
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381, para. 57)126

74/211. Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central America
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 68/207 of 20 December 2013, 70/196 of 22 December 2015 and 72/214 of
20 December 2017, and all relevant declarations and conferences on this matter,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement127 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change128 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Recalling the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,129 in which Member States
recognized the need to promote and integrate disaster risk management approaches throughout the tourism industry,
given the often heavy reliance on tourism as a key economic driver,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Argentina, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Eswatini, Georgia, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Republic of Moldova, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Turkmenistan, Uruguay and
Uzbekistan.
127
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
128
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
129
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
126

521

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with concern that, owing to its geographical location and its geological and hydrometeorological
characteristics, Central America is a region prone and vulnerable to adverse natural events which have caused
substantial human and economic losses, including impacts on gross domestic product per capita, income, and poverty
reduction,
Recognizing that Central America is a region of significant natural resources and that its rich biodiversity
provides invaluable benefits to its populations and to its countries’ economies, and noting that sustainable tourism can
contribute directly to the conservation of ecosystems through a variety of activities and by raising awareness of the
importance of biodiversity and, in this regard, that the Central American countries are improving their institutional
and policy frameworks, strategies and action plans,
Noting the role of the World Tourism Organization as a member of the informal advisory group on
mainstreaming biodiversity, which is tasked with supporting the Executive Secretary and the Bureau of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity in developing a coherent outline for a long-term
approach on mainstreaming, including on ways to integrate mainstreaming adequately into a post-2020 global
biodiversity framework, looking forward to the convening of the summit on biodiversity in 2020, and looking forward
also to the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, to be held in
Kunming, China, in 2020, which is expected to adopt a post-2020 global biodiversity framework,
Recalling its resolution 70/193 of 22 December 2015, entitled “International Year of Sustainable Tourism for
Development, 2017”, and noting the efforts and initiatives taken to celebrate the Year, with a view to creating
awareness of the important contribution of tourism to sustainable development while promoting the exchange of good
practices, knowledge and experiences, as well as increased cross-border collaboration by developing joint ventures to
increase the synergies of tourism, including the sharing of tourism-related data and statistics, as appropriate,
Recognizing the important cross-cutting role of sustainable tourism as a positive contribution to the three
dimensions of sustainable development and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, including the
eradication of poverty, with a focus on ecotourism, rural tourism, community-based tourism and micro-, small and
medium-sized enterprises, the generation of trade opportunities, protection of the environment, improvement of
quality of life, and advancement on gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, especially in
developing countries,
Recognizing also the importance of promoting tourism product development by indigenous peoples and local
communities in order to support their economic development and participation in trade while protecting natural
environments and cultural traditions,
Stressing the need for responsible tourism and for its beneficial socioeconomic impact on local communities,
the economic empowerment of women through tourism, fair tourism, the protection of women, children and people
in vulnerable situations against all forms of exploitation in tourism, the prevention of trafficking in persons and
trafficking in cultural artefacts, respect for intangible cultural heritage and cultural and natural sites, the protection of
tourists as consumers and the provision of unbiased information to tourists,
Noting in this regard the role of the Central American Integration System,130 through the Central American
Tourism Integration Secretariat, in the promotion of sustainable tourism in the region,
Commending the ongoing efforts of the Governments of the Central American countries, in coordination with
the Central American Commission on Environment and Development and in cooperation with the World Tourism
Organization, in the implementation of existing and new programmes designed to launch and promote sustainable
tourism throughout the region,
Noting the existing joint initiatives designed and implemented to stimulate regional tourism integration and to
foster the development of indigenous and local communities, such as the Mayan World regional brand,

_______________
The membership of the Central American Integration System includes Belize, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama.
130

522

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the outcomes of the Forum on Tourism, Sustainability and Climate Change in Central America, held
from 11 to 13 April 2013 in La Ceiba, Honduras, the declaration of the fifteenth forum on the development of tourism
and on the harmonization of efforts to promote tourism in Central America and the Dominican Republic, held in
Guatemala City on 27 August 2014, and the outcomes adopted at the 112th meeting of the Central American Tourism
Council, held in San Salvador on 23 September 2019,
Noting the twenty-third session of the General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization, held in Saint
Petersburg, Russian Federation, from 9 to 13 September 2019,
Acknowledging the importance of ongoing actions to accelerate the shift towards sustainable consumption and
production131 in the tourism sector while contributing to sustainable development and resilient societies,
Taking note of the World Tourism Organization World Tourism Barometer of January 2019, according to which
the tourism sector has become a major economic activity for many of the countries in the region, creating muchneeded job opportunities and bringing in significant income and foreign exchange earnings,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;132

2. Recognizes the major role that sustainable tourism plays in the development of the Central American
countries, as an instrument of social inclusion that generates decent jobs and contributes to the improvement of the
quality of life of the population, aimed at achieving poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions;
3. Also recognizes that since the adoption of resolution 72/214 in 2017, the Central American countries have
strengthened efforts to promote sustainable tourism and sustainable development, as well as enhanced inclusiveness
and coordination among all stakeholders, and have also highlighted the key role that sustainable tourism plays in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and targets;133
4. Recalls the adoption of the principles of sustainable tourism, developed by the Central American Tourism
Integration Secretariat and found in its strategic plan for sustainable development, 2014–2018, which captures the
region’s vision of itself as an integrated, sustainable, multi-location, cross-border destination of high quality and
emphasizes its action plan for tourism and climate change as a component of the regional strategy on climate change;
5. Recognizes that the tourism sector has been a catalyst for achieving sustainable development in its three
dimensions in Central America, including addressing environmental issues, in particular climate change, poverty
eradication and economic development, highlighting the importance of strengthening appropriate policies and
financial support within a broader framework of sustainable development policies;
6. Encourages regional and national tourism organizations to promote destination models that seek the
highest possible direct benefits for local and national economies, in order to contribute to improving quality of life
and reducing poverty in local communities, taking into account the integration of sustainability policies in the tourism
sector, and invites all stakeholders to identify, assess and mitigate the impacts of tourism on the three dimensions of
sustainable development;
7. Recognizes the valuable role of international cooperation with relevant partners, and encourages them to
continue to support the implementation of various projects aimed at promoting sustainable tourism in the region by,
inter alia, strengthening ecotourism, rural, cultural and heritage tourism, including colonial sites, preventing trafficking
in cultural artefacts and ensuring respect for intangible cultural heritage and cultural and natural sites;
8. Welcomes the progress made by the Central American countries in converging towards a regional tourism
strategy based on preserving the region’s biodiversity and natural and cultural attractions and reducing poverty through
employment and entrepreneurial tourism development that emphasizes micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises,
while addressing the adverse effects of climate change, to improve the quality of life of the region’s inhabitants;

_______________
In accordance with United Nations Environment Assembly resolution 4/1 (UNEP/EA.4/Res.1).
A/74/208.
133
See resolution 70/1.
131
132

523

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

9. Appreciates the continued efforts of the Central American countries to support sustainable tourism
development, including the adoption and implementation of new legislation and policies, and encourages them to use
sustainable tourism as a tool to promote the eradication of poverty and enhance the protection of biodiversity, cultural
heritage and community development;
10. Encourages cooperation to promote the engagement of women, youth, indigenous peoples and local
communities and initiatives that foster their socioeconomic empowerment through sustainable tourism that continues
to promote equitable partnerships, the creation of jobs and entrepreneurial opportunities;
11. Recognizes the continued need to support sustainable tourism activities and relevant capacity-building
efforts that promote environmental awareness, conserve and protect the environment, respect wildlife, biodiversity,
ecosystems and cultural diversity and improve the welfare and livelihoods of local communities by supporting their
local economies and the human and natural environment as a whole;
12. Notes the importance of adequately measuring the sociocultural and environmental impact of tourism, and
encourages efforts to fill the present data gap in this area by taking advantage of the emergence of non-traditional
solutions and sources of data, with an overarching goal of advancing the national sustainable development agenda
beyond the tourism sector;
13. Recognizes that the implementation of sustainable consumption and production patterns in the tourism
sector in Central America, and hence advancing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development133 in the region,
requires, inter alia, the identification and adoption of more resource-efficient tourism planning approaches by all
relevant stakeholders;
14. Stresses the need to promote the further development of sustainable tourism, in particular through the
consumption of sustainable tourism products and services, and to strengthen the development of ecotourism,
maintaining, in particular, the culture and environmental integrity of indigenous and local communities and enhancing
the protection of ecologically sensitive areas and the natural heritage and indigenous cultural and religious sites of
those communities;
15. Invites Governments and other stakeholders to join the Sustainable Tourism Programme of the 10-Year
Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns,134 which aims at promoting
innovation and circular thinking to accelerate resource efficiency in the tourism value chain;
16. Welcomes the establishment of two observatories for sustainable tourism in Central America,135 and
invites Governments and other stakeholders to consider joining the International Network of Sustainable Tourism
Observatories of the World Tourism Organization, which contributes to the promotion of economically, socially and
environmentally sustainable tourism, and to support the practice of informed policymaking around the world;
17. Encourages further collaboration by public-private partnerships towards the enhancement of quality data
collection, taking into account the concerted efforts by national authorities of the Central American countries, in
conjunction with the private sector, through the establishment of observatories for sustainable tourism to monitor the
development of tourism at the destination level in order to provide timely information for evidence-based policies and
decision-making;
18. Urges the tourism sector in the Central American countries to be part of the coordination, knowledgesharing and communication mechanisms for security and emergency management at the national and regional levels
and to collectively promote an evidence-based approach in developing measures for safe, secure and seamless travel,
which will enable government agencies to make relevant, informed and coordinated decisions;
19. Emphasizes, taking into account the fact that the tourism sector is vulnerable to natural disasters, the need
to foster resilient tourism development in the Central American region, including through national strategies for
rehabilitation after shocks, climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction plans and public-private partnerships;

_______________
134
135

524

A/CONF.216/5, annex.
The observatories are located in Panama City and in La Antigua Guatemala.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

20. Welcomes the efforts of the World Tourism Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, regional commissions and other regional organizations, as well as the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, to promote sustainable tourism worldwide;
21. Invites Member States and other stakeholders and the World Tourism Organization to continue to support
the activities undertaken by the Central American countries for the promotion of sustainable tourism in the region,
including with regard to emergency preparedness for better disaster risk reduction, the vulnerabilities of the Central
American countries to natural disasters, and their impacts on sustainable tourism, as well as for capacity-building, job
creation and the promotion of local culture and products, and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals;
22. Invites the international community to support efforts, as appropriate, in creating and implementing
innovative technologies to modernize the tourism industry in the Central American countries;
23. Encourages the Central American countries, through the Central American Tourism Council and the
Central American Tourism Integration Secretariat, to promote sustainable tourism by intensifying bilateral,
regional and multilateral cooperation at the level of the tourism industry, and to continue to support sustainable
tourism through policies that foster responsive and inclusive tourism, strengthen regional identity and protect their
natural and cultural heritage, including their ecosystems and biodiversity, and notes that existing initiatives, such
as the Global Partnership for Sustainable Tourism, among other international initiatives, can deliver direct and
focused support to Governments;
24. Also encourages the Central American countries to establish and strengthen secure, reliable, efficient,
high-quality, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including transit transport systems that link them to international
markets, affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy and information and communications technology, with
the support of the international community, as appropriate, so as to promote sustainable tourism in the region;
25. Recognizes that persons with disabilities have equal rights to access tourism services and opportunities,
such as independent travel, accessible services, trained staff, reliable information and inclusive marketing, and that
great efforts should be made to ensure that tourism policies and practices are inclusive of persons with disabilities, the
majority of whom live in developing countries;
26. Calls upon Member States and the tourism sector to take effective measures, in the context of sustainable
tourism, including ecotourism initiatives, to help to promote the equal participation of women and the balanced
participation of youth, older persons, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, at all levels
and in decision-making processes in all areas, and to promote effective economic empowerment, mainly through
decent job and income creation;
27. Recognizes that addressing the need for improved monitoring of the development impacts of tourism
requires rethinking and changing traditional practices in order to incorporate multiple data sources to provide public
administrations and the tourism sector with the most updated intelligence on tourism, and notes the progress achieved
through the International Network of Sustainable Tourism Observatories of the World Tourism Organization, which
is focused on continuously monitoring the impacts of tourism, tackling the three dimensions of sustainability,
strengthening evidence-based decision-making and creating a culture of continuous and timely monitoring and
measurement;
28. Welcomes the positive role of tourism in the conservation of biodiversity and in fighting climate change,
which provides a further argument for enhancing the environmental components of tourism policies and better
utilizing the potential of tourism as an enabling agent of change, and the convening of the United Nations Climate
Change Conference in Madrid within the context of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change;
29. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Secretary-General of the World Tourism
Organization and with other relevant United Nations entities, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth
session an action-oriented report on the implementation of the present resolution, including concrete
recommendations to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in this regard,
in the Central American countries, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session the
item entitled “Sustainable development”.
525

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 74/212
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381, para. 57)136

74/212. International Day of Clean Air for blue skies
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for the
proclamation of international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, in which it is stated that an international day or
year should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Recalling the need to substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air,
water and soil pollution and contamination by 2030, as well as to reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact
of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management by 2030,
Recognizing that clean air is important for the health and day-to-day lives of people, mindful that air pollution
is the single greatest environmental risk to human health and one of the main avoidable causes of death and disease
globally, recognizing also that air pollution disproportionately affects women, children and older persons, and
concerned also by the negative impact of air pollution on ecosystems,
Recalling United Nations Environment Assembly resolution 3/8 of 6 December 2017,137 World Health
Assembly resolution 68.8 of 26 May 2015138 and Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
resolution 75/4 of 31 May 2019,
Emphasizing the need to strengthen international cooperation at the global, regional and subregional levels in
various areas related to improving air quality, including the collection and utilization of data, joint research and
development, and the sharing of best practices,
Acknowledging the importance of and urgent need to raise public awareness at all levels and to promote and
facilitate actions to improve air quality, bearing in mind that clean air is important for the health and livelihood of
people,
Appreciating the progress made in combating air pollution as seen in various projects, partnerships, mechanisms
and instruments at the national, regional and global levels,
Acknowledging that improving air quality can enhance climate change mitigation and that climate change
mitigation efforts can improve air quality,
Encouraged by the increasing interest of the international community in clean air, and emphasizing the need to
make further efforts to improve air quality, including reducing air pollution, to protect human health,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Georgia, Guatemala, Israel, Mauritius, Mongolia, Namibia, Paraguay, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkmenistan, United States of America and Uzbekistan.
137
UNEP/EA.3/Res.8.
138
See World Health Organization, document WHA68/2015/REC/1.
136

526

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Decides to designate 7 September as the International Day of Clean Air for blue skies, to be observed
starting in 2020;
2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, other international and regional
organizations and civil society, including non‑governmental organizations, individuals and other relevant
stakeholders, to observe the International Day in an appropriate manner and in accordance with national priorities,
and to continue to give consideration to enhancing international cooperation in support of the efforts of all Member
States towards attaining clean air;
3. Invites the United Nations Environment Programme to facilitate the observance of the International Day,
in collaboration with other relevant organizations, mindful of the provisions contained in the annex to Economic and
Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980;
4. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to promote the observance of the International Day.
RESOLUTION 74/213
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381, para. 57)139

74/213. Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness of environmental effects related to waste
originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 65/149 of 20 December 2010, 68/208 of 20 December 2013 and 71/220 of
21 December 2016,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, and its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social
and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recalling the relevant recommendations of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held in
Stockholm in June 1972,140

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Timor-Leste, Ukraine and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
140
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972 (A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1), part one.
139

527

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note of the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992,141 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(Johannesburg Plan of Implementation), adopted in Johannesburg, South Africa, in September 2002,142 and
reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The
future we want”, adopted in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 2012,143
Recognizing the work of the Convention on Biological Diversity144 and its programme of work to reduce marine
and coastal biological loss, as well as other multilateral environmental agreements and regional seas conventions to
address marine pollution and their contribution to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,
Recalling the political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under
the auspices of the General Assembly on 24 and 25 September 2019,145 in which Member States confirm that they
remain resolved to ensure the lasting protection of the planet and its natural resources and commit to reducing disaster
risk and building resilience,
Recalling also its resolution 73/254 of 20 December 2018, in which it promotes global partnerships that are
critical to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as a principle-based approach to enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and all relevant partners,
Recalling further the efforts to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development, including preventing and significantly reducing, by 2025, marine pollution of all kinds,146
Recalling its resolution 71/312 of 6 July 2017, entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action”, and looking
forward to the 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development,
Recalling also its resolution 72/73 of 5 December 2017, in which it proclaimed the United Nations Decade of
Ocean Science for Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,147 which provides the legal framework for
ocean activities, and emphasizing its fundamental character, conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely
interrelated and need to be considered as a whole through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral approach,
Noting the importance of cooperation on chemical munitions dumped at sea as an effort that contributes to the
improvement of the overall marine environment,
Recalling relevant international and regional instruments such as the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction,148 the Convention
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter,149 the Convention for the Protection
and Development of the Marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean Region,150 the Convention for the Protection
of the Marine Environment and the Coastal Region of the Mediterranean,151 the Agreement on the Protection of the

_______________
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions
Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1.
142
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
143
Resolution 66/288, annex.
144
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
145
Resolution 74/4, annex.
146
See resolution 70/1.
147
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
148
Ibid., vol. 1974, No. 33757.
149
Ibid., vol. 1046, No. 15749.
150
Ibid., vol. 1506, No. 25974.
151
Ibid., vol. 1102, No. 16908.
141

528

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Marine Environment and the Coastal Area of the South-East Pacific,152 the Convention on the Protection of the
Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area153 and the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of
the North-East Atlantic,154
Noting the national, regional and international activities, including scientific research,155 data collection and
sharing, awareness-raising, reporting on encounters and technical advice, related to munitions dumped at sea, inter
alia, in the frameworks of the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other
Matter, the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic, the Convention for
the Protection of the Marine Environment and the Coastal Region of the Mediterranean and the Convention on the
Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area,
Emphasizing that, in the report on the Third Special Session of the Conference of the States Parties to Review
the Operation of the Chemical Weapons Convention (the Third Review Conference), adopted at The Hague on
19 April 2013, the States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction were invited to support voluntary sharing of information,
raising awareness and cooperation on this issue,
Noting that Member States, international and regional organizations and civil society have undertaken activities
to discuss and promote the issues related to waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea, including
international cooperation and the exchange of experiences and practical knowledge,
Noting also that the First Global Integrated Marine Assessment (first World Ocean Assessment), adopted in
2015, also highlights the issue of marine pollution, including from dumping, and has been taken into account by the
General Assembly, in its resolutions 70/235 of 23 December 2015, 71/257 of 23 December 2016, 72/73 of
5 December 2017 and 73/124 of 11 December 2018,
Noting further the concerns about the potential long-term environmental effects related to waste originating
from chemical munitions dumped at sea, including their potential impact on human health and safety and on the
marine environment and resources,
Recognizing the mandates and capacities of competent United Nations system entities in the fields of marine
environment monitoring, research and information-sharing, as well as pollution preparedness and response,156
Recognizing also the ongoing efforts aimed at awareness-raising, information-sharing and capacity-building at
various levels, as well as partnership and cooperation on the issue among relevant regional and international bodies,
including the United Nations, the International Maritime Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Commission for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic and the Baltic
Marine Environment Protection Commission, as well as the regional seas conventions and others,157
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,157 including the views submitted and contained therein;

2. Notes the importance of raising awareness of the environmental effects related to waste originating from
chemical munitions dumped at sea;
3. Invites Member States and relevant international and regional organizations to keep under observation the
issue of the waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea, to continue outreach efforts to assess and
increase awareness of environmental effects related to that issue and to cooperate, including by strengthening existing

_______________
Ibid., vol. 1648, No. 28325.
Ibid., vol. 2099, No. 36495.
154
Ibid., vol. 2354, No. 42279.
155
See, for example, the findings of the Baltic Sea research project entitled “Chemical Munitions, Search and Assessment (CHEMSEA)”,
which is conducting research on environmental effects related to chemical munitions dumped at sea. The findings summarize all results
obtained by the project.
156
Competent United Nations system entities include, inter alia, the United Nations Environment Programme, the International Maritime
Organization, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission and the Secretariat.
157
See A/74/242.
152
153

529

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

efforts within regional seas conventions and other international, regional and subregional activities, as appropriate,
related to risk assessment, monitoring, information-gathering, risk prevention and response to incidents;
4. Encourages voluntary sharing of information on waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at
sea through conferences, seminars, workshops, training courses and publications aimed at the general public and
industry in order to reduce related risks;
5. Also encourages partnerships between Governments, industry and civil society for raising awareness
about, reporting on and monitoring of waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea;
6. Invites Member States in a position to do so to consider providing assistance and sharing expertise aimed
at building capacities related to risk assessment, monitoring, information-gathering, risk prevention and response to
incidents resulting from waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea;
7. Encourages Member States to share experiences, good practices and information on the technologies
available to treat, conserve or safely destroy the waste originating from chemical munitions dumped at sea;
8. Invites the Secretary-General to continue analysing all available information and additionally, if
appropriate, to seek the views of Member States and relevant regional and international organizations on cooperative
measures to assess and increase awareness of the environmental effects related to waste originating from chemical
munitions dumped at sea, also with a view to exploring the possibility of establishing a database158 and options for
the most appropriate institutional framework for such a database, as well as identifying the appropriate
intergovernmental bodies within the United Nations system for further consideration and implementation, as
appropriate, of the cooperative measures envisaged in the present resolution, building on and without duplicating
existing activities, and with a view to achieving efficiency and synergies, taking into account the mandates and
capacities of relevant international and regional organizations;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, prepared using responses of Member
States and relevant regional and international organizations, as well as other available information, and decides to
include the item entitled “Sustainable development” in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session, unless
otherwise agreed.
RESOLUTION 74/214
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381, para. 57)159

74/214. Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central Asia
The General Assembly,
Guided by the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, which encourages regional cooperation to
advance the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 72/214 of 20 December 2017 on sustainable tourism
and sustainable development in Central America and 73/245 of 20 December 2018 on the promotion of sustainable
tourism, including ecotourism, for poverty eradication and environment protection, and other related resolutions,

_______________
Such a database could contain relevant and voluntarily shared information on, inter alia, the location of dumping sites, the type, quantity
and, to the extent possible, the current condition of chemical munitions, the recorded environmental impact, best practices on risk prevention
and response to incidents or accidental encounters and destruction or impact reduction technologies, including by means of data collection
and management.
159
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, China, Cuba, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Ghana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Maldives, Mauritius, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
158

530

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling also the Manila Declaration on World Tourism of 10 October 1980,160 the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development and Agenda 21 of 14 June 1992,161 the Amman Declaration on Peace through
Tourism of 11 November 2000162 and the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development and the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),163
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement164 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to implement
fully the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change165 that have not
yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon
as possible,
Recognizing that sustainable tourism can contribute directly to the conservation of environmentally vulnerable
natural areas and habitats through a variety of activities and by raising awareness of the importance of biodiversity,
stressing the urgent need to address the unprecedented global decline in biodiversity and looking forward to the
convening of a summit on biodiversity at the level of Heads of State and Government, within existing resources,
before the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, in 2020, in order to highlight the
urgency of action at the highest levels in support of a post-2020 global biodiversity framework that contributes to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and places the global community on a path towards realizing the
2050 Vision for Biodiversity,
Recognizing also the important dimension and role of sustainable tourism as a positive instrument towards the
improvement of the quality of life for all people and its contribution to sustainable development, especially in
developing countries, and to the eradication of poverty and the protection of the environment,
Recognizing further that sustainable tourism, including ecotourism, mountain tourism and rural tourism, is a
cross-cutting activity that can contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, including by
fostering economic growth, alleviating poverty, creating full and productive employment and decent work for all,
advancing gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls and increasing incomes for the population, and
noting in particular that tourism accounts for more than 10 per cent of global gross domestic product, the industry
represents more than 6 per cent of service exports and more than 4 per cent of investments are directed at tourism
development,

_______________
A/36/236, annex, appendix I.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annexes I and II.
162
A/55/640, annex.
163
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex, and resolution 2, annex.
164
Adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
165
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
160
161

531

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the adoption in 2012 by the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development of the 10-Year
Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns,166 and welcoming the launch of
the Sustainable Tourism Programme of the One Planet network,
Welcoming the ongoing efforts of the Central Asian countries to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Sustainable Development Goals at the national and regional levels,
Recognizing the importance of various international events held in Central Asia and other forums in further
promoting the sustainable tourism industry in the region,
Noting that the countries of Central Asia intend to attract more national and international financing and
investment in their tourism sectors,
Emphasizing that the passage of the Great Silk Road through Central Asia and the efforts of Central Asian
countries to promote tourism on world markets are increasing the interest of foreign tourists in the region,
1. Notes the significant practical contribution of the Central Asian countries to strengthening regional
stability and sustainable development, as well as their efforts in this regard;
2. Expresses its support for the regional efforts and initiatives aimed at strengthening economic cooperation
in Central Asia;
3. Appreciates the contribution of international development assistance to the promotion of tourism in
Central Asia;
4. Invites Member States, other stakeholders, and the World Tourism Organization, within its mandate and
resources, to continue to support the Central Asian countries in their efforts to develop responsible and sustainable
tourism in the region and to that end:
(a) To participate in capacity-building activities to achieve the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Sustainable Development Goals,167 through facilitating access to tourism-related benefits to all sectors
of society, in particular people in vulnerable situations;
(b) To expand cooperation with Central Asian countries in the field of sustainable tourism according to their
respective international commitments;
(c) To help formulate the main directions of a consolidated and comprehensive policy for the sustainable
development of tourism in the Central Asian region, taking into account the specifics and the level of economic
development of each country of the region;
(d) To support sustainable tourism activities and relevant capacity-building efforts that promote
environmental awareness, conserve and protect the environment, respect wildlife, biodiversity, ecosystems and
cultural diversity, as well as natural, historical and cultural heritage and increase tourist flow, and to promote the
development of sustainable tourism and strategies that attract foreign tourists to Central Asia and improve the welfare
and livelihoods of local communities by supporting their local economies and the human and natural environment as
a whole;
(e) To join efforts to introduce the practice of creating and implementing innovation technologies to
modernize the tourism industry;
5.

Encourages the Central Asian countries:

(a) To unite their efforts on the widespread introduction of active types of tourism, including mountain
tourism, ecotourism, sport fishing and car and bicycle travel;
(b) To inform Member States on the sustainable development of pilgrimage tourism in Central Asia and its
potential and invite them to visit the religious sites of Central Asia and take part in religious events, as appropriate;

_______________
166
167

532

A/CONF.216/5, annex.
See resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(c) To support sustainable tourism through policies that foster responsive and inclusive tourism, strengthen
regional identity and protect their natural and cultural heritage, including their ecosystems and biodiversity;
(d) To share their experiences on sustainable tourism aimed at contributing to poverty eradication for the
benefit of all, with a particular focus on those who risk being left behind;
(e) To establish and strengthen secure, reliable, efficient, high-quality, sustainable and resilient infrastructure,
including transit transport systems that link them to international markets, all sources of energy, including renewable
energy, and information and communications technology, with the support of development partners, multilateral
financial and development institutions and regional banks, so as to promote sustainable tourism in the region;
6. Calls upon Member States and other stakeholders to take effective measures, in the context of sustainable
tourism, including ecotourism initiatives, to help to promote the equal participation of women and the balanced
participation of youth, older persons, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, at all levels
and in decision-making processes in all areas, and to promote effective economic empowerment, mainly through
decent job and income creation;
7. Takes note of the progress made by the Central Asian countries in the implementation of existing
programmes aimed at creating and promoting sustainable tourism throughout the region, and in that regard welcomes
their contribution to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development167 and its Sustainable
Development Goals;
8. Invites Member States to participate in major events in the area of sustainable tourism in Central Asia,
which may contribute to the development of sustainable tourism in the region.
RESOLUTION 74/215
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 154 to 2, with 26 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/381, para. 57)168
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Egypt, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu and Zambia.
168

533

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

74/215. Agricultural technology for sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 72/215 of 20 December 2017,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Welcoming the Zero Hunger Challenge initiative launched by the Secretary-General at the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development as a vision for a future free from hunger, and recalling the Rome Declaration
on Nutrition, adopted at the Second International Conference on Nutrition,169 the United Nations Decade of Action
on Nutrition (2016–2025),170 the International Year of Plant Health, 2020,171 and the United Nations Decade on
Ecosystem Restoration (2021–2030),172
Recalling the adoption of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production
Patterns by the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012,173
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement174 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully implement
the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change175 that have not yet
done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as
possible,
Welcoming the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, adopted
at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction,176
Welcoming also the Buenos Aires outcome document of the second High-level United Nations Conference on
South-South Cooperation, held in Buenos Aires in March 2019,177
Recalling relevant strategies and programmes of action, including the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,178 the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway,179 and the Vienna Declaration and Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014–2024,180 reaffirming the importance of supporting Agenda 2063 of the African Union

_______________
World Health Organization, document EB 136/8, annex I.
See resolution 70/259.
171
See resolution 73/252.
172
See resolution 73/284.
173
A/CONF.216/5, annex.
174
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
175
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
176
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
177
Resolution 73/291, annex.
178
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chaps. I and II.
179
Resolution 69/15, annex.
180
Resolution 69/137, annexes I and II.
169
170

534

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and the programme of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,181 and recognizing the major challenge to the
achievement of durable peace and sustainable development in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations,
Welcoming the United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017–2030,182 and acknowledging that forests and trees
outside forests provide essential ecosystem services, such as timber, food, fuel, fodder, non-wood products and shelter,
as well as soil and water conservation and clean air, and that forests and trees outside forests contribute substantially
to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to the conservation of biodiversity, prevent land degradation and
desertification and reduce the risk of floods, landslides and avalanches, droughts, dust and sand storms and other
disasters,
Welcoming also the United Nations Decade of Family Farming (2019–2028)183 and noting that sustainable
agricultural technology, digitalization as well as technological, social, economic and institutional innovations build on
the knowledge and capacities and respond to the needs and realities of smallholders and family farmers, in particular
women and youth in rural areas, and in that regard highlighting the importance of innovation-driven development and
support to entrepreneurship and innovation, and welcoming new sustainable agricultural technologies that can
contribute to their transition from subsistence farming to innovative, commercial production, helping them to increase
their own food security and nutrition, generate marketable surpluses and add value to their production,
Recognizing that agricultural technology has a beneficial impact on and an important role in the successful
implementation of the goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in that regard taking
note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on progress towards the Sustainable Development
Goals184 and the Global Sustainable Development Report, and the Secretary-General’s strategy on new technologies,
Expressing concern about the rise in global hunger, which affected 821 million people in 2018,
Recognizing that agricultural technologies have improved the productivity of agriculture and enhanced the
sustainability and resilience of food production systems at the local level,
Noting with concern the findings of the special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on
climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas
fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems entitled Climate Change and Land,
Taking note of the June 2019 report of the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation entitled
“The age of digital interdependence”,
Seriously concerned about the findings of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services, and stressing the urgent need to step up efforts to prevent the loss of biological diversity and the
degradation of land and soil,
Welcoming the inauguration of the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries, and encouraging its
continued support,
Recognizing that the agriculture sector is inextricably linked with the entire food system and that agricultural
technologies and digitalization can add value throughout the food system by improving the sustainability of storage,
transport, trade, processing, transformation, retail, waste reduction and recycling, as well as interactions among these
processes,
Stressing the crucial role of women in the agricultural sector and their contribution to enhancing agricultural and
rural development, improving food security and nutrition and eradicating rural poverty, and underlining the fact that
meaningful progress in agricultural and agricultural technology development necessitates, inter alia, closing the
gender gap, introducing appropriate gender-responsive interventions at all stages in agricultural innovation processes,
including at the policy level, and ensuring that women have equal access to agricultural technologies, related services
and inputs and all necessary productive resources, including tenure rights and access to land, fisheries and forests, as

_______________
A/57/304, annex.
See resolution 71/285.
183
See resolution 72/239.
184
E/2019/68.
181
182

535

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

well as to affordable education and training, social services, social protection, health care, health services and financial
services, and access to and participation in local, regional and international markets,
Recognizing that young people play a significant role in supporting sustainable economic growth and that
agricultural technology, innovation and digitalization have an essential role to play in facilitating access to agricultural
skills for young women and men, improving the livelihoods of youth, creating quality and decent jobs and contributing
to the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, strengthening progress towards achieving the
realization of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recognizing also the rapid evolution in science and technological innovation and digitalization, and that the
development and open access to mega data and information will bring about profound changes in agricultural
research, agricultural extension and rural development,
Recognizing further that a systems approach to agricultural innovation is essential to ensure that innovations,
including technologies, are aligned towards common objectives, promote collaboration, address problems relevant to
farmers and offer incentives to, and the means to accelerate adoption by, smallholder farmers, and that it is essential
to enable interactions and knowledge flows among the different stakeholders in the agricultural innovation system,
including farmers’ organizations, research institutions, extension services, governments, international organizations,
the private sector and civil society,
Acknowledging the role and work of civil society, the private sector and academia in furthering progress in
developing countries and promoting sustainable agriculture and management practices, the use of agricultural
technology, digitalization and the training of smallholder farmers, in particular rural women, and that multi-stakeholder
partnerships can contribute to the financing of food security and nutrition as well as sustainable development by
mobilizing additional resources through advocacy and innovative funding mechanisms and facilitating the coordinated
and targeted use of existing resources, aligning them more effectively with global and national public priorities,
Stressing the need to design sustainable food systems that conserve the natural resource base and enhance the
provision of ecosystem services, while increasing productivity, and that respond to the challenges posed by, inter alia,
climate change, the depletion and scarcity of natural resources, urbanization and globalization, and recognizing that
agricultural technology and digitalization can contribute to food security and nutrition and help to build resilience,
Emphasizing that participatory research, in conjunction with effective, pluralistic and demand-driven extension
and rural advisory services, is critical in order to ensure that agricultural technologies respond to the demands and
needs of all farmers, including family farmers and smallholder producers,
Recognizing the need to further enhance the linkages and synergies between agricultural technology and
innovative sustainable agricultural practices, including agroecological principles, resource use efficiency, circular
economy, recycling, optimizing external inputs, integration, crop rotation and diversification, no-tillage, soil health
monitoring, agroforestry and regenerative agricultural practices, and by effectively combining appropriate
technologies, including biotechnologies, with traditional and indigenous knowledge, in order to design sustainable
farming systems that strengthen the interactions between plants, animals, humans and the environment for food
security and nutrition, enhance productivity, improve nutrition, conserve the natural resource base and attain more
sustainable and innovative food systems,
Stressing the need to support and strengthen information systems and statistical systems for better disaggregated
data collection and processing, which will be key in monitoring progress in the adoption of sustainable agricultural
technologies and their impact on improving food security, nutrition and sustainable agriculture,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;185

2. Urges Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and other stakeholders to strengthen efforts
to improve the development of sustainable agricultural technologies and their transfer and dissemination under
mutually agreed terms to developing countries, especially the least developed countries, in particular at the bilateral
and regional levels, and encourages international, regional and national efforts to strengthen capacity and foster the
utilization of local know-how in developing countries, especially that of smallholder and family farmers, in particular
rural women and youth, in order to enhance the productivity and nutritional quality of food crops and animal products,

_______________
185

536

A/74/238.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

promote sustainable practices in pre-harvest and post-harvest agricultural activities and enhance food security and
nutrition-related programmes and policies that take into consideration the specific needs of women, young children
and youth, with particular attention to securing the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour,
strengthening progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals;
3. Recognizes the important role of family farming and smallholder farming in contributing to the
achievement of food security and improved nutrition and the role that family farms play in contributing to global food
security, poverty eradication and sustainability, as well as job creation, and in ending chronic child malnutrition, and
that agricultural technologies should be adapted to the needs of small- and medium-scale family farmers and
combined with credit access for sustainable production and significant investment in rural infrastructure as well as the
training and education of those who would most benefit from them;
4. Calls upon Member States and relevant United Nations organizations and other stakeholders to
mainstream gender perspectives into agricultural policies and projects and to focus on closing the gender gap by, inter
alia, encouraging gender-balanced investments and innovation in small-scale agricultural production and distribution,
and a gender-responsive value chain supported by integrated and multisectoral policies, in order to improve women’s
productive capacity and incomes, strengthen their resilience and achieve equitable access to all forms of financing,
markets and networks, labour-saving technologies and agricultural technology information and know-how,
equipment, decision-making forums and associated agricultural resources to ensure that agriculture, food security and
nutrition-related programmes and policies take into consideration the specific needs of women and the barriers that
women face in accessing agricultural inputs and resources;
5. Encourages Governments to develop and implement youth-focused agricultural development projects
and programmes, including through training, education, financial inclusion services, including microcredit services,
and capacity-building, including with regard to innovation, in association with the private sector, in order to stimulate
the interest and the involvement of youth in agriculture, especially in agroenvironmental sustainability through access
to microcredit and capacity-strengthening, to develop agricultural technological innovation through private partnerships;
6. Remains concerned that agricultural innovations and technologies often bypass ageing famers, and in
particular ageing women farmers, as many do not possess the financial resources or the skills to adopt new practices,
and in this regard stresses the need to strengthen the capacity of ageing farmers through continued access to financial
and infrastructure services and training for improved farming techniques and technologies;
7. Acknowledges the importance of adopting innovative and sustainable food systems by harnessing science,
technology and innovation, including co-innovation, promoting participatory research, demand-driven extension and
rural advisory services and increased, responsible and inclusive public and private investment, building human
capacity, encouraging entrepreneurship, creating an enabling economic and institutional environment and
strengthening knowledge flows, in particular between scientists and farmers, taking into account local and traditional
knowledge systems, in combination with new sources of knowledge;
8. Invites the United Nations system and all relevant stakeholders to consider ways to make available, on
mutually agreed terms, data and information relating to agriculture and food systems, including meteorology, big data,
the Internet of things, satellite imagery, early warning systems and other data-based technologies, that could help to
build the resilience of family farmers and smallholder producers, optimize yields and support rural livelihoods;
9. Recognizes that weather forecasting and climate services and products allow farmers to better plan
agricultural activities, optimize production, manage climate-related risks and integrate climate change adaptation into
their decisions, and therefore encourages governments and meteorological agencies to improve the collection,
dissemination and analysis of agrometeorological and agroclimatological data and information;
10. Acknowledges that technological innovations can be supported by financial innovations and financial
support, such as de-risking strategies and blended finance options, and that blended finance mechanisms are new
institutional models that link public and private financing and patient capital with equity investments and promote
schemes that more effectively distribute investments to small-scale enterprises and producers;
11. Underlines the importance of supporting and advancing research in improving and diversifying crop
varieties and seed systems, as well as supporting the establishment of sustainable agricultural systems, sustainable
management practices and the use of new and existing technologies, such as conservation agriculture, integrated soil
fertility management, integrated farming systems, animal disease prevention and control and integrated pest
management, precision agriculture, irrigation, livestock husbandry and biotechnologies, in order to make agriculture
537

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

more sustainable and productive and, in particular, to make crops and farm animals more resistant to diseases,
including drug-resistant infections, considering international standards in this regard, pests and environmental stresses,
including the impacts of climate change, drought and extreme rainfall events, in accordance with national regulations
and relevant international agreements;
12. Stresses the urgent need to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to
climate change, and urges Member States to continue to engage in adaptation planning processes and the
implementation of mitigation actions;
13. Recognizes that sustainable agricultural mechanization can have potential drawbacks but could also help
address shortages of labour, ease drudgery, increase incomes, enhance productivity and the timeliness of agricultural
activities, promote efficient resource use, enable better market access and attract new investment and talent into
agriculture, thereby creating better prospects for sustainable growth and support measures to mitigate climate and
weather-related hazards, and acknowledges that mechanization and digitalization can also create new and higherpaying jobs in agricultural value chains, making it more attractive for youth to stay in rural areas;
14. Stresses the need to significantly reduce pre-harvest, post-harvest and other food losses and waste
throughout the food supply chain through, inter alia, improved production planning, the promotion of resourceefficient production and processing practices, improved preservation and packing technologies, improved
transportation and logistics management and enhanced household and business awareness of food losses and waste
prevention, to help all actors in the value chain to enjoy greater benefits and to contribute to environmental protection;
15. Recognizes that energy-efficient food systems represent a key component in transitioning to sustainable
food and agriculture;
16. Also recognizes that strengthening urban-rural linkages can improve both rural and urban food security
and nutrition, and in this regard highlights the need for integrated urban and territorial agriculture land planning,
improved rural-urban transportation links, food packaging technology and cold chain development to reduce food
loss, and for effective trade links across the urban-rural continuum, which will contribute to ensuring that small-scale
farmers and fishers are linked to local, subnational, national, regional and global value chains and markets;
17. Further recognizes that urban farming and agriculture can improve the food security and nutrition of, and
foster income opportunities for, urban dwellers, and in this regard highlights the need to further develop agricultural
technology in support of sustainable urbanization, including sustainable intensification through indoor and vertical
farming, the use of automation to overcome intensive labour challenges, the innovative use of urban spaces for
agriculture and the promotion of urban farming, in order to reduce hunger and malnutrition and to promote sustainable
urban development;
18. Underlines the importance of the sustainable use and management of water resources to increase and
contribute to agricultural productivity, calls upon stakeholders to promote integrated water resources management in
agriculture and adapt agricultural systems to improve their overall water efficiency and water productivity, and their
resilience to water stresses, inter alia, by developing and implementing adaptive water and agricultural strategies and
action plans based on a comprehensive approach to the long-term availability and variability of all water sources,
reducing water scarcity risks through integrated water resources management options, designing and implementing
agricultural and landscape management practices that increase the resilience of agricultural systems to water stress
and reduce pollution, making rain-fed agriculture systems a more reliable option, investing in an enabling
environment and mobilizing the full set of tools available to them, and calls for further efforts to develop and
strengthen irrigation facilities and water-saving technology, which can also enhance resilience to the current and
projected adverse impacts of climate change;
19. Encourages Member States, civil society and public and private institutions to develop partnerships to
support financial and market services, including training, capacity-building, infrastructure and extension and rural
advisory services, and calls for further efforts by all stakeholders to include smallholder farmers, in particular rural
women and youth, in planning and in taking decisions about making appropriate sustainable agricultural technologies
and practices accessible and affordable to them, and strengthen the links between community-based initiatives and
financial institutions, including through the promotion of financing tools that foster agricultural sustainability;
20. Recognizes the important role of information and communications technology, as well as digitalization
and e-agriculture, in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, which constitute tools for improving agricultural
productivity, practices and smallholder livelihoods, strengthening agricultural markets and institutions, improving
538

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

agricultural extension and rural advisory services, empowering farmer communities, keeping farmers and rural
entrepreneurs informed about agricultural innovations, weather conditions, input availability, financial services and
market prices and connecting them with buyers, and stresses the need to ensure the access of women and youth to
information and communications technology, digitalization and e-agriculture, especially in rural areas;
21. Calls upon Member States to include sustainable agricultural development as an integral part of their
national policies and strategies, notes the positive impact that North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation
can have in this regard, and urges the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to include elements of agricultural
technology, research and development in efforts to realize the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,186 with a
focus on the research and development of technology that is affordable, durable and sustainable and that can be easily
used by and disseminated to smallholder farmers, in particular rural women and ageing farmers;
22. Requests relevant United Nations organizations, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to promote, support and facilitate the exchange of experience among Member States through, inter
alia, recommendations and other public goods related to ways to promote sustainable agriculture and increase the
adaptive capacity of agriculture and the use of a broad range of agricultural technologies that support more sustainable
food systems, build long-term fertility, healthy and resilient agroecosystems and secure livelihoods and have a positive
impact on the entire value chain, including technology for post-harvest crop storage, processing, handling and
transportation, including in pressing environmental circumstances;
23. Underlines the instrumental role of agricultural technology, agricultural research and innovation and
technology transfer on mutually agreed terms and the sharing of knowledge and practices in furthering sustainable
development and in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, calls, therefore, upon Member States, and
encourages relevant international bodies, to support sustainable agricultural research and development, emphasizes
that research outputs should be appropriate to the needs of and accessible to end users, including governments, water
managers, large-scale private sector enterprises and smallholder farmers, and in this regard calls for continued support
to the international agricultural research system, including the research centres of CGIAR and other relevant
international organizations and initiatives;
24. Stresses the importance of indicators that can be used to formulate targeted policies towards the adoption
of agricultural technology and to measure their impact on the Sustainable Development Goals, and in this regard
encourages Member States, in cooperation with all relevant stakeholders, to continue to contribute to the ongoing
work of the Statistical Commission on the global indicator framework;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, within
existing resources, an action-oriented report that examines the current technological trends and key advances in
agricultural technologies, provides illustrative examples of the transformative use of technologies at scale and includes
recommendations that assist Member States in accelerating their efforts to implement the relevant goals and targets
of the 2030 Agenda, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session the item entitled
“Sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 74/216
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 131 to 2, with 49 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/381/Add.1, para. 8)187
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,

_______________
Resolution 70/1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
186
187

539

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/216. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21
and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,188 Agenda 21,189 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,190 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development191 and the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)192 and
the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we
want”,193 as well as all relevant resolutions on the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development and the resulting processes for the elaboration of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and for the realization of sustainable development, and further recognizing the
uneven progress in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and all other internationally agreed
development goals and commitments necessary to achieve sustainable development,
Reaffirming the need to further mainstream sustainable development at all levels, integrating economic, social
and environmental aspects and recognizing their interlinkages, so as to achieve sustainable development in all its
dimensions, and reiterating that sustainable development is a key element of the overarching framework for United
Nations activities,

_______________
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
189
Ibid., annex II.
190
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
191
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
192
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
193
Resolution 66/288, annex.
188

540

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Welcoming the convening of the high-level political forum on sustainable development under the auspices of
the General Assembly (Sustainable Development Goals Summit) on 24 and 25 September 2019, and the adoption of
its political declaration,194 and taking note of the 2019 Global Sustainable Development Report as an important input
to the high-level political forum under the auspices of the General Assembly,
Recognizing that digital technologies and the unprecedented scale, spread and speed of change brought about
by them can be harnessed to support the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Stressing the need, in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to benefit from and
build on experiences, success stories, best practices, challenges and the lessons learned from the previous agreements
on sustainable development,
Stressing also the importance of overcoming silos and seeking innovative and coordinated approaches in
integrating the three dimensions of sustainable development, and in this regard taking note of the actions and initiatives
implemented by the United Nations system entities,
Stressing further the need to determine gaps, obstacles, synergies and challenges in the implementation of
commitments and instruments in the sustainable development field, in a coherent and integrated manner, and with a
view to pursuing and achieving policy coherence as well as identifying new opportunities and emerging challenges
for international cooperation on the path towards sustainable development,
Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development,195 the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change,196 the New Urban Agenda197 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030,198 as well as major outcome documents in relation to countries in special situations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development;199
2. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the mainstreaming of the three dimensions of
sustainable development throughout the United Nations system;200
3. Reaffirms the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,193 and also reaffirms, as set out in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,201 all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development;188
4. Recognizes that the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development constituted a milestone
that ushered in major international instruments and commitments that guide progress in closing development gaps
within and among developed and developing countries, including the Convention on Biological Diversity,202 the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change203 and the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa (the
Rio conventions)204 as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;

_______________
Resolution 74/4, annex.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
196
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
197
Resolution 71/256, annex.
198
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
199
A/74/204.
200
A/74/72-E/2019/13.
201
Resolution 70/1.
202
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
203
Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.
204
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.
194
195

541

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Urges the full and effective implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and all other
internationally agreed development goals and commitments in the economic, social and environmental fields,
including the Millennium Development Goals and those under the three Rio conventions, building on their
contributions, best practices, challenges and lessons learned, in order to support the full and effective implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
6. Recognizes that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development builds on issues included in Agenda 21,
and encourages further efforts aimed at strengthening international cooperation to address gaps in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda;
7. Acknowledges, in this regard, that sustainable consumption and production practices can be costefficient and effective ways to achieve economic development, reduce environmental impacts and advance human
well-being, and urges the need to further Sustainable Development Goal 12, in order to contribute to the
achievement of all Goals;
8. Recognizes that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development adopted, among other
commitments on sustainable consumption and production, the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns,205 and that both the Framework and its multi-partner trust fund are tools for
action on sustainable consumption and production, and notes the launch of the “One Plan for One Planet” strategy
2018–2022, and in this regard reiterates the need for such initiatives to continue sharing best practices and providing
other forms of technical assistance in the shift towards sustainable consumption and production patterns, including by
providing tools and solutions for policy design and implementation;
9. Also recognizes the importance of new and ongoing efforts to develop policies, frameworks, partnerships
and instruments that improve resource efficiency, reduce waste and mainstream sustainability practices across all
sectors of the economy, and enable consumers to make sustainable consumption choices;
10. Further recognizes the important role of the private sector in utilizing sustainable practices, including for
multinational corporations and micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises which may face greater challenges in
enhancing resource efficiency;
11. Acknowledges the link between plastic waste and sustainable consumption and production patterns, and
encourages further efforts at all levels to reduce, reuse and recycle plastics and to address through innovative
approaches different types of plastic waste, including marine plastic litter;
12. Urges the international community to continue supporting developing countries in strengthening their
scientific and technological capacity to move towards more sustainable patterns of consumption and production;
13. Encourages the further strengthening of the science-policy interface and of the means of implementation
from all sources and at all levels, including a revitalized and enhanced Global Partnership, as well as by supporting
innovative approaches to sustainability science and emphasizing cross-disciplinary partnerships;
14. Requests the United Nations system to further mainstream and integrate the three dimensions of
sustainable development throughout its work, and to continue to exchange experiences and lessons learned in this
regard and to step up its efforts at all levels in continued support of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
15. Encourages regional and subregional organizations to continue to promote sustainable development in
their respective regions by, inter alia, promoting peer learning and cooperation, including South-South and triangular
cooperation, as well as effective linkages among global, regional, subregional and national processes, as appropriate,
to advance sustainable development;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, with a particular focus on the state of play with regard to sustainable
consumption and production and the application and promotion thereof, and to recommend concrete actions to
implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in this regard;

_______________
205

542

A/CONF.216/5, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled, “Towards the achievement of sustainable development: implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including through sustainable consumption and production,
building on Agenda 21”.
RESOLUTION 74/217
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.2, para. 9)206

74/217. Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway207 is a stand-alone,
overarching framework setting out the sustainable development priorities of small island developing States that builds
on the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States208 and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States,209 and further recognizing that the Samoa Pathway is consistent with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,210 including the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development,211 and is in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,212
the New Urban Agenda213 and the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change,214
Reaffirming also that small island developing States remain a special case for sustainable development,
renewing thus our solidarity with them, as they continue to face the combined challenges arising, in particular, from
their geographical remoteness, the small scale of their economies, high costs and the adverse effects of climate change
and natural disasters, and remaining particularly concerned that many small island developing States have not
achieved sustained high levels of economic growth, owing in part to their vulnerabilities to the ongoing negative
impacts of environmental challenges and external economic and financial shocks,
Acknowledging the need for urgent action to address the adverse impacts of climate change, including those
related to sea level rise and extreme weather events, which continue to pose a significant risk to small island
developing States and to their efforts to achieve sustainable development and, for many, represent the gravest of threats
to their survival and viability, including, for some, through loss of territory, as well as through threats to water
availability and food security and nutrition,
Taking note with concern of the findings contained in the recent reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, in particular the special reports entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C, Climate Change and Land and
The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 69/15, annex.
208
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
209
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10−14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
210
Resolution 70/1.
211
Resolution 69/313, annex.
212
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
213
Resolution 71/256, annex.
214
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
206
207

543

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Welcoming the 2019 Climate Action Summit, convened by the Secretary-General on 23 September, noting its
multi-partner initiatives and commitments, noting also the Youth Climate Summit, held on 21 September, and
stressing the urgent need to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to climate change
in small island developing States,
Noting the importance of oceans, seas and marine resources to small island developing States, and
acknowledging their efforts to develop and implement strategies for the conservation and sustainable use of the ocean
and its resources, and, in this regard reiterating the call made in the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our future: call
for action”215 and encouraging the fulfilment of voluntary commitments pledged in the context of the United Nations
Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the
oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development, and recalling the decision to convene the 2020
conference,216
Noting with concern the findings of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services and looking forward to the summit on biodiversity with a view to highlighting the urgency of
action at the highest levels in support of a post-2020 global biodiversity framework,
Underscoring the importance of eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty,
and noting that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, as well as an overarching objective of the 2030 Agenda for small island developing States and other
developing countries,
Recognizing the long-standing cooperation and support provided by the international community, which has
played an important role in helping small island developing States to make progress in addressing their vulnerabilities
and in supporting their sustainable development efforts, and recalling paragraph 19 of the Samoa Pathway, which
calls for strengthening this cooperation, and paragraph 22 of the Samoa Pathway, which underscores the urgency of
finding additional solutions to address the major challenges facing small island developing States,
Reaffirming the need to mainstream sustainable development at all levels, integrating economic, social and
environmental aspects, and recognizing their interlinkages, so as to enable small island developing States to achieve
sustainable development in all its dimensions,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;217

2. Welcomes the convening of the high-level meeting to review progress made in addressing the priorities of
small island developing States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway207 on 27 September 2019 and the adoption on 10 October 2019 of its political declaration,218 in which Heads
of State and Government reaffirmed the commitment to strengthening cooperation with and support to small island
developing States in the context of sustainable development, in line with their national development strategies and
priorities, and looks forward to the implementation of the calls made in the political declaration;
3. Reiterates the call to the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and their subsidiary bodies
to monitor the full implementation of the Declaration of Barbados219 and the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States,208 the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States209 and the Samoa Pathway,
including through the monitoring frameworks of the regional commissions, and looks forward to the discussion during
the 2020 high-level political forum on sustainable development on the sustainable development challenges facing
small island developing States, with the aim of enhancing engagement and implementing commitments;
4. Notes the initial findings of the Joint Inspection Unit that resources have not increased over a period during
which the mandates of the small island developing States units of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of

_______________
Resolution 71/312, annex.
Resolution 73/292.
217
A/74/66.
218
Resolution 74/3.
219
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
215
216

544

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

the Secretariat and the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States have significantly expanded;220
5. Notes with concern the findings and conclusions of the needs assessment resulting from the expanding
mandates of the small island developing States units of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the Office
of the High Representative;
6. Calls for urgent and ambitious global action, in line with the Paris Agreement,214 to address the threat and
impact of climate change on small island developing States;
7. Welcomes the continuing commitment of the international community to take urgent and concrete actions
to address the vulnerabilities of small island developing States and to continue to seek new solutions to the major
challenges facing them in a concerted manner in order to support the full implementation of the Samoa Pathway;
8. Underlines the need to give due consideration to the issues and concerns of small island developing States
in all relevant major United Nations conferences and processes and the relevant work of the United Nations
development system, and calls for the elaboration of information specific to small island developing States in a
disaggregated manner in all major United Nations reports where appropriate;
9. Reiterates that many small island developing States continue to face the adverse effects of climate change
and natural disasters, and in this regard, recognizes the economic challenges, including unsustainable debt levels,
arising in part from extreme weather events and slow onset events;
10. Calls upon the Secretary-General to conduct, in consultation with Member States, all relevant United
Nations system entities and other relevant stakeholders, an examination of the disaster-related funding and support
environment, with a view to the possible development of a targeted voluntary disaster fund, mechanism or financial
instrument, coordinated with and complementary to existing mechanisms, to assist small island developing States in
managing disaster risk and building back better after disasters, and to report thereon at the seventy-sixth session of the
General Assembly;
11. Reaffirms that official development assistance, both technical and financial, can foster resilient societies
and economies, and calls upon the international community to mobilize additional development finance from all
sources and at all levels to support small island developing States’ efforts;
12. Calls upon relevant institutions to learn from each other’s efforts to address the diverse circumstances of
countries, to better manage transitions and graduation, recognizes that official development assistance should continue
to focus on countries most in need, and takes note of a willingness to develop a wider analysis of new measures,
building on existing experiences with eligibility exceptions, for concessional finance and multidimensional
assessments, to address the limitations of an income-only assessment of development and graduation readiness;
13. Calls upon Member States to invite the World Bank to consider reviving the high-level working group
among the development banks and its partners to review the rules governing access for small island developing States
to concessional finance;
14. Underlines the need to take targeted measures to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, and to promote the implementation of nationally appropriate social protection systems and
measures for the poor and those in vulnerable situations;
15. Recognizes that achieving the Sustainable Development Goals in small island developing States is not
possible without private investment, including long-term foreign investment, which can be facilitated and attracted
through the creation of an enabling environment and capacity support for small island developing States;
16. Calls upon the Committee for Development Policy to give due consideration to the unique and particular
vulnerabilities of small island developing States as it continues to monitor regularly, together with their Governments,
the progress of small island developing States that have graduated from least developed country status, while looking
forward to the outcomes of the ongoing comprehensive review of the least developed country criteria, which will be
concluded at the next plenary of the Committee, in 2020;

_______________
220

See A/71/324, A/71/324/Corr.1 and A/71/324/Add.1.

545

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

17. Recognizes with concern the transition challenges encountered by small island developing States that have
graduated or are about to graduate from least developed country status; remains mindful that graduation must not
disrupt a country’s development progress; and stresses the need for the development and implementation of a viable
multiannual transition strategy to facilitate each small island developing State’s graduation, with the support of the
international community where appropriate, to mitigate against, inter alia, the possible loss of concessionary financing,
to reduce the risks of falling heavily into debt and to ensure macrofinancial stability;
18. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, to ensure, by 2020, within existing resources, the allocation
of adequate resources to respond to the expanding mandates of the small island developing States units of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States in support of the sustainable
development agenda of the small island developing States;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its seventy-fifth session, a report on
the follow-up to and implementation of the Samoa Pathway, including on progress made and continuing challenges
faced, and on the implementation of the present resolution, building on the discussions and outcomes of the high-level
meeting to review progress made in addressing the priorities of small island developing States through the
implementation of the Samoa Pathway, convened in September 2019;
20. Recognizes that improved data collection and statistical analysis are required to enable small island
developing States to effectively plan, follow up on, evaluate the implementation of and track success in attaining
the Sustainable Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals, in this regard calls upon
the Secretary-General, within existing resources and in consultation with Member States, all relevant United
Nations system entities and other relevant stakeholders, to identify the Samoa Pathway priority areas not covered
by the Sustainable Development Goals or the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,212 and,
if any are identified, to develop forthwith targets and indicators for those priority areas while ensuring
complementarities and synergies and avoiding duplication, in order to strengthen monitoring and evaluation, and
noting the work being done by the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States to develop a toolkit for a harmonized
approach to the implementation of the Samoa Pathway as a whole, and to provide recommendations as part of the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly, at its
seventy-sixth session;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States”.
RESOLUTION 74/218
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.3, para. 7)221

74/218. Disaster risk reduction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/231 of 20 December 2018 and all previous relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the Sendai Declaration222 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,223

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 69/283, annex I.
223
Ibid., annex II.
221
222

546

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling further the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,224 Agenda 21,225 the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,226 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development227 and the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),228
and reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The
future we want”,229 in particular the decisions related to disaster risk reduction,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,230 and recognizing the
linkages between disaster risk reduction and sustainable urban development,
Recognizing the need for a broader and a more people-centred preventive approach to disaster risk and that
disaster risk reduction practices need to be multi‑hazard and multisectoral, inclusive and accessible in order to be
efficient and effective,
Reiterating the call in the Sendai Framework for the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives,
livelihoods and health and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses,
communities and countries,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of disasters and their devastating impact this year and in
recent years, which have resulted in massive loss of life, food insecurity, water-related challenges, displacement,
humanitarian needs and long-term negative economic, social and environmental consequences for vulnerable
societies throughout the world, and which hamper the achievement of their sustainable development, in particular that
of developing countries,
Recognizing that disaster risk is increasingly complex and systemic and that hazards can trigger each other with
cascading impacts across sectors and geographies, as well as at the local, national, regional and global levels, and that
the interrelation of risks across multiple dimensions and scales and potential unintended negative consequences should
inform development policies and investments, emphasizing that these policies should be oriented towards building
resilience and achieving sustainability and the Sustainable Development Goals, and noting in this regard the findings
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals,231 the
Global Sustainable Development Report and the 2019 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, and

_______________
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
225
Ibid., annex II.
226
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
227
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
228
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
229
Resolution 66/288, annex.
230
Resolution 71/256, annex.
231
E/2019/68.
224

547

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

stressing the importance of an integrated understanding of disaster risk in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement232 and the Sendai Framework,
Recognizing also the importance of promoting policies and planning that build resilience and reduce
displacement risk in the context of disasters, including through transboundary cooperation,
Recalling the Bangkok Principles for the implementation of the health aspects of the Sendai Framework as a
contribution to the Sendai Framework to build resilient health systems,
Recognizing climate change as one of the drivers of disaster risk, and that the adverse effects of climate change,
as contributors to environmental degradation and extreme weather events, may, in certain instances, among other
factors, contribute to disaster-induced human mobility, and in this regard acknowledging the internationally agreed
outcomes adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,233
Recognizing also that disasters, many of which are exacerbated by climate change and are increasing in
frequency and intensity, significantly impede progress towards sustainable development,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement, and encouraging all its parties to fully implement the Agreement, and parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change that have not yet done so to deposit their
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Welcoming the holding of the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on
23 September, and noting the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit,
Looking forward to the preparatory meetings leading to the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, to be held in Qatar in 2021, to raise ambition and accelerate action to reduce disaster risk in the
least developed countries,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the Sendai Framework, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement,
Noting with concern the findings contained in the special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and related global
greenhouse gas emission pathways, Global Warming of 1.5°C, in the context of strengthening the global response to
the threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, noting with concern also the
findings contained in the special report of the Panel on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable
land management, food security and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems, entitled Climate Change and
Land, and noting with concern further the findings contained in the special report of the Panel entitled The Ocean and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate,
Stressing the urgent need to address the unprecedented global decline in biodiversity, noting with concern the
findings of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, and in this regard
looking forward to the 2020 United Nations summit on biodiversity and the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of
the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, which will adopt a post-2020 global biodiversity framework,
Reaffirming the importance of strengthening international cooperation, in the face of disasters, weather-related
hazards, including those driven by natural climate cycles such as the El Niño Southern Oscillation, and the adverse
effects of climate change, to estimate and prevent major damage and ensure an adequate response, early action and
attention to the affected populations in a timely manner in order to enhance resilience to their impacts, and recognizing
in this regard the importance of developing risk-informed strategies, risk finance tools, including forecast-based
financing approaches and disaster risk insurance mechanisms and coordinated multi‑hazard early warning systems,
including timely risk communication at the local, national and regional levels,
Recognizing that disaster-prone developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, small island
developing States, landlocked developing countries and African countries, as well as middle-income countries facing

_______________
232
233

548

Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

specific challenges, warrant particular attention in view of their higher vulnerability and risk levels, which often
greatly exceed their capacity to prepare for, respond to and recover from disasters, and recognizing also that similar
attention and appropriate assistance should also be extended to other disaster-prone countries with specific
characteristics, such as archipelagic countries, as well as countries with extensive coastlines,
Recalling that the Sendai Framework applies to risks of small-scale and large-scale, frequent and infrequent,
sudden- and slow-onset disasters caused by natural or human-made hazards, as well as related environmental,
technological and biological hazards and risks,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 73/231;234
2. Urges the effective implementation of the Sendai Declaration222 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030;223
3. Reiterates its call for the prevention of new and the reduction of existing disaster risk through the
implementation of integrated and inclusive economic, structural, legal, social, health, cultural, educational,
environmental, technological, political, financial and institutional measures that prevent and reduce hazard exposure
and vulnerability to disaster, increase preparedness for response and recovery and thus strengthen resilience;
4. Stresses the urgent need to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to
climate change and extreme weather events, and in this regard further urges Member States to continue engaging in
adaptation planning processes and to enhance cooperation in disaster risk reduction;
5. Underlines the need to address the economic, social and environmental impacts of disasters, many of
which are exacerbated by climate change, and emphasizes the need for action at all levels to enhance efforts to build
resilience through, inter alia, the sustainable management of ecosystems to reduce the impacts and costs of disasters;
6. Takes note of the launch of the Coalition for Disaster-Resilient Infrastructure, the Risk-Informed Early
Action Partnership, the Climate Risk and Early Warning Systems (CREWS) initiative, and the Year of Action
launched by the Global Commission on Adaptation that will culminate in the 2020 Climate Adaptation Summit;
7. Recognizes that in some cases the use of public debt and renewed external borrowing to absorb the impact
of a disaster could lead to higher debt servicing for developing countries and constrain their growth and their capacity
to invest in long-term resilience-building, and further acknowledges that, with each new disaster, financial
vulnerabilities may grow and domestic response capacities may weaken;
8. Calls upon all relevant actors to work towards the achievement of the global targets adopted in the Sendai
Framework;
9. Recognizes progress made in achieving target (e) of the Sendai Framework and that the development and
implementation of risk-informed strategic plans, policies, programmes and investments and national and local disaster
risk reduction strategies are essential for sustainable development and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals;235
10. Expresses concern that the current pace of action is not fast enough to meet the target (e) deadline of the
Sendai Framework by the end of 2020, and thus urges States to accelerate progress and allocate the resources
necessary to support the development and implementation of inclusive and participatory national and local disaster
risk reduction strategies, in line with the Sendai Framework, with a particular focus on local strategies and
programmes, to promote coherence and integration with sustainable development and climate change adaptation

_______________
234
235

A/74/248.
See resolution 70/1.

549

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

strategies, including national adaptation plans, to include the objective of preparing to “build back better” in disaster
risk reduction strategies and, where appropriate, to incorporate considerations regarding the risk of disaster
displacement, in accordance with national circumstances, making use of practical guidance to support the
achievement of target (e), and notes in this regard the relevant voluntary “Words into action” guidelines;
11. Urges States to conduct inclusive and multi-hazard disaster risk assessments that consider climate change
projections to support evidence-based disaster risk reduction strategies and guide risk-informed development
investments by the private and public sectors;
12. Recognizes the important contribution of healthy ecosystems to reducing disaster risk and building
community resilience, and encourages all States, United Nations entities and other relevant actors to promote
ecosystem-based approaches for disaster risk reduction at all levels and across all phases of disaster risk reduction and
management;
13. Acknowledges that water is essential to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, that waterrelated disasters and multidimensional hazards threaten lives, livelihoods, agriculture and basic service infrastructure
and cause substantial socioeconomic damage and losses, and that sustainable, integrated disaster risk-informed water
resource management is necessary for successful disaster preparedness, disaster risk reduction and climate change
adaptation, and in this regard invites all countries to integrate land and water management, including for floods and
droughts, into their national and subnational planning and management processes;
14. Recognizes that biological hazards require strengthened coordination between disaster and health
risk management systems in the areas of risk assessment, surveillance and early warning, and that resilient
health infrastructures and strengthened health systems capable of implementing the International Health
Regulations (2005),236 as well as increasing the overall capacity of health systems, reduce overall disaster risk and
build disaster resilience;
15. Urges States, while implementing the Sendai Framework, to prioritize the establishment and
strengthening of national disaster loss databases to augment efforts to create or enhance systems for data collection
and the development of baselines on current losses, including livelihood and other losses of affected populations, and
work towards the collection of information disaggregated by income, sex, age and disability and on historical disaster
losses going back, at least, to 2005, if feasible;
16. Recognizes that disaster risk reduction requires a multi-hazard and systemic approach and inclusive riskinformed decision-making based on the open exchange and dissemination of data disaggregated by, inter alia, income,
sex, age and disability, and analysis with an adequate understanding of how the information is to be interpreted and
used, as well as on easily accessible, up-to-date, comprehensible, interoperable, science-based, non-sensitive risk
information, for a wide range of users and decision makers, complemented by traditional knowledge, and in this
regard encourages States to commence or, as appropriate, further enhance the collection and analysis of data on
disaster loss and other relevant disaster risk reduction targets, disaggregated by income, sex, age and disability and
other characteristics relevant in national contexts, and to strengthen inter-institutional, inclusive coordination on
disaster risk data and integrated analysis, and invites Member States to mobilize national statistical and planning
offices and other relevant authorities, and strengthen their capacity in the systemic collection, analysis and validation
of disaster risk data to institutionalize its use in decision-making processes and investments across sectors;
17. Also recognizes the endorsement by the Economic and Social Council on 2 July 2018 of the Strategic
Framework on Geospatial Information and Services for Disasters,237 as a guide for Member States to ensure the
availability and accessibility of quality geospatial information and services across all phases of disaster risk reduction
and management, and which contributes to the implementation of the Sendai Framework;
18. Stresses the importance of promoting the further development of and investment in effective national and
regional multi-hazard early warning mechanisms, where relevant, and facilitating the sharing and exchange of
information across all countries;

_______________
236
237

550

World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.
Economic and Social Council resolution 2018/14, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

19. Reaffirms that international cooperation for disaster risk reduction includes a variety of sources and is a
critical element in supporting the efforts of developing countries to reduce disaster risk, and encourages States to
strengthen international and regional information exchange and sharing, including through North-South cooperation
complemented by South-South and triangular cooperation, establishing and networking risk management centres,
promoting critical science and technology research cooperation on disaster reduction and improving international
coordination mechanisms to respond to large-scale disasters;
20. Recognizes the importance of monitoring the Sendai Framework, and encourages States to use the online
monitor to report on progress against the Sendai Framework global targets and the Sustainable Development Goals
related to disaster risk to provide, inter alia, a comprehensive overview of progress to inform the deliberations and
outcomes of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and the Global Platform for Disaster Risk
Reduction, and notes the ongoing work towards coherence between national climate change adaptation and national
disaster risk reduction strategies, as well as the Sendai Framework target indicators and national adaptation goals and
indicators;
21. Reaffirms that the establishment of common indicators and shared data sets to measure the Sendai
Framework global targets and the disaster risk reduction targets of Sustainable Development Goals 1, 11 and 13 is an
important contribution to ensure coherence, feasibility and consistency in implementation, the collection of data and
reporting, and in this regard recognizes the importance of prioritizing capacity-building support to developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries, small island developing States, landlocked developing countries
and African countries, as well as middle-income countries facing specific challenges;
22. Encourages States to give appropriate consideration to disaster risk reduction in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,234 where it is reflected across several Goals and targets, including in their
voluntary national reviews, inter alia, through the engagement of national Sendai Framework focal points early in the
national review process, as appropriate, and stresses the importance of considering disaster risk reduction in the
deliberations and outcomes of the high-level political forum on sustainable development;
23. Reiterates its strong encouragement of and the need for effective coordination and coherence, as
applicable, in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,238 the Paris Agreement adopted under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,232 and the Sendai Framework, as well as the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,233 the Convention on Biological Diversity,239 the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa,240 and the New Urban Agenda,230 while respecting the relevant mandates, in order to build
synergies and resilience, translate integrated global policy frameworks, as appropriate, into national laws, policies or
regulations defining roles and responsibilities across the public and private sectors, as well as into integrated
multisectoral programmes at the national and local levels, and reduce disaster risk across sectors, and addressing the
global challenge of eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty;
24. Encourages countries, the relevant United Nations bodies, agencies, funds and programmes and other
relevant institutions and stakeholders to take into consideration the important role of coordinated, inclusive and
participatory disaster risk governance across sectors for the achievement of sustainable development and, inter alia,
the strengthening of disaster prevention as well as preparedness for effective response, recovery, rehabilitation and
reconstruction;
25. Urges that due consideration continue to be given to the review of the global progress in the
implementation of the Sendai Framework as part of the integrated and coordinated follow-up processes to United
Nations conferences and summits, aligned with the Economic and Social Council, the high-level political forum on
sustainable development and the quadrennial comprehensive policy review cycles, as appropriate, taking into account
the contributions of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction and regional and subregional platforms for
disaster risk reduction and the Sendai Framework monitor;

_______________
Resolution 69/313, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
240
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.
238
239

551

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

26. Recognizes that effective and meaningful global and regional partnerships and the further strengthening
of international cooperation, including the fulfilment of respective commitments of official development assistance
by developed countries, are essential for effective disaster risk management;
27. Encourages the incorporation of disaster risk reduction measures, as appropriate, into multilateral and
bilateral development assistance programmes and infrastructure financing, including through North-South
cooperation complemented by South-South as well as triangular cooperation, within and across all sectors related to
sustainable development, including poverty reduction, agriculture, natural resource management, the environment,
urban development and adaptation to climate change;
28. Recognizes that financing for disaster risk reduction requires greater attention, and in this regard
encourages increased investments in disaster risk reduction, including resilient infrastructure, and invites the United
Nations system and its entities, within the scope of their respective mandates, in partnership with international
financial institutions, regional development banks and other relevant institutions and stakeholders, to support
developing countries in developing comprehensive disaster risk reduction financing strategies in support of national
and local disaster risk reduction strategies, and incentivizing investments in resilience and prevention, and to explore
the development of tailored financing mechanisms for disaster risk reduction, including forecast-based financing
approaches and disaster risk insurance mechanisms;
29. Encourages States to allocate increased domestic resources to disaster risk reduction, including resilient
infrastructure, to include disaster risk reduction in budgeting and financial planning across all relevant sectors, and to
ensure that national financing frameworks and infrastructure plans are risk-informed, according to national plans and
policies;
30. Recognizes that economic losses are rising as a result of the increasing number and value of assets exposed
to hazards, and encourages countries to conduct a disaster risk assessment of existing critical infrastructure, to ensure
that infrastructure plans are aligned to national disaster risk reduction strategies and risk assessments, to support the
publication of disaster risk assessments, to make disaster risk assessments a prerequisite for infrastructure and housing
investments and to strengthen regulatory frameworks for land-use planning and building codes, as appropriate,
towards the achievement of target (d) of the Sendai Framework, and in this regard encourages countries and other
relevant stakeholders to integrate disaster risk reduction considerations into their social, economic and environmental
investments;
31. Encourages all relevant stakeholders to collaborate with the private sector to enhance the resilience of
businesses, as well as the societies within which they operate, by integrating disaster risk into their management
practices, to facilitate private investments in disaster risk reduction and to promote risk-informed private investments;
32. Reaffirms that investing in national and local skills, systems and knowledge to build resilience and
preparedness will save lives, reduce the risk of displacement in the context of disasters, strengthen the adaptive
capacity of food production systems and enhance food security, cut costs and preserve development gains, and in this
regard encourages exploring innovative ways, such as forecast-based financing approaches and disaster risk insurance
mechanisms, to increase the availability of resources for Member States before a disaster is credibly expected to occur;
33. Also reaffirms the need for the enhancement of the implementation capacity and capability of developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries, small island developing States, landlocked developing countries
and African countries, as well as middle-income countries facing specific challenges, including the mobilization of
support through international cooperation, for the provision of means of implementation to augment domestic efforts
in accordance with their national priorities;
34. Recalls that the economic vulnerability index gives consideration to the impacts of natural disasters,
recognizes the relevance of disaster risk and the impact of disasters in the process of graduation from the least
developed country category, including the impact assessment of the likely consequences of graduation and the
vulnerability profiles, and stresses the importance of integrating disaster risk reduction into the smooth transition
strategies of graduating countries;
35. Recognizes that the extent to which developing countries are able to effectively enhance and implement
national disaster risk reduction policies and measures in the context of their respective circumstances and capabilities
can be further enhanced through the provision of sustainable international cooperation;

552

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

36. Also recognizes the importance of giving priority to the development of local and national disaster risk
reduction capacity-building, policies, strategies and plans with the participation of all relevant stakeholders, in
accordance with national practices and legislation;
37. Further recognizes that, while each State has the primary responsibility for preventing and reducing
disaster risk, it is a shared responsibility between Governments and relevant stakeholders, and recognizes that
non-State and other relevant stakeholders, including major groups, parliaments, civil society, the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement, non-governmental organizations, national platforms for disaster risk reduction,
focal points for the Sendai Framework, local government representatives, scientific institutions and the private sector,
as well as organizations and relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other relevant
institutions and intergovernmental organizations, play an important role as enablers in providing support to States, in
accordance with national policies, laws and regulations, in the implementation of the Sendai Framework at the local,
national, regional and global levels, and that greater efforts are needed to mobilize multi-stakeholder partnerships for
disaster risk reduction, according to national plans and policies;
38. Encourages Governments to promote the full, equal and effective participation and leadership of
women, as well as of persons with disabilities, in the design, management, resourcing and implementation of
gender-responsive and disability-inclusive disaster risk reduction policies, plans and programmes, and recognizes
in this regard that women and girls are disproportionately exposed to risk, increased loss of livelihoods and even
loss of life during and in the aftermath of disasters, and that disasters and the consequent disruption to physical,
social, economic and environmental networks and support systems disproportionately affect persons with
disabilities and their families;
39. Stresses the importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective and the perspectives of persons with
disabilities, as well as other people in vulnerable situations, in disaster risk management, and of engaging and
appropriately drawing on the capacities of children, youth, including young professionals, as contributors in disaster
risk management so as to strengthen the resilience of communities and reduce social vulnerabilities to disasters, and
in this regard recognizes the need for the inclusive participation and contribution of women, children, older persons,
persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, as well as the role of youth, volunteers, migrants,
academia, scientific and research entities and networks, business, professional associations, private sector financing
institutions and the media, in all forums and processes related to disaster risk reduction, in accordance with the Sendai
Framework;
40. Emphasizes that disaster prevention, preparedness, early actions and resilience-building in most cases are
significantly more cost-effective than emergency response, as well as the importance of additional efforts to increase
the availability of and access to multi-hazard early warning mechanisms of States, in order to ensure that early warning
leads to early action, and encourages all relevant stakeholders to support these efforts;
41. Acknowledges the continuous work of the entities of the United Nations system, in accordance with their
respective mandates, in supporting the efforts of developing countries in the area of disaster risk reduction, including
through the inclusion, where appropriate, of disaster risk reduction in the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework and as part of the common country assessment’s multidimensional analysis, requests the
relevant United Nations entities and United Nations country teams, and urges other relevant stakeholders, to continue
to integrate disaster risk reduction and the implementation of the Sendai Framework into their work and to align their
work with the United Nations Plan of Action on Disaster Risk Reduction for Resilience: Towards a Risk-informed
and Integrated Approach to Sustainable Development, guided by the Senior Leadership Group on Disaster Risk
Reduction for Resilience convened by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk
Reduction, according to the Sendai Framework;
42. Also acknowledges the importance of the work of the agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system and other relevant institutions in disaster risk reduction, the substantial increase in demands on the
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction and the need for timely, stable, adequate and predictable resources
necessary for supporting the implementation of the Sendai Framework, and in this regard encourages Member States
to consider providing or augmenting voluntary contributions to the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction;
43. Recognizes the continued importance of voluntary funding, and urges existing and new donors to provide
sufficient funding and, where possible, to augment financial contributions to the United Nations trust fund for disaster
553

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

reduction to support the implementation of the Sendai Framework, including through unearmarked and, where
possible, multi-annual contributions;
44. Reaffirms the importance of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction and the regional and
subregional platforms for disaster risk reduction as forums to assess and discuss progress on the implementation of
the Sendai Framework and advance coherence between disaster risk reduction, sustainable development and climate
change mitigation and adaptation, including financing, and recognizes their outcomes as contributions to the highlevel political forum on sustainable development;
45. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of Switzerland for hosting the sixth session of the Global
Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction in Geneva from 13 to 17 May 2019, jointly organized with the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, and looks forward to the regional platforms for disaster risk reduction and their
deliberations, to be held in Australia and Jamaica in 2020 and jointly organized with the United Nations Office for
Disaster Risk Reduction, and encourages participation by all stakeholders, sectors and ministries at the highest level
possible;
46. Stresses the importance of promoting the incorporation of disaster risk knowledge, including disaster
prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery and rehabilitation, in formal and non-formal education, as
well as in civic education at all levels and in professional education and training;
47. Welcomes the annual observance of the International Day for Disaster Risk Reduction on 13 October and
World Tsunami Awareness Day on 5 November, and encourages all States, United Nations bodies and other relevant
actors to observe the Days to further raise public awareness of disaster risk reduction;
48. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
49. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth
session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Disaster risk reduction”.
RESOLUTION 74/219
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.4, para. 11)241

74/219. Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 43/53 of 6 December 1988, 54/222 of 22 December 1999, 62/86 of 10 December 2007,
63/32 of 26 November 2008, 64/73 of 7 December 2009, 65/159 of 20 December 2010, 66/200 of 22 December 2011,
67/210 of 21 December 2012, 68/212 of 20 December 2013, 69/220 of 19 December 2014, 70/205 of 22 December
2015, 71/228 of 21 December 2016, 72/219 of 20 December 2017 and 73/232 of 20 December 2018 and other
resolutions and decisions relating to the protection of the global climate for present and future generations of
humankind,
Recalling also the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change242 and the Paris Agreement
adopted under the Convention,243 acknowledging that they are the primary international, intergovernmental forums
for negotiating the global response to climate change, expressing determination to address decisively the threat posed
by climate change and environmental degradation, recognizing that the global nature of climate change calls for the

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
242
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
243
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
241

554

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

widest possible international cooperation aimed at accelerating the reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions and
addressing adaptation to the adverse impacts of climate change, and noting with concern the significant gap between
the aggregate effect of parties’ mitigation pledges, in particular their nationally determined contributions, as
appropriate, and aggregate emission pathways,
Recalling further the Paris Agreement, which, pursuant to article 2, paragraph 2, thereof, will be implemented
to reflect equity and the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light
of different national circumstances,
Acknowledging that action on adaptation to climate change is an urgent priority and a global challenge faced by
all countries, in particular developing countries, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects
of climate change, recognizing that the current need for adaptation is significant and that greater levels of mitigation
can reduce the need for additional adaptation efforts, and bearing in mind that the provision of scaled-up financial
resources should aim to achieve a balance between adaptation and mitigation,
Welcoming the convening of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the
Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the second session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the
Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, presided over by the Government of Chile, in Madrid, from 2 to
13 December 2019,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,244 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development245 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation),246 the 2005 World Summit Outcome,247 the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The
future we want”,248 the outcomes of the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and of the sessions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the
Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–
2020, adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in Istanbul, Turkey,
from 9 to 13 May 2011,249 the Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the
Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–
2020, held in Antalya, Turkey, from 27 to 29 May 2016,250 the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024, adopted at the second United Nations Conference on
Landlocked Developing Countries, held in Vienna from 3 to 5 November 2014,251 the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,252 the Mauritius Declaration253 and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States,254 the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,255 the Sendai
Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,256 the Beijing Declaration and

_______________
Resolution 55/2.
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
246
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
247
Resolution 60/1.
248
Resolution 66/288, annex.
249
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
250
Resolution 70/294, annex.
251
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
252
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
253
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
254
Ibid., annex II.
255
Resolution 69/15, annex.
256
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
244
245

555

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Platform for Action,257 and the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,258
Noting the contribution of various initiatives, including the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, as well
as regional and subregional platforms for disaster risk reduction, to promoting coherence between disaster risk
reduction, sustainable development and efforts to mitigate climate change and the findings of the 2019 Global
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, and recognizing that disaster risk reduction efforts consistent with the
Sendai Framework contribute to strengthening resilience and climate change adaptation, and in this regard
highlighting synergies which help to ensure progress towards sustainable development,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Noting with concern the findings contained in the special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and related global
greenhouse gas emission pathways, Global Warming of 1.5°C, in the context of strengthening the global response to
the threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty,
Noting also with concern the findings contained in the special report of the Intergovernmental Panel entitled
Climate Change, Desertification, Land Degradation, Sustainable Land Management, Food Security, and Greenhouse
Gas Fluxes in Terrestrial Ecosystems, and noting further with concern the findings contained in the special report of
the Intergovernmental Panel entitled The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate,
Reiterating its support for the objectives and guiding principles of the Green Climate Fund, including a gendersensitive approach in its process and operations, and stressing its goal of ensuring efficient access to its resources
through simplified approval procedures and enhancing readiness support, which will help to deliver outcomes in
developing countries so as to limit or reduce greenhouse gas emissions and help them adapt to the impacts of climate
change,
Welcoming the pledges made to the Green Climate Fund as a part of the current first formal replenishment
process, including at the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General, held on 23 September,
and at the high-level pledging conference of the Green Climate Fund, held in Paris in October 2019, totalling
9.78 billion United States dollars as at 25 October 2019, emphasizing the importance of a successful process so that
the Fund continues to be one of the main channels to enable the flow of financial resources to developing countries
under the Paris Agreement and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
Stressing that low greenhouse gas emission development can create employment opportunities and quality jobs,
in accordance with nationally defined development priorities,

_______________
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
258
Resolution 71/256, annex.
257

556

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017–2030,259 and acknowledging that all types of forests
contribute substantially to climate change mitigation and adaptation,
Noting that forests are addressed under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and
noting also article 5 of the Paris Agreement,
Recognizing that climate change is a major and growing driver of biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation
and that the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and ecosystem functions and services, contribute
significantly to climate change adaptation and mitigation, disaster risk reduction and food security and nutrition,
Looking forward to the 2020 Biodiversity Summit, the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention and a post-2020 global biodiversity framework,
Noting the need for enhanced coordination and cooperation at all levels among the parties to and secretariats of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,260 and
the Convention on Biological Diversity,261 as appropriate, while respecting their individual mandates,
Noting also the contribution of the United Nations Environment Assembly to addressing the challenge of, inter
alia, climate change, within its mandate and in collaboration with other relevant organizations and stakeholders,
Recalling its resolution 71/312 of 6 July 2017, entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action”, and looking
forward to the 2020 United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development,
Recognizing that, in undertaking its work, the United Nations should promote the protection of the global
climate for the well-being of present and future generations of humankind,
Recalling the entry into force on 1 January 2019 of the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer,262 welcoming its ratification by 90 countries and one regional economic
integration organization, while encouraging further ratifications as soon as possible, and recalling the thirty-first
Meeting of the Parties to the Montreal Protocol, held on 14 and 15 November 2019 in Rome,
Noting with appreciation the interactive dialogue on Harmony with Nature convened by the President of the
General Assembly under the overall theme “Mother Earth approach” in the implementation of education and climate
action in harmony with nature, held on 22 April 2019, in commemoration of International Mother Earth Day,
Noting the contributions of the International Civil Aviation Organization to global efforts to combat climate
change, and noting also the contributions of the International Maritime Organization in this regard,
Encouraging Member States to advance innovative pathways to achieving sustainable consumption and
production in line with United Nations Environment Assembly resolution 4/1,263
1. Reaffirms that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time, expresses profound alarm that
the emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise globally, remains deeply concerned that all countries, particularly
developing countries, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change and are already experiencing an increase
in such impacts, including persistent drought and extreme weather events, land degradation, sea level rise, coastal
erosion, ocean acidification and the retreat of mountain glaciers, further threatening food security, water availability
and livelihoods, and efforts to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions and achieve sustainable development,
recognizes the substantial risks posed by climate change to health, and emphasizes in this regard that mitigation of
and adaptation to climate change represent an immediate and urgent global priority;

_______________
See resolution 71/285.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
261
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
262
UNEP/OzL.Pro.28/12, annex I.
263
UNEP/EA.4/Res.1.
259
260

557

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Reaffirms also the Paris Agreement243 and its early entry into force, encourages all the parties to the
Agreement to fully implement the Agreement and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change242 that have not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession,
where appropriate, as soon as possible, and highlights the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development264 and the Paris Agreement;
3. Recalls that the Paris Agreement, in enhancing the implementation of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, including its objective, aims to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate
change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, including by holding the increase
in the global average temperature to well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre‑industrial levels and pursuing efforts to
limit the temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would
significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change, increasing the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of
climate change and foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions development in a manner that does
not threaten food production, and making finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas
emissions and climate-resilient development;
4. Welcomes the nationally determined contributions submitted to date, and recalls that the regular updating
of such contributions will reflect the highest possible level of ambition, in the light of different national circumstances,
and provide the information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding, in accordance with the relevant
decisions;
5. Notes with concern that the nationally determined contributions presented thus far by the parties to the
Paris Agreement are not sufficient and that action is needed to hold the increase in the global average temperature to
well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to
1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels, and underlines the importance of the request in decision 1/CP.21265 of
the Conference of the Parties to the Convention to the Parties to the Paris Agreement, as appropriate, to communicate
or update by 2020 their nationally determined contributions;
6. Stresses the urgent need to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to
climate change and extreme weather events, and in this regard urges Member States to continue to engage in
adaptation planning processes and to enhance cooperation, namely disaster risk reduction;
7. Welcomes the Paris Agreement work programme, commonly referred to as the Katowice Rulebook,
adopted at the third part of the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to
the Paris Agreement,266 and encourages Parties to the Paris Agreement to finalize outstanding decisions in upcoming
sessions;
8. Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change on the twenty-fourth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention;267
9. Emphasizes the need for collective efforts to promote sustainable development in its three dimensions in
an innovative, coordinated, environmentally sound, open and shared manner;
10. Underlines the need to address the economic, social and environmental impacts of climate change, and
emphasizes the need for action at all levels, to enhance efforts to build resilience through, inter alia, the sustainable
management of ecosystems, and to build resilience to reduce the impacts and costs of natural disasters;
11. Recognizes that enhanced access to international climate finance is important to support mitigation and
adaptation efforts in developing countries, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of
climate change, and also recognizes the ongoing efforts in this regard;

_______________
Resolution 70/1.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1.
266
See FCCC/CP/2018/10/Add.1.
267
A/74/207, sect. I.
264
265

558

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

12. Acknowledges the work undertaken under the auspices of the Marrakech Partnership for Global Climate
Action,268 and encourages non-party stakeholders to scale up their efforts to address and respond to climate change;
13. Welcomes the holding of the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on
23 September, notes the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit and notes also the
Youth Climate Summit, held on 21 September;
14. Also welcomes the convening by the President of the General Assembly of the high-level meeting during
the seventy-third session of the General Assembly on the issue of the protection of the global climate for present and
future generations of humankind in the context of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development;
15. Reiterates the resolve of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, as set out in paragraphs 3 and 4 of its decision 1/CP.19,269 to accelerate the full implementation of
the decisions constituting the agreed outcome pursuant to its decision 1/CP.13270 and to enhance ambition in the
pre-2020 period in line with decision 1/CP.21, in order to ensure the highest possible mitigation efforts under the
Convention by all parties;
16. Welcomes the further acceptance or ratification of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol271 by
135 countries, up from 117 countries one year ago, expresses concern that the Doha Amendment has not yet entered
into force, and welcomes the efforts of those parties that are already implementing the Doha Amendment prior to its
entry into force;
17. Recognizes the importance for all countries of averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage
associated with the adverse effects of climate change, including extreme weather events and slow-onset events, and
the role of sustainable development in reducing the risk of loss and damage, and in that regard looks forward to the
outcome of the review of the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change
Impacts, in the context of relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and article 8 of the Paris Agreement;
18. Notes with appreciation the hosting by the Government of Chile, in Madrid, of the twenty-fifth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the fifteenth session
of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol and the second session of
the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement, in Madrid, from 2 to
13 December 2019;
19. Urges Member States, taking into account that women and girls are often disproportionately affected by
climate change owing to gender inequalities and the dependence of many women on natural resources for their
livelihoods, to promote the integration of a gender perspective into environmental and climate change policies and to
strengthen mechanisms and provide adequate resources towards achieving the full and equal participation of women
in decision-making at all levels on environmental issues, and stresses the need to address the challenges posed by
climate change that affect women and girls in particular, including through the full implementation of the new gender
action plan adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
at its twenty-third session,272 and looks forward to its review with a view to advancing towards the goal of promoting
gender-responsive and equal and meaningful participation of women in support of climate action;
20. Recalls the action plan for integrating sustainable development practices into Secretariat-wide operations
and facilities management submitted by the Secretary-General273 and endorsed in its resolution 72/219, and requests
the Secretary-General to report on the implementation thereof and the improvements achieved to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;

_______________
See FCCC/CP/2016/10/Add.1.
See FCCC/CP/2013/10/Add.1.
270
See FCCC/CP/2007/6/Add.1.
271
See FCCC/KP/CMP/2012/13/Add.1.
272
FCCC/CP/2017/11/Add.1, decision 3/CP.23, annex.
273
A/72/82.
268
269

559

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

21. Notes the ongoing work and potential of the Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, established for the exchange of experiences and sharing
of best practices on mitigation and adaptation in a holistic and integrated manner, and recalls decision 2/CP.23 of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Platform’s purpose and functions274 and decision 2/CP.24 of the
Conference of the Parties on the Platform’s governance and further operationalization;275
22. Decides to include in the United Nations calendar of conferences and meetings for the years 2020 and
2021 the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention and its subsidiary bodies envisaged for the
years 2020 and 2021;
23. Invites the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to report, through
the Secretary-General, to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, on the work of the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item
entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Protection of global climate for present and future
generations of humankind”.
RESOLUTION 74/220
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.5, para. 7)276

74/220. Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/233 of 20 December 2018, as well as other resolutions relating to the implementation
of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa,277
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, and its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social
and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling that, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the international community committed to
combating desertification, restoring degraded land and soil, including land affected by desertification, drought and
floods, and striving to achieve a land degradation-neutral world by 2030,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,

_______________
See FCCC/CP/2017/11/Add.1.
See FCCC/CP/2018/10/Add.1.
276
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Kazakhstan, and the State of Palestine (on behalf of
the States that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
277
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
274
275

560

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting that in its decision 3/COP.14,278 the Conference of the Parties to the Convention invited parties that have
committed to voluntary land degradation neutrality targets to implement measures to accelerate the achievement
thereof, by, inter alia, creating an enabling environment for the achievement of land degradation neutrality, including
the responsible governance of land and tenure security, the engagement of stakeholders and the improved access of
smallholders to advisory and financial services,
Noting also that combating desertification, land degradation and drought, including through the sustainable
management of natural resources, can contribute to sustainable development for all and to easing displacement flows,
Bearing in mind its resolution 62/195 of 19 December 2007, in which it declared the decade 2010–2020 as the
United Nations Decade for Deserts and the Fight against Desertification, and its resolution 64/201 of 21 December
2009, in which it designated the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, as the focal point of the
Decade, and invited States parties to the Convention, observers and other relevant stakeholders to organize activities
to observe the Decade,
Bearing in mind also its resolution 73/284 of 1 March 2019, in which it declared the decade 2021–2030 as the
United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration,
Recalling the adoption of the 2018–2030 Strategic Framework of the Convention,279 including a new strategic
objective on drought,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement280 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully implement
the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change281 that have not yet
done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as
possible,
Recognizing that climate change, unsustainable agricultural and forestry practices and land degradation, inter
alia, are major and growing drivers of biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation, and that conservation, restoration
and the sustainable use of biodiversity, and ecosystem functions and services, including through nature-based
solutions, contribute significantly to land degradation neutrality, climate change adaptation and mitigation, disaster
risk reduction and food security and nutrition,
Noting with concern the findings of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services land degradation and restoration assessment and its Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity
and Ecosystem Services, the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change contained in its special report
on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas
fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems, as well as the findings contained in the special report of the Panel entitled Global
Warming of 1.5°C,
Deeply concerned about the continuous trend in land degradation and the fact that the impacts of desertification,
land degradation and drought are felt most strongly by people in vulnerable situations,
Recalling the United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017–2030,282 and acknowledging that all types of forests
provide essential ecosystem services, such as timber, food, fuel, fodder, non-wood products and shelter, as well as soil
and water conservation and clean air, that the sustainable management of forests and trees outside forests is vital to
the integrated implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and that forests prevent land
degradation and desertification and reduce the risk of floods, soil erosion, landslides and avalanches, droughts, sand
and dust storms and other disasters,
Expressing its appreciation to the Government of India for hosting the fourteenth session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, held in New Delhi from 2 to 13 September 2019,

_______________
See ICCD/COP(14)/23/Add.1.
ICCD/COP(13)/21/Add.1, decision 7/COP.13, annex.
280
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
281
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
282
See resolution 71/285.
278
279

561

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the establishment of an intergovernmental working group on effective policy and implementation
measures for addressing drought under the Convention, with a view to presenting its findings and recommendations
to the parties for their consideration at the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention,
Reaffirming the importance of government leadership, multi-stakeholder partnerships and increasing private
engagement for the sustainable management, restoration and rehabilitation of ecosystems, biodiversity and land,
Highlighting the importance of multi-stakeholder participation at the local, subnational, national and regional
levels and from all sectors of society, including civil society organizations, local government and the private sector, as
appropriate, in the implementation of the Convention and its 2018–2030 Strategic Framework,
Recognizing the value of knowledge, education, science and new technology to sustainable land management,
including making use of, inter alia, the Voluntary Guidelines for Sustainable Soil Management of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, emphasizing the importance of science-based decision-making and
that science and technology to combat desertification, land degradation and drought should therefore be further
promoted, and acknowledging the work of the Science-Policy Interface of the Convention,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 73/233 on the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa;283
2. Welcomes the outcomes of the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa,278 and stresses the importance of their effective implementation;
3.

Also welcomes the New Delhi Declaration: Investing in Land and Unlocking Opportunities;284

4. Invites Member States to support efforts to implement the strategic objectives of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa;277
5. Strongly encourages the parties to the Convention to apply and align with the 2018–2030 Strategic
Framework of the Convention279 in their national policies, programmes, plans and processes relating to desertification,
land degradation and drought, and to implement the Strategic Framework, taking into account the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development;285
6. Reaffirms that achieving land degradation neutrality has the potential to act as an accelerator and integrator
for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and as a catalyst for attracting sustainable development financing
and climate finance to implement the Convention, and respond to the overall objectives of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;286
7. Reiterates the need to combat desertification, restore degraded land and soil, including land affected by
desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a land degradation-neutral world, and takes note with
appreciation of the voluntary land degradation neutrality target-setting programme under the Convention and the work
of the secretariat of the Convention and partners to assist parties to the Convention in carrying out voluntary targetsetting activities, and in this respect invites parties to the Convention that have not yet subscribed to the programme
to do so;
8. Recognizes that land-based solutions, as part of nature-based solutions, constitute promising options to
evaluate and consider in connection with sequestering carbon and enhancing the resilience of people and ecosystems
affected by desertification, land degradation and drought, as well as the adverse effects of climate change;
9. Also recognizes the importance of applying new and innovative technologies and enabling policies and
approaches, as well as sharing best practices, in combating desertification, land degradation and drought, and requests

_______________
A/74/207, sect. II.
ICCD/COP(14)/23/Add.1, decision 27/COP.14, annex I.
285
Resolution 69/313, annex.
286
Resolution 70/1.
283
284

562

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

the Secretary-General to continue to identify, as appropriate, those technologies, enabling policies and best practices
in his report on the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Encourages the entities of the United Nations system, when designing and implementing their
programmes and projects, to take into account the role of land degradation neutrality as a potential accelerator to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals;
11. Underlines the importance of comprehensive reporting, follow-up and review at the global, national and
regional levels, as appropriate, in order to track progress in the implementation of the Convention;
12. Reiterates the invitation to parties to the Convention to take measures to ensure, as appropriate, that their
relevant institutions integrate drought risk management, climate information and climate change impact assessments
into relevant policymaking processes and initiatives;
13. Invites the parties to the Convention to provide the new Executive Secretary of the Convention with full
support in the fulfilment of his mandate and in promoting the implementation of the Convention;
14. Stresses the urgent need to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to
climate change and extreme weather events, and in this regard urges Member States to continue to engage in
adaptation planning processes and to enhance cooperation in disaster risk reduction;
15. Invites the United Nations Coalition on Combating Sand and Dust Storms, which was formed at the
twenty-fourth meeting of the senior officials of the Environment Management Group in September 2018, and other
relevant United Nations entities to continue their collaboration to assist affected country parties in developing and
implementing national and regional policies on sand and dust storms;
16. Recognizes that gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls remains a crucial contribution
to the effective implementation of the Convention, including its 2018–2030 Strategic Framework, and to the
achievement of the Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, stresses the importance of parties to the
Convention and partners pursuing the equal participation of women and men in planning, decision-making and
implementation at all levels and further promoting gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls in
desertification, land degradation and drought-related policies and activities, and stresses the importance of effective
implementation of the four priority thematic areas of the Gender Action Plan adopted by the parties to the Convention;
17. Reiterates the invitation to the secretariat and the Global Mechanism of the Convention to continue to
collaborate and build partnerships with the secretariats of the other Rio conventions, the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), other United Nations entities, international
organizations and other relevant organizations to explore further ways of strengthening awareness-raising, improving
the Gender Action Plan and developing further tools and guidelines for the use of parties in the thematic areas of the
Gender Action Plan and the gender-responsive implementation of the Convention;
18. Recalls the invitation to parties to the Convention to legally recognize rights to equal use and ownership
of land for women and the enhancement of women’s equal access to land and land tenure security, as well as the
promotion of gender-sensitive measures to combat desertification, land degradation and drought and achieve land
degradation neutrality, taking into account the national context;
19. Encourages parties to the Convention to follow the principles of implementation of the Voluntary
Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food
Security287 in the implementation of activities to combat desertification, land degradation and drought;
20. Encourages the public and private sectors to continue to invest in developing, adapting and scaling up the
application of technologies, enabling policies, methods and tools to combat desertification, land degradation and
drought in different regions, and to boost knowledge exchange, including of traditional knowledge with the consent
of the knowledge holders, capacity-building and sharing of technologies on mutually agreed terms;
21. Encourages parties to the Convention to continue to promote the prevention of desertification, land
degradation and drought with an integrated landscape approach, including the rehabilitation and restoration of
degraded land and sustainable land management;

_______________
287

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.

563

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

22. Encourages developed countries party to the Convention and other relevant stakeholders to actively
support the efforts of developing countries party to the Convention in promoting sustainable land management
practices and in seeking to achieve a land degradation-neutral world by providing substantial financial resources, from
all sources, facilitated access to appropriate technology on mutually agreed terms and other forms of support,
including through capacity-building measures;
23. Recognizes the benefits gained from cooperation through the sharing of climate and weather information,
forecasting and early warning systems related to desertification, land degradation and drought, while also taking
account of sand and dust storms, at the global, regional and subregional levels, and in this regard likewise recognizes
the need for further cooperation between parties to the Convention and relevant organizations in the sharing of related
information, forecasting and early warning systems;
24. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system within their respective mandates to harness
opportunities for leveraging synergies among the Convention on Biological Diversity,288 the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa, and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change281 and other relevant
multilateral environmental agreements, as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in this respect
welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen synergies among the secretariats of the aforementioned conventions;
25. Invites the President of the General Assembly, with the support of the Executive Secretary of the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa, to organize, during the seventy-fourth session of the Assembly, a high-level
dialogue to assess the progress made in the fight against desertification, land degradation and drought and to map the
way forward, in the light of the United Nations Decade for Deserts and the Fight against Desertification, which is
coming to an end in 2020;
26. Notes with appreciation the financial contributions that have been made by Member States and other
donors towards the Land Degradation Neutrality Fund, and invites Member States and other donors to make further
contributions to the Land Degradation Neutrality Fund and the Convention’s drought initiative;
27. Decides to include, in the United Nations calendar of conferences and meetings for the year 2020 and
subsequent years, the sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention and each of its subsidiary bodies,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to make provisions for those sessions in the proposed programme
budgets;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth
session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa”.
RESOLUTION 74/221
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.6, para. 8)289

74/221. Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution
to sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 64/203 of 21 December 2009, 65/161 of 20 December 2010, 66/202 of 22 December
2011, 67/212 of 21 December 2012, 68/214 of 20 December 2013, 69/222 of 19 December 2014, 70/207 of

_______________
288
289

564

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

22 December 2015, 71/230 of 21 December 2016, 72/221 of 20 December 2017 and 73/234 of 20 December 2018
and its previous resolutions relating to the Convention on Biological Diversity,290
Reaffirming the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, including the
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development291 and its principles, the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,292 and, inter alia, the commitments
concerning biodiversity contained therein, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,293 the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development294 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)295 and the outcome document of the special event
to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals convened by the President of the
General Assembly,296
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming further its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement,297 and encouraging all its parties to fully implement the Agreement, and
parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change298 that have not yet done so to deposit their
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Reaffirming also the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador, from 17 to 20 October 2016,299 and its vision
for cities and human settlements that protect, conserve, restore and promote their ecosystems, water, natural habitats
and biodiversity and minimize their environmental impact,
Welcoming the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on 23 September, and noting
the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit,
Encouraging parties, other Governments and relevant organizations to integrate ecosystem-based approaches
and nature-based solutions to climate change adaptation and mitigation and disaster risk reduction into their strategic
planning, as appropriate, across sectors,
Recalling that the objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity, to be pursued in accordance with its
relevant provisions, are the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
292
Resolution 66/288, annex.
293
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
294
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
295
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
296
Resolution 68/6.
297
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
298
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
299
Resolution 71/256, annex.
290
291

565

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to
genetic resources, by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those resources
and to technologies, and by appropriate funding,
Reaffirming the intrinsic value of biological diversity, as well as the ecological, genetic, social, economic,
scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of biological diversity, and its critical role in
maintaining ecosystems that provide essential services, which are critical foundations for sustainable development
and human well-being,
Recognizing that the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention is crucial for sustainable
development, poverty eradication, food security and the improvement of human well-being and a major factor
underpinning the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and other internationally agreed development
goals,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law,
States have the sovereign right to exploit their own resources pursuant to their own environmental policies and the
responsibility to ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment of
other States or of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
Recalling that, in its resolution 65/161, the General Assembly declared 2011–2020 the United Nations Decade
on Biodiversity, with a view to contributing to the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020,300
Recalling also that, in its resolution 73/284 of 1 March 2019, the General Assembly declared 2021–2030 the
United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration, with the aim of supporting and scaling up efforts to prevent, halt
and reverse the degradation of ecosystems worldwide and raise awareness of the importance of successful ecosystem
restoration,
Recognizing that the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous peoples and local
communities that are relevant to the Convention make a key contribution to the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity and that their wider application can support social well-being and sustainable livelihoods,
Taking note of the decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity
at its thirteenth meeting entitled “Article 8 (j) and related provisions”,301 decision CBD/CP/MOP/VIII/19302 and
decision CBD/NP/MOP/DEC/2/7,303 as well as of the work done by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Inter‑sessional Working
Group on Article 8 (j) and related provisions,
Recalling the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples304 and the outcome document of
the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,305
Recognizing the vital role that women play in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, and
reaffirming the need for their full participation at all levels of policymaking and implementation for the conservation
and sustainable use of biological diversity,
Recalling the 2015–2020 Gender Plan of Action under the Convention on Biological Diversity,306 which will
contribute to the integration of a gender perspective and promote gender equality within the implementation of the
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and its 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets,

_______________
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/2, annex.
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/13/25, decision XIII/18.
302
Adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety at its eighth meeting
(see United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/CP/MOP/8/17).
303
Adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources
and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization at its second meeting (see United Nations Environment
Programme, document UNEP/CBD/NP/MOP/2/13).
304
Resolution 61/295, annex.
305
Resolution 69/2.
306
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/29, sect. I, decision XII/7, annex.
300
301

566

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing the important role of other biodiversity-related multilateral environmental agreements, including
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora,307 in contributing to the
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and in ensuring that no species entering into international trade is
threatened with extinction,308 recognizing also the economic, social and environmental impacts of poaching and
trafficking in wildlife, and noting the contribution of parties to and the secretariat309 of the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora to the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity
2011–2020, its 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets and the Global Strategy for Plant Conservation,
Recalling its resolution 71/312 of 6 July 2017, in which it endorsed the declaration entitled “Our ocean, our
future: call for action” adopted by the high-level United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development, in this regard reaffirming the important role of the declaration in demonstrating the
collective will to take action to conserve and sustainably use our oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development, to halt and reverse the decline in the health and productivity of our ocean and its ecosystems and to
protect and restore its resilience and ecological integrity, and recognizing the important contributions of the partnership
dialogues and voluntary commitments made in the context of that Conference to the effective and timely
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14,
Recalling also the United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017–2030,310 and recognizing that forests are home
to an estimated 80 per cent of all terrestrial species and that forests, including boreal, temperate and tropical, contribute
substantially to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to the conservation of biodiversity,
Noting the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, at its tenth
meeting, of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
Arising from Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity,311 the objective of which is the fair and
equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources, including by appropriate access to
genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of relevant technologies, taking into account all rights over those
resources and to technologies, and by appropriate funding, and acknowledging the role of access to genetic resources
and equitable benefit-sharing arising from their utilization in contributing to the conservation and sustainable use of
biological diversity, poverty eradication and environmental sustainability, and thereby to the achievement of
sustainable development,
Noting also that 195 States and 1 regional economic integration organization are parties to the Convention,
noting further that 91 States and 1 regional economic integration organization have signed the Nagoya Protocol and
that 122 States and 1 regional economic integration organization that are parties to the Convention have deposited
their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to the Nagoya Protocol, and noting that 171 States
and 1 regional economic integration organization are parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention
on Biological Diversity312 and that 46 States and 1 regional economic integration organization are parties to the
Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety,313
Welcoming the entry into force of the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on 5 March 2018,
Recalling the adoption by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention at its ninth meeting of the strategy for
resource mobilization in support of the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention,314 as well as
decision X/3, adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its tenth meeting,315 on the review of its implementation,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
See resolution Conf. 16.7 of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna
and Flora.
309
See resolution Conf. 16.3 (Rev. CoP17), entitled “CITES Strategic Vision: 2008–2020”.
310
See resolution 71/285.
311
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/1.
312
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2226, No. 30619.
313
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/BS/COP-MOP/5/17, annex, decision BS-V/11.
314
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/9/29, annex I, decision IX/11.
315
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex.
307
308

567

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and the targets for resource mobilization, under Aichi Target 20 of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020,
adopted by the Conference of the Parties in its decision XII/3,316
Noting the outcomes of the thirteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention,317 the eighth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol318 and the
second meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Nagoya Protocol,319 all
held in Cancun, Mexico, in 2016,
Recalling with appreciation the Cancun Declaration on Mainstreaming the Conservation and Sustainable Use
of Biodiversity for Well-being, adopted at the high-level segment of the thirteenth meeting of the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention,320
Noting the outcomes of the eighteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, held in Geneva from 17 to 28 August 2019, and
of the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, held in New Delhi
from 2 to 13 September 2019,321 which will contribute significantly to the protection and sustainable use of species
and ecosystems,
Taking note of the African Ministerial Declaration on Biodiversity and the Pan‑African Action Agenda on
Ecosystem Restoration for Increased Resilience, adopted in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 13 November 2018,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological Diversity;322

2. Looks forward to the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, as well as the
meetings of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meetings of the Parties to the Protocols to the Convention, to
be held in Kunming, China, in the fourth quarter of 2020, all under the theme proposed by the host, “Ecological
civilization: building a shared future for all life on Earth”, and recognizes that a post-2020 global biodiversity
framework to be adopted is intended to contribute to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development323 and is expected
to place the global community on a path towards realizing the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity;
3. Also looks forward to the sixteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties and the meetings of the
Conference of the Parties serving as the Meetings of the Parties to the Protocols to the Convention, which will be held
in Turkey in the fourth quarter of 2022;
4. Welcomes the outcomes of the fourteenth meeting of Conference of the Parties to the Convention,324 and
recalls with appreciation the convening of the ninth meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting
of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol and the third meeting of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting
of the Parties to the Nagoya Protocol, in Sharm el-Sheikh from 17 to 29 November 2018, under the theme “Investing
in biodiversity for people and planet”, recognizes that the outcomes of the meetings will contribute to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and takes note with appreciation of the Sharm
el-Sheikh Declaration, adopted at the high-level segment of the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties;

_______________
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/29, sect. I.
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/13/25, sect. I.
318
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/CP/MOP/8/17, sect. I.
319
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/NP/MOP/2/13, sect. I.
320
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/13/24.
321
See ICCD/COP(14)/23/Add.1.
322
A/74/207, sect. III.
323
Resolution 70/1.
324
See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/14/14, sect. I.
316
317

568

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Also welcomes the hosting by Egypt of the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention, from 17 to 29 November 2018, and of the African Biodiversity Summit, held on 13 November 2018, as
well as the initiative of the Conference of the Parties at its fourteenth meeting to promote a coherent approach between
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,298 the Convention on Biological Diversity290 and the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa325 (the Rio conventions), to address biodiversity loss, climate change and land
and ecosystem degradation;
6. Encourages support for the Sharm el-Sheikh to Kunming Action Agenda for Nature and People, which is
aimed at collecting, coordinating and celebrating actions in support of biodiversity conservation and its sustainable
use, encourages all relevant stakeholders, including indigenous peoples and local communities and the private sector,
to consider developing biodiversity commitments, and invites relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations system and other relevant institutions and intergovernmental organizations, where relevant, to support the
implementation of the Action Agenda;
7. Highlights the importance of parties raising high-level political engagement for the achievement of the
Aichi Biodiversity Targets by 2020 and the related Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
8. Welcomes the commitments made by the parties at the high-level segment of the fourteenth meeting of
the Conference of the Parties and through the decisions adopted, which support the implementation of the current
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020300 and the development of a post-2020 global biodiversity framework,
inter alia, to:
(a) Accelerating efforts to implement the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and achieve the Aichi
Biodiversity Targets, including by implementing the decisions of the Conference of the Parties and the Cartagena and
Nagoya Protocols, as appropriate, and by providing and mobilizing international and national resources, thereby
contributing to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
(b) Supporting the development and implementation of a post-2020 global biodiversity framework, building
on the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and the lessons learned from the implementation of the Strategic Plan for
Biodiversity 2011–2020 and aligned with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with a level of ambition
and practicality that will facilitate the transformational changes needed to achieve the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity, as
noted in the conclusions of the Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice;
(c) Promoting, prior to the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, voluntary biodiversity
contributions by parties and other actors towards achieving the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity;
(d) Engaging indigenous peoples and local communities, women, youth, civil society, local governments and
authorities, academia, the business and financial sectors and other relevant stakeholders to support action towards the
2050 Vision for Biodiversity and to provide momentum for the implementation of a post-2020 global biodiversity
framework;
9. Urges parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity to ensure the coherence and complementarity of
a post-2020 global biodiversity framework with other existing or upcoming international processes, in particular with
regard to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement297 and other related processes,
frameworks and strategies, and reiterates the invitation to the other multilateral environmental agreements, including
biodiversity-related conventions and the Rio conventions, relevant international organizations and their programmes,
and other relevant processes to actively participate in the development process for a post-2020 global biodiversity
framework;
10. Recalls the invitation to the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, in the
capacity as Chair of the United Nations Environment Management Group, to facilitate, in collaboration with the
members of the Group, the contribution of the United Nations system to the development and implementation of a
post-2020 global biodiversity framework;

_______________
325

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.

569

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

11. Reaffirms its decision to convene a summit on biodiversity at the level of Heads of State and Government,
within existing resources, before the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, in 2020, in
order to highlight the urgency of action at the highest levels in support of a post-2020 global biodiversity framework
that contributes to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and places the global community on a path towards
realizing the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity, “Living in harmony with nature”;
12. Urges Member States and other potential donors to contribute to the United Nations multi-partner trust
fund to support the summit, primarily to support preparations as well as travel and participation by representatives of
developing countries, in the event that a country offers to host the summit;
13. Requests the President of the General Assembly, within existing resources, to start preparations for the
summit in close collaboration with the secretariat of the Convention, and with the support of the United Nations
Environment Programme and other relevant United Nations entities, also requests the President to appoint as early as
possible two co-facilitators, one each from a developing and a developed country, by the end of 2019, to lead the
preparatory process in an expedited manner, in consultation with Member States, including on the modalities of the
summit, to be agreed upon by the Assembly no later than March 2020, and invites the President to keep Member
States updated on developments in the process;
14. Recalls with appreciation the entry into force of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and
the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity311
on 12 October 2014;
15. Stresses the importance of mainstreaming biodiversity for achieving the objectives of the Convention,
the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020, its Aichi Biodiversity Targets and the 2050 Vision for Biodiversity
in order to achieve the transformational change required throughout societies and economies, including changes in
behaviour and decision-making at all levels, and urges all relevant stakeholders to mainstream biodiversity in all
relevant sectors;
16. Welcomes the decisions of the parties to the Convention to better mainstream biodiversity and to take
specific actions tailored to national needs and circumstances, and in line with other relevant international agreements,
including in key sectors, such as agriculture, forestry, fisheries and tourism, as well as health, energy, mining,
infrastructure, manufacturing and processing sectors, which are crucial for addressing biodiversity loss, bearing in
mind the impact of these sectors on biodiversity;
17. Stresses the importance of mainstreaming biodiversity in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development as part of national implementation plans for the Sustainable Development Goals, in
particular all biodiversity-related Goals and targets;
18. Recognizes that integrating biodiversity considerations into sectoral and cross-sectoral policies, plans and
programmes at all levels is critical for harnessing the benefits of enhanced synergies and policy coherence;
19. Encourages the respective parties, in close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, to take concrete
measures towards achieving the objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Protocols thereto, the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety312 and the Nagoya Protocol, requests the parties, in close collaboration with relevant
stakeholders, to coherently and efficiently implement the obligations and commitments under the Convention and the
Protocols, and in this regard emphasizes the need to comprehensively address at all levels the difficulties that may
impede their implementation;
20. Recognizes that the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity can significantly contribute to disaster
risk reduction and to reducing the adverse impacts of climate change, including by adding resilience to fragile
ecosystems and making them less vulnerable;
21. Urges the parties to the Convention to facilitate the transfer of technology for the effective implementation
of the Convention in accordance with article 16 and other relevant provisions of the Convention, in this regard takes
note of the strategy for the practical implementation of the programme of work on technology transfer and scientific
and technical cooperation developed by the Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group on Technology Transfer and Scientific
and Technological Cooperation, as well as of decision XI/2, entitled “Review of progress in implementation of
570

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

national biodiversity strategies and action plans and related capacity-building support to parties”,326 and recalls the
relevant decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its twelfth meeting in this regard;316
22. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the secretariat of the Convention, parties to the Convention
and the Global Environment Facility, as the financial mechanism of the Convention, in conjunction with United
Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, as well as other entities, in organizing capacity-building
workshops to support countries in the updating of national biodiversity strategies and action plans, with a view to
enhancing capacity and addressing the need for human, technical and financial resources to implement the Strategic
Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention at its tenth meeting, in particular for developing countries;
23. Recognizes with concern the limited progress in the achievement of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and the
implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 by the parties to the Convention, and, given the
limited time remaining, calls upon all parties to accelerate and scale up efforts to implement them, acknowledging
the contribution of such efforts to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals;
24. Notes with concern the limited progress made in the implementation of the three objectives of the
Convention, namely, the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and
equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources;
25. Notes with particular concern the limited progress made by its parties in the implementation of the Nagoya
Protocol;
26. Notes the limited progress made in mainstreaming article 8 (j) of the Convention and related provisions
into various areas of work under the Convention, takes note with appreciation of decision 14/17 of the Conference of
the Parties to the Convention to consider the development of a fully integrated programme of work on article 8 (j) and
related provisions within a post-2020 global biodiversity framework, to allow for the full and effective participation
of indigenous peoples and local communities in the work of the Convention, and in this regard invites the secretariat
of the Convention, through the Secretary-General, to report on the progress made by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Intersessional Working Group on Article 8 (j) and related provisions when reporting on the implementation of the present
resolution to the General Assembly;
27. Encourages parties to promote the mainstreaming of gender considerations, taking into account the
2015–2020 Gender Plan of Action under the Convention on Biological Diversity,306 in developing, implementing and
revising their national and, where appropriate, regional and subnational biodiversity strategies and action plans and
equivalent instruments in implementing the three objectives of the Convention, recognizes the need to enhance
cooperation on capacity-building in order to support parties in this process, and emphasizes the importance of
integrating a gender perspective into the process of developing a post-2020 global biodiversity framework;
28. Calls upon Governments and all stakeholders to take appropriate measures to mainstream consideration
of the socioeconomic impacts and benefits of the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and its components,
as well as ecosystems that provide essential services, into relevant programmes and policies at all levels, in accordance
with national legislation, circumstances and priorities;
29. Reaffirms the importance of continuing to pursue more efficient and coherent implementation of the three
objectives of the Convention, and calls upon parties and stakeholders to strengthen international cooperation measures
for the fulfilment of obligations contained in the Convention;
30. Invites all parties, relevant departments of the Secretariat, the specialized agencies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations system and the regional commissions to continue to contribute to the achievement of the
objectives of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020;
31. Reaffirms the need for a comprehensive and participatory process towards developing proposals for the
follow-up to the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020, fully in line with decision XIII/1317 and decision 14/34,
as well as other relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention;

_______________
326

See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/11/35, annex I.

571

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

32. Recognizes that parties to the Convention have reiterated that resources, financial, human and technical,
need to be provided and mobilized from all sources, with a view to the effective implementation of the Strategic Plan
for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and a post-2020 global biodiversity framework to follow it, stresses the need for further
consideration of the evaluation of all resources mobilized in terms of the biodiversity outcomes achieved, and, in this
regard, welcomes the decision of the parties to the Convention on an overall substantial increase in total biodiversityrelated funding for the implementation of the Strategic Plan from a variety of sources, including national and
international resource mobilization, international cooperation and the exploration of new and innovative financial
mechanisms, as appropriate, and notes that the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties affirmed that
resource mobilization will be an integral part of a post-2020 global biodiversity framework and initiated preparations
of this resource mobilization component at an early stage and in full coherence and coordination with the overall
process of developing a post-2020 framework;
33. Invites countries that have not yet done so to ratify or accede to the Convention;
34. Invites parties to the Convention to ratify or accede to the Nagoya Protocol, and invites the Executive
Secretary of the Convention and the Global Environment Facility, within its mandate as the financial mechanism of
the Convention, in collaboration with relevant organizations, to continue to support capacity-building and
development activities to support the ratification and implementation of the Protocol;
35. Also invites parties to the Convention to consider, as appropriate, ratifying or acceding to the Cartagena
Protocol;
36. Invites parties to the Cartagena Protocol to consider, as appropriate, ratifying or acceding to the NagoyaKuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety;313
37. Notes with concern the findings of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services, and stresses the urgent need to halt the global decline of biodiversity, which is unprecedented in
human history, including its main indirect and direct drivers, in particular changes in land and sea use, direct
exploitation of organisms, climate change, pollution and invasion of alien species;
38. Notes that increasing investments in nature-based solutions has the potential to cost-effectively support
biodiversity conservation, restoration and its sustainable use, to help advance climate mitigation and adaptation and
to reduce adverse impacts of climate change and to slow, halt and even reverse some aspects of biodiversity and
ecosystem loss, and therefore invites all relevant stakeholders to pay due attention to the opportunities it presents;
39. Takes note with concern of the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in its special
reports entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C, The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate and Climate Change
and Land: An IPCC Special Report on Climate Change, Desertification, Land Degradation, Sustainable Land
Management, Food Security, and Greenhouse Gas Fluxes in Terrestrial Ecosystems;
40. Stresses the importance of the engagement of the private sector and other relevant stakeholders, as well as
indigenous peoples and local communities, women and youth, in the implementation of the three objectives of the
Convention and in the achievement of the biodiversity targets, invites them to align their practices more explicitly
with the objectives of the Convention, including through partnerships, in accordance with national legislation,
circumstances and priorities, in this regard stresses the importance of the ongoing work of the Global Partnership for
Business and Biodiversity, and notes other related and complementary initiatives;
41. Notes the ongoing work of the Joint Liaison Group of the secretariats and offices of the relevant subsidiary
bodies of the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Convention to Combat Desertification and the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Liaison Group of Biodiversity-related Conventions,
acknowledges the importance of improving coherence in the implementation of those conventions, recognizes the
importance of enhancing synergies among the biodiversity-related conventions, without prejudice to their specific
objectives, in this regard notes the contribution of the United Nations Environment Assembly, as reflected in its
resolution 2/17 of 27 May 2016,327 and the outcomes of its fourth session, held in Nairobi from 11 to 15 March
2019,328 in particular its ministerial declaration, and encourages the conferences of the parties to the biodiversity-

_______________
327
328

572

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/71/25), annex.
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/74/25), annex I.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

related multilateral environmental agreements to consider strengthening efforts in this regard, taking into account
relevant experiences and bearing in mind the respective independent legal status and mandates of those instruments;
42. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its seventy-fifth session, a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, including on progress in the implementation of the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and difficulties encountered in the process of their
implementation, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub‑item entitled “Convention on Biological Diversity”.
RESOLUTION 74/222
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.7, para. 8)329

74/222. Report of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United Nations
Environment Programme
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the mandate contained in its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it
established the United Nations Environment Programme, and other relevant resolutions that reinforce its mandate,
as well as the 1997 Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of the United Nations Environment Programme
of 7 February 1997,330 the Malmö Ministerial Declaration of 31 May 2000331 and the Nusa Dua Declaration of
26 February 2010,332
Reaffirming also its commitment to strengthening the role of the United Nations Environment Programme as
the leading global environmental authority that sets the global environmental agenda, promotes the coherent
implementation of the environmental dimension of sustainable development within the United Nations system and
serves as an authoritative advocate for the global environment,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held from
20 to 22 June 2012 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, entitled “The future we want”,333 and noting the follow-up on
paragraph 88, subparagraphs (a) to (h), of the outcome document, including through General Assembly resolution
67/213 of 21 December 2012,
Recalling also the establishment of universal membership in the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme, as well as other measures to strengthen its governance and its responsiveness and
accountability to Member States, the attendant change of its designation to the United Nations Environment Assembly
of the United Nations Environment Programme and the evolution in the periodicity of its sessions,
Recalling further its resolutions 68/215 of 20 December 2013, 69/223 of 19 December 2014, 71/231 of
21 December 2016 and 73/260 of 22 December 2018,
Reaffirming the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development334 and its principles,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/52/25), annex, decision 19/1, annex.
331
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/55/25), annex I, decision SS.VI/1, annex.
332
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/65/25), annex I, decision SS.XI/9.
333
Resolution 66/288, annex.
334
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
329
330

573

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking into account Agenda 21335 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development,336
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome337 and the outcome document of the special event of the General
Assembly to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,338
Recalling also the Bali Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacity-building,339
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement and its early entry into force,340 and encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change341 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
the Paris Agreement and other relevant major intergovernmental outcomes of United Nations conferences and
summits in economic, social and environmental fields,
Welcoming the holding of the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on
23 September, noting the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit and noting also the
Youth Climate Summit, held in New York on 21 September,
Looking forward to the summit on biodiversity to be held in 2020 in support of a post-2020 global biodiversity
framework that contributes to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, recalling resolution 71/312 of 6 July
2017, entitled “Our ocean, our future: call for action”, and looking forward to the 2020 United Nations Conference to
Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development,
Taking note of the contribution of the United Nations Environment Assembly to addressing the challenge of,
inter alia, climate change and biodiversity loss, within its mandate and in collaboration with other relevant
organizations and stakeholders,
Committed to strengthening international environmental governance within the context of the institutional
framework for sustainable development in order to promote a balanced integration of the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development as well as coordination within the United Nations system,

_______________
Ibid., annex II.
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
337
Resolution 60/1.
338
Resolution 68/6.
339
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/GC.23/6/Add.1 and UNEP/GC.23/6/Add.1/Corr.1, annex.
340
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
341
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
335
336

574

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Committed also to enhancing the voice of the United Nations Environment Programme and its ability to fulfil
its coordination mandate within the United Nations system by strengthening its engagement in key United Nations
coordination bodies and empowering it to lead efforts to formulate United Nations system-wide strategies on the
environment,
Recognizing the important contribution of the United Nations Environment Assembly to the 2019 high-level
political forum on sustainable development, which met under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council from
9 to 18 July in New York and undertook an in-depth review of progress on a subset of 6 of the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals,
Reiterating the need for secure, stable, adequate and predictable financial resources for the United Nations
Environment Programme, and, in accordance with resolution 2997 (XXVII), underlining the need to consider the
adequate reflection of all the administrative and management costs of the Programme in the context of the United
Nations regular budget, as well as the need to realize efficiency gains,
Reaffirming the commitments, as contained in the ministerial outcome document of the first session of the
United Nations Environment Assembly of the United Nations Environment Programme, held in Nairobi from 23 to
27 June 2014,342 inter alia, to ensure the full integration of the environmental dimension, especially throughout the
sustainable development agenda, acknowledging that a healthy environment is an essential requirement and key
enabler for sustainable development,
Reiterating the need to develop and expand partnerships, including between Governments, the private sector,
academia, relevant United Nations entities and programmes, indigenous peoples and local communities, civil society
and individuals,
1. Welcomes the holding of the fourth session of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United
Nations Environment Programme in Nairobi from 11 to 15 March 2019, also welcomes the report on the session and
the resolutions and decisions contained therein,343 and looks forward to the convening of the fifth session of the United
Nations Environment Assembly from 22 to 26 February 2021;
2. Reiterates the ministerial declaration entitled “Innovative solutions for environmental challenges and
sustainable consumption and production”,344 adopted by the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United
Nations Environment Programme at its fourth session, and reaffirms that embracing innovative solutions for
environmental challenges and sustainable consumption and production are important elements for implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development345 and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals;
3. Encourages Member States to advance innovative pathways to achieve sustainable consumption and
production, in line with resolution 4/1 of 15 March 2019 of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United
Nations Environment Programme;346
4. Invites the Statistical Commission, the Commission on Science and Technology for Development and
other relevant United Nations entities to support the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme in the development of a global environmental data strategy by 2025, as referred to in the ministerial
declaration adopted by the United Nations Environment Assembly at its fourth session;
5. Invites Member States and all relevant United Nations bodies and partners to contribute to the delivery of
the implementation plan “Towards a pollution-free planet” as set out in United Nations Environment Assembly
resolution 4/21 of 15 March 2019;347
6. Welcomes the continued commitment of the United Nations Environment Assembly to contributing to the
effective implementation of the environmental dimension of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in an

_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/69/25), annex, resolution 1/1.
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/74/25).
344
UNEP/EA.4/HLS.1.
345
Resolution 70/1.
346
UNEP/EA.4/Res.1.
347
UNEP/EA.4/Res.21.
342
343

575

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

integrated manner, as reflected in its resolutions 2/5 of 27 May 2016348 and 3/3 of 6 December 2017349 on the
contributions of the United Nations Environment Assembly to the high-level political forum on sustainable
development;
7. Commends the President and the Bureau of the Economic and Social Council for supporting and
facilitating the effective integration of the contributions of the United Nations Environment Assembly into the
preparation, work and proceedings of, and the participation of the President of the Environment Assembly in, the
high-level political forum on sustainable development under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council;
8. Encourages the President of the United Nations Environment Assembly to continue to convey the main
messages agreed upon by the Environment Assembly at its sessions during the high-level political forum on
sustainable development under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council, as appropriate, taking into account
the integrated nature of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as General Assembly resolutions
67/290 of 9 July 2013 and 70/299 of 29 July 2016;
9. Welcomes the contributions of the United Nations Environment Assembly to the lead-up, inputs and
meetings of the high-level political forum on sustainable development under the auspices of the General Assembly in
2019, and looks forward to further contributions to the high-level political forum under the auspices of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council;
10. Reiterates that capacity-building and technology support to developing countries in environment-related
fields are important components of the work of the United Nations Environment Programme, and in this regard calls
for the continued and focused implementation of the Bali Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacitybuilding339 adopted by the Programme;
11. Welcomes the sixth flagship Global Environment Outlook report and its summary for policymakers,350
which was reviewed and approved by Member States from 21 to 24 January 2019 and welcomed with appreciation
by the United Nations Environment Assembly at its fourth session, and reiterates the continuing need for the United
Nations Environment Programme to conduct up-to-date, comprehensive, scientifically based and policy-relevant
global environmental assessments, in close consultation with Member States, in order to support decision-making
processes at all levels;
12. Acknowledges the contribution of the International Resource Panel, including through its report, Global
Resources Outlook 2019: Natural Resources for the Future We Want;
13. Expresses concern about the findings of relevant global environmental assessments which indicate that,
despite the availability of solutions to our common environmental challenges, our planet is increasingly polluted,
affected by the adverse effects of climate change, quickly losing its biodiversity and experiencing widespread
environmental degradation, and recalls the request by the United Nations Environment Assembly to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to continue to promote greater coherence and coordination
of global assessments undertaken within the United Nations system;351
14. Takes note with appreciation of the request by the United Nations Environment Assembly to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment Programme to prepare, in consultation with Member States, the
commemoration of the creation of the United Nations Environment Programme by the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972,352 making use of contributions from relevant
stakeholders;

_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/71/25), annex, resolution 2/5.
UNEP/EA.3/Res.3.
350
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in the summary for policymakers do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of the United Nations Environment Programme concerning the legal status of any country, territory or city
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. For general guidance on matters relating to the use of maps
in publications, please see www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/english/htmain.htm.
351
See UNEP/EA.4/Res.23, para. 10.
352
Ibid., para. 7.
348
349

576

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

15. Expresses concern about the sustainability, predictability and stability of the funding of the United Nations
Environment Programme governing body, and requests the Secretary-General to make proposals, as appropriate;
16. Notes the request by the United Nations Environment Assembly to the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to provide options to secure the participation of developing countries in the
Environment Assembly;353
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled
“Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Report of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United
Nations Environment Programme”.
RESOLUTION 74/223
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.8, para. 8)354

74/223. Education for sustainable development in the framework of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 72/222 of 20 December 2017 and other previous resolutions on education for sustainable
development,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review
of operational activities for development of the United Nations system and its general guidelines and principles, as
well as its resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018 and Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/15 of 8 July 2019,
and welcoming the efforts of the Secretary-General to better position the United Nations operational activities for
development to support countries in their efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming further the commitment made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to ensure inclusive
and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all,
Noting with concern that, despite the considerable progress on education access and participation over the past
years, 262 million children and youth aged 6 to 17 were still out of school in 2017, more than half of children and
adolescents are not meeting minimum proficiency standards in reading and mathematics and, while rapid
technological changes present opportunities and challenges, the learning environment, the capacities of teachers and
the quality of education have not kept pace, and refocused efforts are needed to improve learning outcomes for the
full life cycle, especially for women, girls and people in vulnerable situations,355
Reaffirming the commitment made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to ensure that all learners
acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development, including through education for

_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/69/25), annex, resolution 1/15.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Japan, and the State of Palestine (on behalf of the
States that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5
of 16 October 2018).
355
See the report of the Secretary-General: special edition – progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals (E/2019/68), Goal 4
“Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all”.
353
354

577

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls, the promotion of a culture of peace and non‑violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity
and of culture’s contribution to sustainable development,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Acknowledging the importance for achieving sustainable development of delivering quality education to all girls
and boys, which will require reaching children living in extreme poverty and rural areas, children with disabilities,
migrant and refugee children and those in conflict and post-conflict situations, indigenous people and children in
vulnerable situations and providing safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning environments for all, and
recognizing the importance of scaling up investments and international cooperation to allow all children to complete
free, equitable, inclusive and quality early childhood, primary and secondary education leading to relevant and
effective learning outcomes, including by scaling up and strengthening initiatives, such as the Global Partnership for
Education, and by upgrading education facilities that are child-, disability- and gender-sensitive and increasing the
percentage of qualified teachers in developing countries, including through international cooperation, especially in
the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and middle-income
countries,
Recognizing that, despite gains in providing access to education, girls are still more likely than boys to remain
excluded from education owing to gendered barriers,
Acknowledging the importance of ensuring that all children, youth and adults achieve literacy and numeracy
skills by 2030,
Acknowledging also the importance of adopting science, technology and innovation strategies as integral
elements of national sustainable development strategies to help to strengthen knowledge-sharing and collaboration
and the importance of scaling up investments in science, technology, engineering and mathematics and digital literacy
education and enhancing technical, vocational and tertiary education, distance education and training and of ensuring
equal access for women and girls and encouraging their participation therein,
Acknowledging further the importance of education for achieving sustainable development, including in the
context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and building on the Millennium Development Goals,
Agenda 21,356 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation),357 the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the World Conference on
Education for Sustainable Development, organized by the Government of Japan and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, held in Aichi-Nagoya, Japan, from 10 to 12 November 2014, the World
Education Forum 2015, held in Incheon, Republic of Korea, from 19 to 22 May 2015, and the Education 2030
Framework for Action, adopted on 4 November 2015 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirty-eighth session,
Recalling the Global Action Programme on Education for Sustainable Development as follow-up to the United
Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development after 2014,358 the Aichi-Nagoya Declaration on Education
for Sustainable Development, adopted at the World Conference on Education for Sustainable Development,359 and
the Incheon Declaration of the World Education Forum 2015,360

_______________
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
357
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
358
See A/69/76.
359
A/70/228, annex.
360
Incheon Declaration: Education 2030 – towards inclusive and equitable quality education and lifelong learning for all.
356

578

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting that the Global Action Programme made good progress through its key partner network of
97 stakeholders, with 26 million learners in formal and non-formal settings having been exposed to Education for
Sustainable Development curricula and special projects designed to instil knowledge and inspire action in their
communities, and with the partners having supported the training of 2 million educators on Education for Sustainable
Development and adapted material and resources to meet their needs,
Taking note of the framework entitled “Education for Sustainable Development: towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals” (ESD for 2030), endorsed by the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its fortieth session,
Reaffirming its resolution 73/25 of 3 December 2018, by which it proclaimed 24 January the International Day
of Education,
Recognizing the importance of promoting a holistic approach to education for sustainable development and of
encouraging the reinforcement of the interdisciplinary linkages of the three pillars of sustainable development,
economic, social and environmental, including different branches of knowledge,
Recognizing also the role of education for sustainable development in promoting and enhancing public
awareness of the eradication of poverty, of sustainable consumption and production, of combating climate change, of
conserving biodiversity and ecosystems, of building disaster-resilient communities and of promoting a culture of
peace and non-violence, among other things,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
Deeply concerned about the risk of education being underfunded and the impact of disrupted educational
services during humanitarian emergencies on efforts to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and lifelong
learning opportunities for all, and recognizing the need to support early childhood education, as well as to promote
tertiary education, skills training and vocational education in conflict and crisis situations, where higher education
serves as a powerful driver for change, shelters and protects a critical group of young men and women by maintaining
their hopes for the future, fosters inclusion and non-discrimination and acts as a catalyst for the recovery and rebuilding
of post-conflict countries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Director General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on the implementation of education for sustainable development,361 which provided an overview of
education for sustainable development in the framework of the Global Action Programme on Education for
Sustainable Development and of the framework entitled “Education for Sustainable Development: towards achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals” (ESD for 2030);
2. Reaffirms education for sustainable development as a vital means of implementation for sustainable
development, as outlined in the Aichi-Nagoya Declaration on Education for Sustainable Development,359 and as an
integral element of the Sustainable Development Goal on quality education and a key enabler of all the other Goals,
and welcomes the increased international recognition of education for sustainable development in quality education
and lifelong learning;
3. Calls upon the international community to provide inclusive and equitable quality education at all
levels – early childhood, primary, secondary, tertiary and distance education, including technical and vocational
training – so that all people, irrespective of sex, age, race or ethnicity, and persons with disabilities, migrants,
indigenous people, children and youth, especially those in vulnerable situations, may have access to lifelong learning
opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to exploit opportunities to participate fully in
society and contribute to sustainable development;
4. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;

_______________
361

A/74/258.

579

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Encourages Governments and other stakeholders concerned to scale up education for sustainable
development action through the implementation of the framework entitled “Education for Sustainable Development:
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals” (ESD for 2030) as follow-up to the Global Action
Programme on Education for Sustainable Development after 2014;358
6. Takes note that the international launch conference for the framework entitled “Education for Sustainable
Development: towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals” (ESD for 2030) will be hosted by the
Government of Germany and in June 2020 in Berlin;
7. Encourages Governments to increase efforts to systemically integrate and institutionalize education for
sustainable development in the education sector and other relevant sectors, as appropriate, including through, inter
alia, the provision of financial resources, the inclusion of education for sustainable development in relevant policies
and the development of the capacities of policymakers, institutional leaders and educators, as well as through the
strengthening of research and innovation, and monitoring and evaluation on education for sustainable development
in order to support the scaling up of good practices;
8. Encourages all countries, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system, relevant
non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to enhance international cooperation in supporting
the efforts of developing countries towards the realization of the full potential of education for sustainable
development;
9. Emphasizes the importance of further developing and implementing educational and public awareness
programmes, training scientific, technical and managerial personnel, fostering access to information and promoting
public participation in addressing climate change challenges;
10. Decides to continue to give consideration, as appropriate, to the contribution of education for sustainable
development in the follow-up and review framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;362
11. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as the specialized United
Nations agency for education, to continue its mandated role to lead and coordinate the Education 2030 agenda, in
particular through the Sustainable Development Goal Education 2030 Steering Committee, as an inclusive global
multi-stakeholder consultation and coordination mechanism for education in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in accordance with the 2030 Agenda follow-up and review process;
12. Also invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as the lead agency for
education for sustainable development, to provide coordination for the implementation of the framework entitled
“Education for Sustainable Development: towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals” (ESD for 2030),
in cooperation with Governments, United Nations organizations, funds and programmes, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders, and to continue to advocate the importance of ensuring adequate resources for
education for sustainable development, and calls upon the United Nations system to increase efforts to mainstream a
gender perspective into the implementation of the framework;
13. Invites the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, to continue to provide support and assist States, upon their request, in developing
their national capacities to promote education for sustainable development, including through knowledge-sharing and
standard-setting, youth empowerment and mobilization, the exchange of best practices, data collection, research and
study;
14. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other relevant United
Nations bodies to continue to assess, in consultation with Member States, progress towards the achievement of
education for sustainable development;
15. Encourages all countries, relevant intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system,
relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to give due consideration to the
contribution of education to the achievement of sustainable development in the formulation of national, regional and
international development policies and international cooperation instruments;

_______________
362

580

Resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session an actionoriented report on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Education for
sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 74/224
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 134 to 2, with 45 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/381/Add.9, para. 8)363
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Dominica, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/224. Harmony with Nature
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,364 Agenda 21,365 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,366 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development367 and the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),368
Recalling its resolutions 64/196 of 21 December 2009, 65/164 of 20 December 2010, 66/204 of 22 December
2011, 67/214 of 21 December 2012, 68/216 of 20 December 2013, 69/224 of 19 December 2014, 70/208 of
22 December 2015, 71/232 of 21 December 2016, 72/223 of 20 December 2017 and 73/235 of 20 December 2018
on Harmony with Nature,
Recalling also its resolution 63/278 of 22 April 2009, by which it designated 22 April as International Mother
Earth Day, commemorating 10 years since its adoption and recognizing its importance,
Recalling further the 1982 World Charter for Nature,369

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
364
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
365
Ibid., annex II.
366
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
367
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
368
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
369
Resolution 37/7, annex.
363

581

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the Peoples’ World Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth, hosted by the
Plurinational State of Bolivia in Cochabamba from 20 to 22 April 2010,370
Recognizing that planet Earth and its ecosystems are our home and that “Mother Earth” is a common expression
in a number of countries and regions, noting that some countries recognize the rights of nature or Mother Earth in the
context of the promotion of sustainable development, and expressing the conviction that, in order to achieve a just
balance among the economic, social and environmental needs of present and future generations, it is necessary to
promote harmony with nature,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,371
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador, from 17 to 20 October 2016,372 and recognizing
that its implementation can contribute to achieving environmental sustainability by protecting ecosystems and
biodiversity, including by adopting healthy lifestyles in harmony with nature,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement,373 and encouraging all its parties to fully implement the Agreement, and
parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change374 that have not yet done so to deposit their
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Noting the importance of nature-based solutions in aiming to achieve goals relating to climate change mitigation
and adaptation,
Noting with appreciation the interactive dialogue on Harmony with Nature convened by the President of the
General Assembly under the overall theme “Mother Earth approach” in the implementation of education and climate
action in harmony with nature, held on 22 April 2019, in commemoration of International Mother Earth Day and to
inspire citizens and societies to reconsider how they interact with the natural world in order to implement the
Sustainable Development Goals in harmony with nature, and noting that some countries recognize the rights of nature
in the context of the promotion of sustainable development,
Recognizing that a number of countries consider Mother Earth the source of all life and nourishment and that
these countries consider Mother Earth and humankind to be a living community of interrelated and interdependent
beings,

_______________
See A/64/777, annexes I and II.
Resolution 66/288, annex.
372
Resolution 71/256, annex.
373
Adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
374
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
370
371

582

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling the interactive dialogue on living in harmony with nature held on the occasion of the thirteenth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, held in Cancún, Mexico, from
4 to 17 December 2016,
Noting the importance of ensuring the integrity of all ecosystems, including oceans, and the protection of
biodiversity, recognized by some cultures as Mother Earth, and noting also the importance for some of the concept of
“climate justice”, when taking action to address climate change,
Noting also that, in promoting a holistic approach to achieving sustainable development in harmony with nature,
Earth system science plays a significant role,
Expressing concern about documented environmental degradation, more frequent and intense natural disasters
and the negative impact on nature resulting from human activity, and recognizing the need to strengthen scientific
knowledge on the effects of human activities on ecosystems, with the aim of promoting and ensuring an equitable,
balanced and sustainable relationship with the Earth,
Recognizing the uneven availability of basic statistical data under the three dimensions of sustainable
development and the need to improve their quality and quantity,
Reaffirming that fundamental changes in the way societies produce and consume are indispensable for achieving
global sustainable development and that all countries should promote sustainable consumption and production
patterns, with the developed countries taking the lead and with all countries benefiting from the process, taking into
account the Rio principles,
Noting that in recent years there have been many initiatives on sustainable development governance, including
policy documents on living well in harmony with nature,
Noting also the adoption and the opening for signature, at United Nations Headquarters, of the Regional
Agreement on Access to Information, Public Participation and Justice in Environmental Matters in Latin America and
the Caribbean, known as the Escazú Agreement, the first binding agreement of its kind, and encouraging its early
entry into force as a contribution to sustainable development,
Recognizing that many ancient civilizations, indigenous peoples and indigenous cultures have a rich history of
understanding the symbiotic connection between human beings and nature that fosters a mutually beneficial
relationship,
Recognizing also that the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous peoples and local
communities can support social well-being and sustainable livelihoods and therefore contribute to global efforts and
initiatives such as the Sustainable Development Goals,
Noting that some countries are discussing the possibility of considering a declaration on the protection of nature,
based on their legislation, policy and educational perspectives,
Noting also that, in a number of countries, both formal and informal educational activities on the rights of Nature
or Mother Earth have arisen in the professional and public spheres in the context of the promotion of sustainable
development, and encouraging a holistic approach to education and public awareness for sustainable development in
its three dimensions,
Recognizing the work undertaken by civil society, academia, scientists, local communities and indigenous
peoples with regard to signalling the precariousness of life on Earth, as well as their efforts, along with those of
Governments and private sector organizations, to devise more sustainable models and methods for production and
consumption,
Noting the work of the experts of the Harmony with Nature Knowledge Network, who are collaborating on
important activities in order to support the United Nations with the goal of ensuring that people everywhere have the
relevant information and awareness for sustainable development and lifestyles in harmony with nature, as set out in
target 12.8 of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Considering that sustainable development is a holistic concept that requires the strengthening of interdisciplinary
linkages in the different branches of knowledge,
583

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on Harmony with Nature;375

2. Invites Member States to consider existing studies and, as appropriate, the findings and recommendations
of the reports of the Secretary-General on Harmony with Nature,376 of the experts’ summary report of the first virtual
dialogue of the General Assembly on Harmony with Nature, addressing Earth jurisprudence,377 and of the interactive
dialogues of the Assembly on Harmony with Nature in the promotion of the balanced integration of the economic,
social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development through harmony with nature;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly to convene, at the seventy-fourth session of the Assembly,
an interactive dialogue, to be held at the plenary meetings to be convened during the commemoration of International
Mother Earth Day on 22 April 2020, with the participation of Member States, the United Nations system, independent
experts and other relevant stakeholders, to discuss and compare regional, national and local initiatives over the past
decade, including actions and transformations in law, policy and education on Earth jurisprudence, where applicable,
as well as to discuss the relationship between harmony with nature and the protection of biological diversity, and to
inspire citizens and societies to reconsider how they interact with the natural world in the context of sustainable
development;
4. Encourages the experts of the Harmony with Nature Knowledge Network to carry out a study of the
evolution over the past decade of regional, local and national initiatives on the protection of Mother Earth, as
applicable, to be considered by the Secretary-General in his report on the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Decides to continue to observe International Mother Earth Day annually on 22 April, requests the
Secretary-General to provide continuing support, and encourages Member States to observe the International Day at
the national level;
6. Takes note with appreciation of the agreement between the Government of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat,378 invites Member States to contribute
to the earmarked activities related to Harmony with Nature under the trust fund of the high-level political forum on
sustainable development, aiming, inter alia, at the participation of independent experts in the interactive dialogues of
the General Assembly on Harmony with Nature, and invites relevant stakeholders to contribute to the earmarked
activities related to Harmony with Nature;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to use the website on Harmony with Nature, managed by the
Division for Sustainable Development Goals of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, to gather information
and contributions on ideas and activities to promote a holistic approach to sustainable development in harmony with
nature and to advance the integration of interdisciplinary scientific work, including success stories on the use of
traditional knowledge and on existing national legislation;
8. Calls for holistic and integrated approaches to sustainable development, in its three dimensions, that will
guide humanity to live in harmony with nature and lead to efforts to restore the health and integrity of the Earth’s
ecosystems;
9.

Invites States, as appropriate:

(a) To further build up a knowledge network in order to advance a holistic conceptualization of sustainable
development in its three dimensions to identify different approaches that reflect the drivers and values of and actions
aimed at living in harmony with nature, relying on current scientific information to achieve sustainable development,
and to facilitate support for and recognition of the fundamental interconnections between humankind and nature;

_______________
A/74/236.
A/65/314, A/66/302, A/67/317, A/68/325, A/68/325/Corr.1, A/69/322, A/70/268, A/72/175, A/73/221 and A/74/236.
377
See A/71/266.
378
Available at www.harmonywithnatureun.org/trustFund.
375
376

584

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(b) To promote harmony with nature, exemplified by indigenous peoples, among others, to learn from their
cultures the protection of nature, and to support and promote efforts being made at the local, national, regional and
global levels, taking into account, inter alia, the best practices and advances made in the establishment of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples Platform;
10. Recognizes that protecting and conserving ecosystems and avoiding harmful practices against animals,
plants, microorganisms and non-living environments contributes to the coexistence of humankind in harmony with
nature, and invites the Secretary-General to address these issues in his report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
11. Encourages all countries to develop and strengthen the quality and quantity of basic national statistical
data on the three dimensions of sustainable development, and invites the international community and the pertinent
bodies of the United Nations system to support the efforts of developing countries by providing capacity-building and
technical assistance;
12. Recognizes the need for broader and multidimensional measures of sustainable development, to
complement gross domestic product in order to better inform policy decisions, and in this regard notes the ongoing
work of the Statistical Commission on a work programme to develop broader measures of progress and to conduct a
technical review of existing efforts in this area;379
13. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth
session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Harmony with Nature”.
RESOLUTION 74/225
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.10, para. 8)380

74/225. Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/7 of 16 October 1998, 54/215 of 22 December 1999, 55/205 of 20 December 2000,
56/200 of 21 December 2001, 58/210 of 23 December 2003, 60/199 of 22 December 2005, 62/197 of 19 December
2007, 64/206 of 21 December 2009, 66/206 of 22 December 2011, 69/225 of 19 December 2014, 70/201 of
22 December 2015, 71/233 of 21 December 2016, 72/224 of 20 December 2017 and 73/236 of 20 December 2018,
as well as its resolutions 65/151 of 20 December 2010 on the International Year of Sustainable Energy for All and
67/215 of 21 December 2012, in which it decided to declare 2014–2024 the United Nations Decade of Sustainable
Energy for All,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,

_______________
379
380

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 4 (E/2013/24), chap. I, sect. C, decision 44/114.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

585

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement381 and its early entry into force, and encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change382 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Welcoming the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on 23 September, and taking
note of the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit,
Highlighting the synergies between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement,
Expressing concern that, at current rates of progress, none of the global energy targets of the Sustainable
Development Goals will be achieved by 2030,
Recalling its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, by which it adopted the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, the 2005 World Summit Outcome383 and the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,384
Reaffirming the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development385 and Agenda 21386 and the principles set
out therein, and recalling the recommendations and conclusions contained in the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)387 and the outcome documents of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,388 the third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, entitled “SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway”,389 the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, entitled “Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024”,390 and the Fourth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, entitled “Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020”,391
Reaffirming also the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,392 which underlines, inter
alia, the importance of energy for cities,
Reaffirming further that each country must take primary responsibility for its own development and that the role
of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized in the achievement of sustainable
development, and recognizing the need for the creation of an enabling environment at all levels and across all sectors
for the achievement of sustainable development,

_______________
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
383
Resolution 60/1.
384
Resolution 65/1.
385
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
386
Ibid., annex II.
387
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
388
Resolution 66/288, annex.
389
Resolution 69/15, annex.
390
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
391
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
392
Resolution 71/256, annex.
381
382

586

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming the sovereign rights of countries over their energy resources and their right to define appropriate
policies for the production and use of energy, recognizing that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development shall
be implemented for the full benefit of all, for today’s generation and for future generations,
Emphasizing that universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all is an integral
part of poverty eradication and the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and that the
increased use and promotion of new and renewable energy, including in off-grid and decentralized systems, and
energy efficiency could make a significant contribution in that regard,
Deeply concerned that nearly 3 billion people in developing countries, especially in rural areas, rely on
traditional biomass, coal and kerosene for cooking and heating, with disproportionate health and workload impacts
on women, children and people in vulnerable situations, including an estimated 4 million premature deaths annually,
that, while the global population without access to electricity fell below 1 billion, close to 840 million people are still
without access to electricity, that reliability and affordability remain challenges in many countries, even as the number
of household connections increases, that Africa accounts for more than half of both access figures and that, even when
energy services are available, millions of poor people are unable to pay for them,
Noting with concern that energy represents less than 1 per cent of overall United Nations expenditure on the
Sustainable Development Goals, despite its critical importance also in achieving other goals,
Emphasizing the critical socioeconomic benefits of affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy and the
need to reframe the understanding of energy from a technical unit to a requirement for basic social services, including
health care, economic development and poverty eradication,
Highlighting the importance of the empowerment of developing countries to achieve universal access through
the rapid expansion of affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy worldwide,
Highlighting also the significant efforts made in developing countries that contributed to an increase in the
global electrification rate to 89 per cent in 2017, and stressing the need to further close the electrification gap in many
difficult-to-reach populations, in particular in sub-Saharan Africa,
Recognizing that each country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development and that
this will include the mobilization of financial resources, as well as capacity-building and the transfer of
environmentally sound technologies to developing countries on mutually agreed terms, including concessional and
preferential terms,
Welcoming the increase in the share of renewable energy as a part of total final energy consumption in 2016 at
the fastest rate since 2012 and the significant reductions in the cost of renewable energy, the sector’s net positive job
contributions and the rapid expansion of renewable energy capacity additions, which are now greater than those of
other resources in the electricity sector, and noting that the levelized cost of solar and wind energy in many regions of
the world is fully competitive with traditional energy resources,
Noting with appreciation the work of the International Renewable Energy Agency, which facilitates the
widespread and increased adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy,
Taking note of the work of multi-stakeholder partnerships, including Sustainable Energy for All, which has given
strong momentum to the promotion of renewable energy and energy efficiency, the initiatives of the Global Climate
Action Agenda, the Small Island Developing States Lighthouses Initiative, SIDS DOCK, the International Partnership
for Energy Efficiency Cooperation and others that can contribute to reaching the objective of ensuring access to
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all,
Noting with appreciation that the transformation of the world’s energy systems is being accelerated by advances
in technology, rapid declines in the cost of renewable energy, the deployment of least-cost decentralized solutions,
policy support, new business models and the sharing of best practices, welcoming the establishment of the
International Solar Alliance as an international organization, and noting the continuing work of the International
Renewable Energy Agency,
Stressing the need for a coherent, integrated approach to energy issues and the promotion of synergies across
the global energy agenda, with a focus on eradicating poverty and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
587

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
Noting that, in the transition to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all, and to achieve
universal access by 2030, the substitution of inefficient fuels with liquid petroleum gas or other sustainable household
fuels, while recognizing the need to increase the share of renewable energy, could be appropriate in urban areas to
significantly reduce negative health impacts if used as a cooking source, and contribute to decreased greenhouse gas
emissions and to achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy for all;393
2. Also takes note of the role and activities of the International Renewable Energy Agency, encouraging the
Agency to continue to support its members in the achievement of their renewable energy objectives, as well as the
contributions of the International Solar Alliance, and encouraging its work to collectively address key common
challenges to the scaling-up of solar energy, as well as the contributions of other international and regional
organizations and forums to the global energy agenda;
3. Welcomes the significant progress recorded with regard to several targets of Sustainable Development
Goal 7;394
4. Strongly encourages Governments and other relevant stakeholders to take actions to achieve universal
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy, increase the global share of new and renewable energy,
improve the inclusion of developing countries in energy sector cooperation, where relevant, and increase the rate of
improvement in energy efficiency for a clean, low-emission, low-carbon climate-resilient, safe, efficient, modern,
affordable and sustainable energy system, given the systemic sustainable development benefits, while taking into
consideration the diversity of national situations, priorities, policies, specific needs and challenges and capacities of
developing countries, including their energy mix and energy systems;
5. Calls for ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all, as such services
are an integral part of poverty eradication measures, human dignity, quality of life, economic opportunity, the
combating of inequality, the promotion of health and the prevention of morbidity and mortality, access to education,
safe drinking water and sanitation, food security, disaster risk reduction and resilience, climate change mitigation and
adaptation, environmental impact reduction, social inclusion and gender equality, including for persons affected by
humanitarian emergencies;
6. Underscores the importance of access to cleaner and more efficient and sustainable cooking and heating
methods, welcomes ongoing efforts, and in this regard calls for the promotion of an enabling environment at the
national and international levels for the increased usage of sustainable, cleaner and more efficient cooking and heating
methods in all countries, in particular developing countries;
7. Encourages Governments, the United Nations system and relevant stakeholders to leverage the costcompetitiveness of renewable energy, especially in off-grid areas, in order to achieve universal energy access, such as
by establishing policy frameworks for metering and payment systems, requiring cost comparisons between grid
extension and off-grid solutions, facilitating investment by domestic and foreign banks and educating students,
communities, investors and entrepreneurs on renewable energy, energy efficiency and conservation, among other
activities, where feasible and appropriate;
8. Recognizes the key role that natural gas currently plays in many countries and its potential to expand
significantly over the coming decades to meet demand in some countries as well as in new sectors, such as the
transportation sector, supporting transitions towards lower-emission energy systems, and calls upon Governments to
enhance energy security through the sharing of best practices and knowledge for the security of gas supply and
demand;

_______________
393
394

588

A/74/265.
See resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

9. Supports energy access in accordance with the national needs of developing countries, in particular the
least developed countries and small island developing States, to tackle their energy access challenges by identifying
the specific needs of each country by mobilizing technical and financial assistance and tools to deploy affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy solutions to tackle the energy access deficit;
10. Calls upon Governments to expand the use of renewable energy beyond the power sector, taking into
account national priorities and constraints, to industry, heating and cooling, construction and infrastructure and, in
particular, the transport sector, including through sustainable sector coupling and sustainable and modern bioenergy,
in the context of sustainable development, including climate change, and calls for supportive policy initiatives and
investments at the national and international levels;
11. Recognizes that current global progress in improving energy efficiency falls well below the pace necessary
to double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency by 2030, and encourages, in accordance with national
laws and regulations, the promotion of widespread energy efficiency initiatives in all economic sectors, the adoption
and updating of building performance codes and standards, energy efficiency labelling, the promotion of energy
management systems, the retrofitting of existing buildings and public procurement policies on energy, among other
modalities, as appropriate, as well as the prioritization of smart grid systems, district energy systems and community
energy plans to improve synergies among clean and effective use of traditional resources, renewable energy and
energy efficiency, which aim to promote the interconnectivity of clean and renewable energy infrastructure and
improve energy efficiency;
12. Calls for strengthened cooperation at the regional level to promote innovation and facilitate financing,
support regional cross-border power grid connectivity, as appropriate, to advance economic integration and
sustainable development and share best practices that are responsive to regional needs with regard to Sustainable
Development Goal 7 and its interlinkages with the other Sustainable Development Goals, and in this regard
encourages Governments to reinforce their energy interconnections, connecting regional energy markets and
increasing energy security at the global level;
13. Calls upon Governments, as well as relevant international and regional organizations and other relevant
stakeholders, to combine, as appropriate, the increased use of new and renewable energy resources, more efficient use
of energy, greater reliance on advanced energy technologies, including cleaner fossil fuel technologies, and the
sustainable use of traditional energy resources;
14. Encourages Governments, relevant international and regional organizations and other relevant
stakeholders to promote investments in developing sustainable, reliable, modern, inclusive and equitable energy
systems, including, inter alia, by strengthening energy systems through cross-border grid connections, as appropriate,
and to consider incorporating decentralized renewable energy solutions in energy planning, as appropriate, and
recognizes that energy transition will take different paths in different parts of the world;
15. Also encourages Governments, relevant international organizations and other relevant stakeholders to use
and promote an integrated resource planning and management approach in their energy strategies that considers
energy choices in the context of linked sectors, inter alia, water, waste, air quality and food, taking into account national
circumstances;
16. Recognizes that sustainable energy access and its deployment can be both improved and accelerated by
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, and calls upon Governments, the United Nations
development system and other stakeholders to increase educational and capacity-building programmes for women in
the sector, further advance equal pay and leadership and other opportunities for women in the energy sector, promote
women’s full, equal and effective participation and leadership in the design and implementation of energy policies
and programmes, mainstream a gender perspective in such policies and programmes and ensure women’s full and
equal access to and use of sustainable energy to enhance their economic and social empowerment, including
employment and other income-generating opportunities;
17. Encourages Governments, with the support of relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, to accelerate the
transition towards sustainable economies, according to national policies and plans, through mitigation and adaptation
strategies that improve energy efficiency and create more and better employment opportunities for all, including
young people, in wage and self-employment;
18. Emphasizes the potential of sustainable energy use to contribute to climate change mitigation and
adaptation, recognizes that increasing the deployment of renewable energy and enhancing energy efficiency are
589

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

components of many countries’ nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement adopted under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,381 and urges effective and timely support for the full
implementation of all those contributions, as applicable;
19. Notes that the impacts of climate change can also threaten access to and the supply of energy, and also
notes the importance of increasing the resilience of the energy sector to climate change, which can be facilitated by
the expansion of renewable energy;
20. Emphasizes, while noting progress, that the large-scale deployment of technologies has been insufficient
and uneven and that support is required to realize their potential, along with appropriate policy initiatives and
investments at the national and international levels, with Governments working in collaboration with relevant
stakeholders, including the private sector;
21. Also emphasizes the value of regional and interregional approaches, which can, among other advantages,
enhance the deployment of renewable and sustainable energy by facilitating the sharing of experiences, reduce
transaction costs, leverage economies of scale, enable greater cross-border interconnectivity to promote energy system
reliability and resilience and augment domestic capacity-building, and recognizes the work of organizations and
initiatives in that regard;
22. Invites all relevant funding institutions and bilateral and multilateral donors, as well as regional funding
institutions, the private sector and non‑governmental organizations, to continue ongoing efforts and take further action
to provide financial resources, as appropriate, to support efforts aimed at ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy in developing countries and countries with economies in transition, including
low-emission, low-carbon and climate-resilient new and renewable resources of energy of demonstrated viability,
especially focused on energy access and economic development in both urban and rural areas, while noting the
potential catalytic effect of concessional and other finance and taking fully into account the development structure of
energy-based economies of developing countries;
23. Encourages the development, dissemination, diffusion and transfer of environmentally sound
technologies to developing countries on mutually agreed terms, including concessional and preferential terms, and
highlights the importance of integrating sustainable energy in the Technology Facilitation Mechanism;
24. Stresses the importance of strategies and contributions by Governments and relevant stakeholders to multistakeholder partnerships in ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all, and
encourages coordination and collaboration between the United Nations and relevant multi‑stakeholder partnerships,
such as Sustainable Energy for All;
25. Recognizes the catalytic effect of the sharing of knowledge and experience, capacity-building and
technical assistance on sustainable energy deployment, and encourages existing and new efforts to enable
Governments of developing countries and relevant stakeholders to plan, finance, implement and monitor sustainable
energy projects to further strengthen their national institutions and capacities;
26. Encourages the development of viable market-oriented strategies that could result in further rapid
reductions in the cost of new and renewable resources of energy and could further increase the competitiveness of
those technologies, including through the adoption, as appropriate, of public policies for research, development and
market deployment, including rationalizing inefficient fossil fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption by
removing market distortions, in accordance with national circumstances;
27. Emphasizes the value of education, academia, technology and entrepreneurship in developing solutions
to face energy challenges and achieve energy sustainability, as well as the importance of investing in research and
development in sustainable energy technologies, and also emphasizes in this context the urgent need to enhance
international cooperation to facilitate access to clean energy research and technology, including renewable energy,
energy efficiency and advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel technologies, and improved infrastructures for supplying
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all;
28. Calls for national efforts to promote access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
and strengthened local engagement to complement current approaches, and reaffirms the commitment to supporting
subnational and local efforts, taking advantage of their direct control, where applicable, of local infrastructure and
codes to foster uptake in end-use sectors, such as residential, commercial and industrial buildings, industry, agriculture,
transport, waste and sanitation;
590

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

29. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue efforts to promote the provision of stable, adequate and
predictable financial resources and technical assistance for sustainable energy and to enhance the effectiveness,
coordination and full utilization of appropriate international funds for the effective implementation of national and
regional high-priority projects for ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all, and
welcomes the convening of the high-level dialogue on the midpoint review of the United Nations Decade of
Sustainable Energy for All (2014–2024), held on 23 and 24 May 2019;
30. Invites the Secretary-General, with the support of the relevant United Nations system entities, to convene
a high-level dialogue in 2021, financed through voluntary contributions, to promote the implementation of the energyrelated goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development394 in support of the implementation of the
United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All, including the global plan of action for the Decade, as described
in the report of the Secretary-General, and the high-level political forum on sustainable development;
31. Encourages UN-Energy to support coherence and coordination among the energy-related activities of the
entities of the United Nations development system, within their respective mandates, in line with the implementation
of resolutions 71/243 of 21 December 2016, 72/279 of 31 May 2018 and Economic and Social Council resolution
2019/15 of 8 July 2019, in order to assist countries, in particular at the country level, upon request by their
Governments, by explicitly leveraging partnerships with other international organizations, donors and relevant
stakeholders, including in their efforts to achieve universal access to sustainable energy and to accelerate its
deployment;
32. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
33. Calls upon the Secretary-General to promote renewable energy, energy efficiency and related sustainable
practices in all United Nations facilities and operations around the world, where appropriate and economically viable;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, including activities carried out to mark the United Nations Decade of
Sustainable Energy for All, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item
entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all”.
RESOLUTION 74/226
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 177 to 2, with 1 abstention,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/381/Add.11, para. 10)395
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
395

591

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia

74/226. Combating sand and dust storms
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 70/195 of 22 December 2015, 71/219 of 21 December 2016, 72/225 of 20 December
2017 and 73/237 of 20 December 2018 on combating sand and dust storms,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement396 and its early entry into force, and encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change397 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the Paris Agreement, and noting with concern the findings contained in the special
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C,
Recalling United Nations Environment Assembly resolutions 1/7 of 27 June 2014 on strengthening the role of
the United Nations Environment Programme in promoting air quality,398 2/21 of 27 May 2016 on sand and dust
storms399 and 4/10 of 15 March 2019 on innovation on biodiversity and land degradation,400
Acknowledging the work done by the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, towards mitigating
sand and dust storm issues at source, and acknowledging also the continuing support of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for countries affected by sand and dust storms through the promotion of
sustainable land use management, agroforestry, shelter belts, afforestation/reforestation and land restoration
programmes, which all contribute to sand and dust storm source mitigation,
Recalling the outcomes of the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification, held in New Delhi, India, from 2 to 13 September 2019, including decision
25/COP.14 of 12 September 2019 entitled “Follow-up on policy frameworks and thematic issues: sand and dust
storms”,401

_______________
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
398
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/69/25), annex.
399
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/71/25), annex.
400
UNEP/EA.4/Res.10.
401
See ICCD/COP(14)/23/Add.1.
396
397

592

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the adoption, by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific at its seventy-second
session, of resolution 72/7 of 19 May 2016 on regional cooperation to combat sand and dust storms in Asia and the
Pacific,
Noting also the endorsement by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific at its seventyfifth session of the recommendation by the Governing Council of the Asian and Pacific Centre for the Development
of Disaster Information Management to establish a subregional cooperation mechanism for slow-onset hazards with
a focus on sand and dust storms in South-West and Central Asia,
Recalling its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, in which it endorsed the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,
Recalling also its resolutions 71/229 of 21 December 2016, 72/220 of 20 December 2017 and 73/233 of
20 December 2018 on the implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,402
Taking note of the Regional Programme to Combat Sand and Dust Storms of the United Nations Environment
Programme, and taking note also of other initiatives, including the ministerial meeting on sand and dust storms held
in Nairobi on 21 February 2013 on the margins of the twenty-seventh session of the Governing Council/Global
Ministerial Environment Forum of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, adopted
at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction and endorsed by the General Assembly in
its resolution 69/283 of 3 June 2015, and recognizing that one of the priorities for action of the Framework is an
understanding of disaster risk for prevention and mitigation and for the development and implementation of
appropriate preparedness and effective response to disasters, which continue to undermine efforts to achieve
sustainable development,
Acknowledging that, based on the notion of hazards as defined in the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015:
Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters,403 addressing multidimensional hazards, including
those posed by sand and dust storms, contributes towards the achievement of the goals, targets and priorities for action
set out in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,
Stressing the need for cooperation at the global and regional levels with a view to managing and mitigating the
effects of sand and dust storms through the enhancement of early warning systems and the sharing of climate and
weather information to forecast sand and dust storms, and affirming that resilient action to combat sand and dust
storms requires a better understanding of the severe multidimensional impacts of sand and dust storms, including the
deterioration of the health, well-being and livelihood of people, increased desertification and land degradation,
deforestation, loss of biodiversity and land productivity, and their impact on sustainable economic growth,
Emphasizing the relevance of the efforts and cooperation of Member States at the regional and international
levels to control and reduce the negative impacts of sand and dust storms on human settlements in vulnerable regions,
taking note of the initiative of the Islamic Republic of Iran in hosting a regional meeting of environment ministers in
Tehran on 29 September 2010, welcoming the holding of other meetings with the active participation of all countries,
and taking note with appreciation of other ongoing initiatives by various countries to combat sand and dust storms,
especially at the regional level,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;404

2. Recognizes that sand and dust storms and the unsustainable land management practices, among other
factors, that can cause or exacerbate these phenomena, including climate change, pose a serious challenge to the
sustainable development of affected countries and regions, also recognizes that, in the past few years, sand and dust
storms have inflicted substantial economic, social and environmental damage on the inhabitants of the world’s arid,

_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
A/CONF.206/6 and A/CONF.206/6/Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2.
404
A/74/263.
402
403

593

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

semi-arid and dry subhumid areas, especially in Africa and Asia, and underscores the need to treat them and to
promptly take measures to address those challenges;
3. Recalls the convening of a high-level interactive dialogue on sand and dust storms, held at Headquarters
in New York on 16 July 2018, bringing together Member States, observer States and observers of the General
Assembly, United Nations system entities, regional commissions and other stakeholders to discuss action-oriented
recommendations and address the challenges faced by the affected countries, including ways to improve policy
coordination at the global level to tackle those challenges in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals, during
which the continuing need to confront the challenges presented by sand and dust storms was highlighted;
4. Welcomes the creation of the United Nations Coalition on Combating Sand and Dust Storms, which aims,
inter alia, to promote and coordinate a collaborative United Nations system response to the growing issue of sand and
dust storms on a local, regional and global scale, ensuring that unified and coherent action is taken, and to facilitate
the capacity-building of Member States, raise their awareness and enhance their preparedness and response to sand
and dust storms in critical regions;
5. Recognizes the importance of new and innovative technologies and best practices in combating sand and
dust storms, as well as their sharing and transfer on mutually agreed terms;
6. Encourages regional, subregional and interregional organizations and processes to continue to share best
practices, experiences and technical expertise in combating sand and dust storms to address the root causes and
impacts of sand and dust storms, including through improved implementation of sustainable land management
practices, and to promote regional cooperation in this matter to reduce the risks and impact of future sand and dust
storms and to provide affected countries with capacity-building and technical support from the relevant United
Nations organizations, such as the World Meteorological Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme
and the World Health Organization, within their respective mandates, to this end;
7. Invites all affected Member States as well as relevant entities of the United Nations development system,
regional organizations and other relevant stakeholders to endeavour to meet the objectives set out in the present
resolution;
8. Reaffirms that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time and, among other factors, is a
serious challenge to the sustainable development of all countries, including those affected by sand and dust storms,
and emphasizes that, among other factors, climate change is an important potential contributor to future wind erosion
and the risk of sand and dust storms, especially the occurrence of more extreme wind events and the movement
towards drier climates, although reverse effects are possible;
9. Recognizes that sand and dust storms cause numerous human health problems in different regions around
the world, especially in arid and semi-arid regions, and that there is a need to reinforce protective strategies to reduce
the negative impacts of sand and dust storms on human health, invites the World Health Organization, with the
cooperation of other relevant United Nations system entities, as appropriate, to support affected countries in combating
health problems caused by sand and dust storms, within their respective mandates, welcomes the formation of a
working group on sand and dust storms to discuss emerging issues and share information under the Global Platform
on Air Quality and Health of the World Health Organization, and also welcomes the finalization of a report on the
health effects of sand and dust storms as part of the current update to the World Health Organization air quality
guidelines, and the development of standard operating procedures to assess and address the short-term health effects
of desert dust by the World Health Organization, in collaboration with experts from the World Meteorological
Organization;
10. Emphasizes that sand and dust storm issues will constitute important components of the global coalition
on health, environment and climate change launched in May 2018 by the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Environment Programme and the World Meteorological Organization to improve coordination and reduce
the 12.6 million deaths each year that are attributed to environmental risks, especially air pollution;
11. Commends the United Nations Environment Assembly on its commitment to addressing sand and dust
storms, and in this regard notes Environment Assembly resolution 2/21 of 27 May 2016 on sand and dust storms,
adopted during its second session,399 and resolution 4/10 of 15 March 2019 on innovation on biodiversity and land
degradation, adopted during its fourth session;400

594

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

12. Welcomes the convening of the fourth session of the United Nations Environment Assembly in Nairobi
from 11 to 15 March 2019, under the theme “Innovative solutions for environmental challenges and sustainable
consumption and production”, and also welcomes its ministerial declaration;405
13. Commends the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, on its efforts to develop both a global
base map of sand and dust storm sources, in collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme and the
World Meteorological Organization, and a sand and dust storms compendium, in collaboration with the SciencePolicy Interface of the Convention and other relevant United Nations system entities, as a comprehensive collation of
material designed to provide information and guidance on how to assess and address the risks posed by sand and dust
storms and plan actions to combat their recurrence and impacts;
14. Welcomes the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification, held in New Delhi, India, from 2 to 13 September 2019, also welcomes the New Delhi
Declaration and other relevant outcomes adopted by the parties during the Conference, namely decision 25/COP.14,
and reaffirms the importance of addressing sand and dust storms under the Convention;402
15. Encourages the relevant entities of the United Nations, including the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Meteorological
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs of the Secretariat, within their respective mandates and resources, and donors to continue to provide
capacity-building and technical assistance for combating sand and dust storms and to continue to support the
implementation of the national, regional and global action plans of the affected countries;
16. Acknowledges the global assessment of sand and dust storms prepared by the United Nations Environment
Programme in collaboration with other relevant United Nations system entities, including the World Meteorological
Organization and the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, which sets out proposals
for consolidated and coordinated technical and policy options for responding to sand and dust storms;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth
session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Combating sand and dust storms”.
RESOLUTION 74/227
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/381/Add.12, para. 7)406

74/227. Sustainable mountain development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/189 of 20 December 2000, 57/245 of 20 December 2002, 58/216 of 23 December
2003 and 59/238 of 22 December 2004, and its resolutions 60/198 of 22 December 2005, 62/196 of 19 December
2007, 64/205 of 21 December 2009, 66/205 of 22 December 2011, 68/217 of 20 December 2013 and 71/234 of
21 December 2016, entitled “Sustainable mountain development”,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and

_______________
UNEP/EA.4/HLS.1.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, North
Macedonia, Norway, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uzbekistan.
405
406

595

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, inter alia, recognizes that economic and social
development depends on the sustainable management of our planet’s natural resources and confirms the determination
of the international community to conserve and sustainably use oceans and seas and freshwater resources, as well as
forests, mountains and drylands, and to protect biodiversity, ecosystems and wildlife,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming also the Paris Agreement407 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change408 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement, and
noting with concern the findings contained in the special reports entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C and The Ocean
and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
Noting with concern the adverse impacts of climate change on high mountains, including the retreat of mountain
glaciers, permafrost thaw, mass loss of ice sheets and the decline in the depth, extent and duration of snow cover,
Welcoming the holding of the 2019 Climate Action Summit, convened by the Secretary-General, on
23 September, taking note of the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit, and taking
note also of the Youth Climate Summit, held on 21 September,
Recalling that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, inter alia, recognizes that
developing countries with fragile mountainous ecosystems are among the countries that are particularly vulnerable to
the adverse effects of climate change,
Recalling also the Convention on Biological Diversity,409 the Aichi Biodiversity Targets contained in its
Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020410 and its programme of work on mountain biodiversity,
Noting with concern the findings of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services, stressing the urgent need to address the unprecedented global decline in biodiversity, and in this
regard looking forward to the 2020 summit on biodiversity and the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties
to the Convention on Biological Diversity, which is to adopt a post-2020 global biodiversity framework,
Recalling the United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017–2030411 and the United Nations Decade on
Ecosystem Restoration (2021–2030),412 and noting with appreciation the Bonn Challenge,
Recognizing the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,
adopted at the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction,413 the latter of which, inter alia,

_______________
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
409
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
410
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/2, annex.
411
See resolution 71/285.
412
See resolution 73/284.
413
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
407
408

596

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

identifies a need for focused action in investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience, and in this regard considers it
important to promote, at the national and local levels, the mainstreaming of disaster risk assessment, mapping and
management into rural development planning and management of, inter alia, mountains, including through the
identification of areas that are safe for human settlement, and at the same time preserving ecosystem functions that
help to reduce risks,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,414 Agenda 21,415 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)416 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets of the Strategic Plan
for Biodiversity 2011–2020,
Recognizing that the benefits derived from mountain regions are essential for sustainable development and that
mountain ecosystems play a crucial role in providing water and other essential resources and services to a large portion
of the world’s population,
Recognizing also that mountain ecosystems are highly vulnerable to the increasing adverse impacts of climate
change, extreme weather events, deforestation, forest fires and forest degradation, land-use change, land degradation
and natural disasters, from which they recover slowly, and that mountain glaciers around the world are retreating and
getting thinner, with increasing impacts on the environment, sustainable livelihoods and human well-being,
Acknowledging that, despite the progress that has been made in promoting the sustainable development of
mountain regions and the conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, the prevalence of
poverty, food insecurity, social exclusion, environmental degradation and exposure to the risk of disasters is still
increasing, particularly in developing countries, and access to safe and affordable drinking water and basic sanitation
as well as to sustainable modern energy services continues to be limited,
Reaffirming that gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls will make a crucial contribution
to progress across all the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, and that the achievement of full human potential
and sustainable development is not possible if one half of humanity continues to be denied full human rights and
opportunities,
Noting with deep concern that about 340 million people in rural mountain areas in developing
countries – 55 per cent of the total rural mountain population – were considered vulnerable to food insecurity in
2017, a steep increase compared with 2012, and in this regard acknowledging the need to prioritize the special and
urgent attention needed by mountain areas, including by focusing on the specific challenges they face and the
opportunities they provide,
Encouraging Member States to advance innovative pathways to achieve sustainable consumption and
production in line with United Nations Environment Assembly resolution 4/1 of 15 March 2019,417
Noting the collaborative efforts of the International Partnership for Sustainable Development in Mountain
Regions (Mountain Partnership), launched during the World Summit on Sustainable Development as a multistakeholder approach benefiting from the committed support of 381 members, including 60 Governments,
16 intergovernmental organizations, 297 major groups and 8 subnational authorities, and engaged in the promotion
of sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and environmental – in mountain regions,
Noting with appreciation the establishment of groups of friends aimed at the promotion of sustainable
mountain development, such as the Mountain Focus Group, in 2001 and the Group of Friends of Mountainous
Countries, in 2019,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on sustainable mountain development;418

_______________
Resolution 66/288, annex.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
416
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
417
UNEP/EA.4/Res.1.
418
A/74/209.
414
415

597

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

2. Encourages States to adopt a long-term vision and holistic approaches, including through incorporating
mountain-specific policies into national sustainable development strategies, increase efforts to end poverty in all its
forms and dimensions, address food insecurity and malnutrition, promote the conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity, traditional crops and diets, and fight against social exclusion, environmental degradation and disaster risk
in mountain areas, taking into account that an integrated landscape approach which addresses natural resources
management, including watershed and sustainable forest management as well as climate change resilience through
multi-stakeholder approaches, can lead to the sustainable development of highland areas, the improvement of the
livelihood of the local mountain communities and the sustainable use of mountain resources;
3. Encourages Member States, and invites international organizations and other relevant stakeholders, with
respect to sustainable mountain development, to reduce and reverse biodiversity loss and the degradation of land and
soil, contributing to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals;
4. Takes note of the Mountain Partnership, the only United Nations voluntary alliance of partners dedicated
to improving the lives of people living in mountain areas and protecting mountain environments around the world,
and also takes note of the Mountain Partnership framework for action for implementing the 2030 Agenda for
mountains, as well as the work of the Mountain Partnership Products initiative;
5. Stresses the special vulnerability of people living in mountain environments, in particular local
communities and indigenous peoples, often with limited access to health, education and economic systems and
particularly at risk because of the negative impact of extreme natural phenomena, and invites States to strengthen
cooperative action, with the effective involvement and sharing of knowledge and experience of all relevant
stakeholders, including traditional knowledge of indigenous peoples living in mountain areas and knowledge of local
mountain communities and their cultures, by strengthening existing arrangements, agreements and centres of
excellence for sustainable mountain development, as well as exploring new arrangements and agreements, as
appropriate;
6. Also stresses the importance of innovative solutions for the diversification of livelihoods and income
enhancement opportunities for local mountain communities, and in this regard encourages the promotion of
innovative solutions and entrepreneurship within local mountain communities, as appropriate, to end poverty and
hunger;
7. Further stresses the importance of mountain family farming communities and indigenous peoples as one
of the custodians of natural and cultural heritage, and encourages Member States to support the activities related to
the United Nations Decade of Family Farming (2019–2028), in line with its global action plan, to promote national
policies, as appropriate, that support secure land tenure, provide access to resources, ensure gender equality and
women’s empowerment, empower people in vulnerable situations and to implement practical actions that can
safeguard decent work opportunities, particularly for youth, in rural areas;
8. Stresses that the traditions and knowledge of indigenous peoples living in mountain areas and the
knowledge of local mountain communities, particularly in the fields of agriculture, medicine and management of
natural resources, should be fully considered, respected and promoted in development policy, strategies and
programmes in mountain regions, and underlines the need to promote the full participation and involvement of local
mountain communities in decisions that affect them and to integrate indigenous and local knowledge, heritage and
values in all development initiatives, in consultation with and with the consent of the concerned indigenous peoples
and local mountain communities, as appropriate;
9. Recognizes the need to increase the adaptive capacity, resilience and sustainability of food and agricultural
production with regard to climate change, notes that sustainable production practices, agroforestry and the
conservation of agrobiodiversity in mountain areas ensure food security and nutrition and dietary diversity and quality,
generate income for smallholder farmers and aid conservation and restoration, addressing the particular vulnerabilities
of food production systems to the adverse impacts of climate change, and also notes that mountain farmers and
pastoralists play a key role in agroecology;
10. Also recognizes that urgent action is needed to reduce poverty in mountain areas, and in this regard
encourages Member States and all relevant stakeholders to take concrete and targeted measures to eradicate poverty
in mountain areas;
11. Notes that women are often the primary managers of mountain resources and the main actors in
agriculture, underlines the need for improved access to resources and productive assets, including land and economic
598

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and financial services, for women in mountain regions, as well as the need to strengthen the role of women in mountain
regions in decision-making processes that affect their communities, cultures and environments, and encourages
Governments and intergovernmental organizations to mainstream a gender perspective, including through data
disaggregated by sex, in mountain development activities, programmes and projects towards the achievement of
gender equality and women’s empowerment;
12. Recognizes that mountains provide sensitive indications of climate change through phenomena such as
modifications to biological diversity, the retreat of mountain glaciers, flash floods and changes in seasonal run-off,
which are having an impact on major sources of freshwater in the world, and stresses the need to undertake actions to
minimize the negative effects of these phenomena, promote adaptation measures and prevent the loss of biological
diversity;
13. Also recognizes that the mountain cryosphere has an impact on surrounding lowland areas, even far from
the mountains, and that widespread cryosphere changes affect physical, biological and human systems in the
mountains and surrounding lowlands, with impacts evident even in the ocean;
14. Encourages Member States to collect at the local, national and regional levels, as appropriate,
disaggregated scientific data on mountain areas through systematic monitoring, including of trends of progress and
change, based on relevant criteria, to support interdisciplinary research programmes and projects and to enhance an
integrated and inclusive approach to decision-making and planning, and in this regard notes that the Mountain Green
Cover Index is included in the global indicator framework for the Sustainable Development Goals and targets of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development419 as an indicator for target 15.4 of the Sustainable Development Goals,
and also notes the need to validate the related national data and improve its data accuracy and analysis at the country
level for the implementation of appropriate policies aimed at restoring and protecting mountain environments;
15. Encourages Member States and all relevant stakeholders to continue to increase public awareness,
including through the commemoration of International Mountain Day, on 11 December, established in its resolution
57/245, with respect to the economic benefits that mountains provide, for instance through ecosystem services or
sustainable tourism, not only to highland communities but also to a large portion of the world’s population living in
lowland areas;
16. Welcomes, in this regard, the contribution of sustainable tourism initiatives in mountain regions as a way
to enhance environmental protection and generate socioeconomic benefits for local communities and indigenous
peoples, including opportunities for productive employment, economic growth and the promotion of local culture and
products;
17. Expresses its deep concern at the number and scale of natural and man-made disasters and their increasing
impact in recent years, which have resulted in massive loss of life and long-term negative social, economic and
environmental consequences for societies throughout the world, and recognizes that disaster risk reduction requires a
broader and more people-centred preventive approach and an all-of-society engagement and partnership,
empowerment and inclusive, accessible and non-discriminatory participation, paying special attention to people
disproportionately affected by disasters, many of which are exacerbated by climate change, especially the poorest,
and also taking into account the vulnerability of people living in mountain environments, especially those in
developing countries;
18. Encourages States, as appropriate, to strengthen disaster risk governance, to invest in disaster risk
reduction for resilience and to develop and improve disaster risk strategies in mountain regions through increased
generation and use of climate and disaster risk information, improved risk communication and participation of
mountain communities, development of hazard risk maps and platforms, improvement of early warning systems and
application of the risk-based approach in all development planning, in order to cope with such extreme events as
rockfalls, avalanches, glacial lake outburst floods and landslides, which can be exacerbated by climate change and
deforestation, consistent with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030;420
19. Encourages, in this regard, the increased involvement of local authorities, as well as other relevant
stakeholders, in particular the rural population, indigenous peoples, civil society and the private sector, in the

_______________
419
420

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/283, annex II.

599

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

development and implementation of programmes, land-use planning and land tenure arrangements, and in other
relevant activities related to sustainable development in mountains;
20. Notes with concern that the access to services and infrastructure is lower in the highlands than in other
areas, and encourages Member States to improve basic infrastructure in mountain areas towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals;
21. Notes the importance of ensuring the conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity,
in order to enhance their capacity to provide benefits that are essential for human well-being, economic activity and
sustainable development, and of developing innovative means of implementation for their protection, in this regard
recognizes with appreciation the establishment of relevant funds, including the Mountain Partnership Secretariat
beneficiary fund, and the efforts made by relevant United Nations entities to promote the conservation of mountain
ecosystems, and encourages Member States and all relevant stakeholders to financially support it on a voluntary basis;
22. Encourages greater efforts by States, all relevant stakeholders and the international community towards
the conservation of mountain ecosystems and the enhancement of the well-being of their local populations, including
by promoting investment in infrastructure in mountain areas, such as transport and information and communications
technologies, and supporting education, extension and capacity-building programmes, especially among local
mountain communities and other relevant stakeholders, taking into account the extent of the current challenges that
they face and bearing in mind the increased economic, social and environmental costs that inaction might represent
for countries and societies;
23. Underlines the fact that action at the national level is a key factor in achieving progress in sustainable
mountain development, welcomes its steady increase in recent years with a multitude of events, activities and
initiatives, and invites the international community to support the efforts of developing countries to develop and
implement strategies and programmes, including, where required, enabling policies and laws for the sustainable
development of mountains, within the framework of national sustainable development plans, including by building
and strengthening institutional capacities, as appropriate;
24. Encourages the further undertaking of multi-stakeholder and transboundary initiatives at the national,
regional and global levels, where appropriate, such as those supported by all relevant international and regional
organizations, to enhance sustainable development in mountain regions, and notes in this regard the numerous
initiatives undertaken, including the fifth global meeting of the Mountain Partnership, held in Rome from 11 to
13 December 2017, the fourth World Mountain Forum, held in Bishkek from 23 to 26 October 2018 and the High
Mountain Summit, held in Geneva from 29 to 31 October 2019;
25. Encourages Member States and all relevant stakeholders to consider, as appropriate, mountain-related
issues in the processes of United Nations conventions and other relevant global forums, including the process related
to a post-2020 global biodiversity framework;
26. Encourages Member States to promote ecosystem-based adaptation, bearing in mind the guidelines
adopted by the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, in 2018,
and climate-smart wildlife conservation as tools for reducing impacts on communities and species, and welcomes the
efforts of partners such as the United Nations Environment Programme, the International Union for Conservation of
Nature and the Mountain Institute in promoting ecosystem-based adaptation in mountain regions;
27. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, to further
enhance their constructive efforts to strengthen inter‑agency collaboration to promote sustainable mountain
development;
28. Recognizes that mountain ranges are usually shared among several countries, and in this context
encourages transboundary cooperation approaches where the States concerned agree to the sustainable development
of mountain ranges and information-sharing in this regard;
29. Notes with appreciation, in this context, the Convention on the Protection of the Alps421 and the
Framework Convention on the Protection and Sustainable Development of the Carpathians, and the recent adoption
of the Protocol on Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development and the entry into force of the Protocol on

_______________
421

600

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1917, No. 32724.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Sustainable Transport, which promote constructive new approaches to integrated, sustainable mountain development
and provide a forum for dialogue among stakeholders, and notes other transboundary approaches and initiatives such
as the Andean Initiative, the Scientific Network for the Caucasus Mountain Region and the established Caucasus
Mountain Forum, the African Mountains Regional Forum, the European Union Strategy for the Alpine Region and
the Zurich process, the Hindu Kush Himalayan Partnership for Sustainable Mountain Development, the Hindu Kush
Himalayan Monitoring and Assessment Programme, the International Snow Leopard and Ecosystem Forum of 2017,
the third World Nomad Games, in 2018 and the Pyrenean Climate Change Observatory, as well as other relevant
initiatives promoting transboundary cooperation and dialogue supported by the United Nations Environment
Programme and other partners;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session on the
implementation of the present resolution under the sub-item entitled “Sustainable mountain development” of the item
entitled “Sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 74/228
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 134 to 2, with 44 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/382/Add.1, para. 10)422
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

74/228. Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization
and interdependence
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 62/199 of 19 December 2007, 63/222 of 19 December 2008, 64/210 of 21 December
2009, 65/168 of 20 December 2010, 66/210 of 22 December 2011, 68/219 of 20 December 2013, 70/211 of
22 December 2015 and 72/227 of 20 December 2017 on the role of the United Nations in promoting development in
the context of globalization and interdependence,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5
of 16 October 2018).
422

601

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement423 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change424 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Reaffirming the vital importance of an inclusive, transparent and effective multilateral system to address the
urgent global challenges of today, recognizing the universality of the United Nations, and reaffirming its commitment
to promote and strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the role and authority of the General Assembly on global matters of concern to the international
community, as set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
Acknowledging that the United Nations, particularly the General Assembly, provides a universal and inclusive
multilateral forum that confers incomparable value to its discussions and its decisions on global matters of concern to
the international community,
Recognizing that, notwithstanding the opportunities and strong momentum to world economic growth brought
by globalization, major challenges still remain to be addressed through multilateralism, and emphasizing the need to
guide the direction of globalization and make it more invigorated, inclusive and sustainable,
Recommitting to setting out together on the path towards sustainable development, remaining devoted to the
pursuit of global development and “win-win” cooperation, which can bring huge gains to all countries and all parts
of the world, and reaffirming that every State has, and shall freely exercise, full permanent sovereignty over all its
wealth, natural resources and economic activity,
Recognizing that globalization and interdependence imply that the economic performance of a country is
increasingly affected by factors outside its geographical borders, that maximizing the benefits of globalization in an
equitable manner requires coherent responses at the global, regional and national levels and that there remains a need
for a revitalized Global Partnership for Sustainable Development to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and
other internationally agreed development goals,
Emphasizing that globalization is a useful tool for development that should benefit all countries and peoples and
that every effort should be made by all to meaningfully integrate all countries into the global economy by creating an
enabling international environment that is inclusive and mutually beneficial for their goods and services,
Reaffirming its strong support for fair and inclusive globalization and the need to translate sustained, inclusive
and sustainable economic growth into sustainable development, particularly poverty eradication and reduction of
inequality, and, in this regard, its resolve to make the goals of full and productive employment and decent work for
all, including women and young people, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples, local communities and other
people in vulnerable situations, a central objective of relevant national and international policies and national
development strategies, including strategies to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions, as part of efforts to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals,
Reaffirming that evidence shows that gender equality, women’s empowerment and women’s full and equal
participation and leadership in the economy are vital to achieve sustainable development and significantly enhance
economic growth and productivity, that women play a critical role in development and contribute to structural

_______________
423
424

602

Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

transformation and that their full and equal participation in decision-making and the economy is vital in order to
achieve sustainable development, and reaffirming also that gender equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls will make a crucial contribution to progress in realizing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming also that the spread of information and communications technology and global interconnectedness
has great potential to accelerate human progress, to bridge the digital divide and to develop knowledge societies, as
does scientific and technological innovation across areas as diverse as medicine and energy,
Reaffirming further the commitment to eradicate poverty and hunger in all its forms and dimensions and
promote sustained, inclusive and equitable growth, sustainable development and global prosperity for all and to
promote the development of the productive sectors in developing countries to enable them to participate more
meaningfully and effectively in and benefit from the process of globalization,
Recognizing that the international multilateral system should continue to support sustainable development in all
countries, particularly in relation to sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, job creation and the efforts
of developing countries to eradicate poverty and hunger and achieve environmental sustainability, and should continue
to promote good governance and the rule of law at all levels,
Cognizant that the future prospects of entire economies and societies will depend on how effectively all
stakeholders respond to the technological trends and challenges and to the interplay of those trends with other major
trends, such as urbanization, the changing nature of work, demographic shifts, climate change, the increasing
magnitude of disasters and environmental challenges and increasing inequality within countries,
Noting with concern that current trade tensions and a surge in trade-restrictive measures are greatly increasing
economic uncertainty, and underscoring that prioritizing and strengthening global cooperation, including through
multilateral solutions, are in the interest of all and remain crucial elements in fulfilling the promise of globalization,
Expressing concern about the adverse impact of the continuing fragility of the global economy and the slow
pace of restoration of global growth and trade, including on development, cognizant that the global economy remains
in a challenging phase, with many downside risks, including net negative capital flows from some emerging and
developing economies, continued low commodity prices, high unemployment, particularly among young people,
women, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples, local communities and people in vulnerable situations, and
rising private and public indebtedness in many developing countries, and stressing the need for continuing efforts to
address systemic fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while
implementing the reforms agreed upon to date in order to attend to those challenges and make progress towards
sustaining global demand,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Fulfilling the promise of globalization:
advancing sustainable development in an interconnected world”;425
2. Reiterates the need for inclusive, transparent and effective multilateral approaches to managing global
challenges, and in this regard reaffirms the central role of the United Nations system in ongoing efforts to find common
solutions to such challenges;
3. Recognizes that a reinvigorated multilateral system, with the United Nations at its centre, is the cornerstone
of a renewed approach to fairer and more inclusive and sustainable globalization to ensure that the negative
consequences of globalization do not threaten peoples’ livelihoods and the sustainability of the planet;
4. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to reposition the United Nations development
system to better support countries with their implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,426 and
calls upon all stakeholders to implement the remaining tasks swiftly and coherently throughout the United Nations
development system;

_______________
425
426

A/74/239.
Resolution 70/1.

603

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Reaffirms the need for the United Nations to play a fundamental role in the promotion of international
cooperation for development and the coherence, coordination and implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals and actions agreed upon by the international community, and reiterates its commitment to strengthening
coordination within the United Nations in close cooperation with all other multilateral financial, trade and
development institutions in order to support sustainable development in the context of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
6. Notes the important efforts undertaken nationally, regionally and internationally to respond to the
challenges posed by the financial and economic crisis and persisting risks to the global economy, and recognizes that
more needs to be done in order to promote economic recovery and to address, among others, turbulence in global
financial and commodity markets, policy uncertainty, trade tensions, financial volatility, unsustainable debt and high
unemployment in several countries;
7. Encourages Member States to advance economic reforms proactively, as appropriate, innovate the growth
model and focus on the inclusiveness of development and, in the meantime, strengthen international cooperation and
avoid inward-looking policies and protectionism, so as to promote an open world economy and generate greater
positive effects of globalization;
8. Recognizes the critical role of trade and development and interrelated issues in the areas of finance,
technology and investment for inclusive and sustainable development and the need to provide integrated policy
responses to issues arising in these areas, including to address inequalities within and among countries, and also
recognizes the importance of international cooperation, finance, technology and capacity-building to supporting
national efforts, in line with national priorities and respecting each country’s policy space while remaining consistent
with international rules and commitments;
9. Also recognizes the need for the multilateral trade, economic and financial architecture to incorporate and
promote sustainable development and ensure greater coherence and coordination to promote an enabling international
environment that facilitates the work of Member States in addressing, inter alia, poverty, inequalities and
environmental challenges;
10. Underlines that the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will depend on an enabling international environment for development and on facilitating
the necessary means of implementation, particularly in the areas of finance, international trade, technology and
capacity-building for developing countries, and in this regard calls for a sincere and effective follow-up on the global
commitments of all actors;
11. Recognizes that the scaling up of successful policies and approaches in the implementation and
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals needs to be complemented by an enhanced and revitalized global
partnership and that this partnership should work in the spirit of global solidarity to support a truly universal and
transformative global development agenda;
12. Reaffirms that the creation, development and diffusion of new innovations and technologies and
associated know-how, including the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms, are powerful drivers of
economic growth and sustainable development;
13. Also reaffirms the need to promote the development, transfer, dissemination and diffusion of
environmentally sound technologies to developing countries on favourable terms, including on concessional and
preferential terms, as mutually agreed;
14. Underlines the significant potential of regional economic integration and interconnectivity to promote
inclusive growth and sustainable development, and reiterates its commitment to strengthening regional cooperation
and regional trade agreements;
15. Invites the President of the General Assembly to consider hosting, in the second quarter of 2020, a thematic
debate on how to maximize the benefits of globalization and interdependence in all countries in the context of
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals;
16. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
604

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session an actionoriented report on the implementation of the present resolution, including concrete recommendations to accelerate the
implementation of the Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and decides to include in
the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Globalization and interdependence”, the
sub-item entitled “Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and
interdependence”.
RESOLUTION 74/229
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/382/Add.2, para. 8)427

74/229. Science, technology and innovation for sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement428 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully implement
the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change429 that have not yet
done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as
possible,
Recalling its resolution 72/228 of 20 December 2017 on science, technology and innovation for development
and its previous resolutions on the issue,430
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/25 of 23 July 2019 on science, technology and
innovation for development and previous Council resolutions on the issue,431
Recalling its resolution 73/17 of 26 November 2018 on the impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and targets,
Recalling also the World Summit on the Information Society and its outcomes,432 as well as other relevant
intergovernmentally agreed outcomes,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
429
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
430
Resolutions 58/200, 59/220, 60/205, 61/207, 62/201, 64/212, 66/211, 68/220 and 70/213.
431
Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/46, 2009/8, 2010/3, 2011/17, 2012/6, 2013/10, 2014/28, 2015/27, 2016/23, 2017/22
and 2018/29.
432
See A/C.2/59/3 and A/60/687.
427
428

605

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Taking note of the reports of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development on its fourteenth to
twenty-second sessions,433
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General,434
Taking note further of the work of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on the
impact of new and emerging technologies and on promoting innovation to accelerate the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals,
Recognizing that science, technology and innovation, including environmentally sound technologies and
information and communications technologies, are critical in the pursuit of sustainable development and are one of
the key means of implementation of the intergovernmentally agreed development outcomes, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals,
Noting that the 2019 Global Sustainable Development Report identifies science, technology and innovation as
one of the levers for transformation to accelerate progress in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and that
its strategic deployment has the potential to resolve and minimize trade-offs among the Goals and targets, and
recognizes that technology transfer to developing countries on mutually agreed terms will be critical to scale up and
accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Noting also the June 2019 report of the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation entitled
“The age of digital interdependence”,
Emphasizing that science, technology and innovation play a key role in accelerating the pace of economic
diversification and transformation, improving productivity and competitiveness, as well as enabling the full
participation of developing countries in the global economy,
Reaffirming that the creation, development and diffusion of new innovations and technologies and associated
know-how, including the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms, are powerful drivers of economic growth
and sustainable development,
Underscoring that rapid technological change brings enormous opportunities to accelerate progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, while it also poses new challenges, including perpetuating divides within and
between countries,
Recognizing that new technologies increase the demand for digital skills and competencies and that, at the same
time, developing countries are experiencing higher numbers of young people entering the labour market and a
widening gap between their knowledge, skills and abilities and those sought by employers, and expressing concern
that the share of women in specialist information and communications technology occupations remains low,
especially in developing countries,
Recognizing also that education, training and capacity-building in science, technology and innovation can
provide new skills and so widen employment opportunities, while addressing market needs,
Calling upon the international community and all stakeholders to support efforts by developing countries to
provide opportunities for science, technology, engineering and mathematics education and research for all, including
youth and women, and particularly in the emerging technologies, and to provide suitable working conditions in order
to prevent brain drain,
Recognizing that innovation, such as pro-poor, inclusive, grass-roots and social innovation that seeks to solve
problems, is not always addressed by markets,
Recognizing also the importance of utilizing science, technology and innovation in a manner relevant to specific
national and local situations and needs,

_______________
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 11 (E/2011/31); ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 11 and
corrigendum (E/2012/31 and E/2012/31/Corr.1); ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 11 and corrigendum (E/2013/31 and E/2013/31/Corr.1); ibid.,
2014, Supplement No. 11 (E/2014/31); ibid., 2015, Supplement No. 11 (E/2015/31); ibid., 2016, Supplement No. 11 (E/2016/31); ibid., 2017,
Supplement No. 11 (E/2017/31); ibid., 2018, Supplement No. 11 (E/2018/31); and ibid., 2019, Supplement No. 11 (E/2019/31).
434
A/74/230.
433

606

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing further the importance of data protection and privacy, in particular for developing countries in the
context of science and technology for development, especially regarding the adoption of new technologies,
Taking note of the Digital Economy Report 2019 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
which examines the scope for value creation and capture in the digital economy by developing countries and gives
special attention to opportunities for these countries to take advantage of the data-driven economy as producers and
innovators, and notes that platformization and the monetization of the rapidly expanding volume of digital data are
increasingly driving value creation, while acknowledging the risk that digitalization may contribute to rising inequality
and further consolidation rather than to more inclusive development,
Recognizing that realizing gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls will make a crucial
contribution to progress across all of the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, and recognizing also that there
is a need to ensure full and equal access to and participation in science, technology and innovation for women of all
ages, as well as to target science, technology and innovation strategies to address women’s empowerment and
inequalities, including the gender digital divide,
Recalling the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women on women’s economic
empowerment in the changing world of work, adopted at its sixty-first session,435 which, inter alia, highlighted the
need for managing technological and digital change for women’s economic empowerment, particularly to strengthen
the capacities of developing countries, so as to enable women to leverage science and technology for entrepreneurship
and economic empowerment in the changing world of work and to support women’s access, throughout their life
cycle, to skills development and decent work in new and emerging fields by expanding the scope of education and
training opportunities in, inter alia, science, technology, engineering and mathematics, information and
communications technology and digital fluency, and to enhance women’s and, as appropriate, girls’ participation as
users, content creators, employees, entrepreneurs, innovators and leaders,
Expressing concern that many developing countries still face serious challenges in building their national
science, technology and innovation base, lack affordable access to information and communications technologies,
and that, for the poor, the promise of science, technology and innovation remains unfulfilled,
Taking note with appreciation of the United Nations Technology Innovation Labs, in their efforts to facilitate
and stimulate innovation for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recognizing that science, technology and innovation cooperation and collaboration with, as well as foreign
direct investment in and trade with and among, developing countries, as well as international support, are fundamental
to enhancing developing countries’ ability to benefit from technological advances and to produce, nurture, access,
comprehend, select, adapt and use science, technology and innovation knowledge,
Recognizing also the importance of supporting policies and activities of developing countries in the fields of
science, technology and innovation through North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation in the areas of
financial and technical assistance, capacity-building and technology transfer on mutually agreed terms,
Recognizing further the need to mobilize and scale up financing for science, technology and innovation,
especially in developing countries, in support of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Welcoming the increase in official development assistance targeting the development of science, technology and
innovation capacities in developing countries in the past two decades, however, remaining concerned that official
development assistance for science, technology and innovation capacities directed to the least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and African countries has remained at about the same
levels for the past decade,
Recognizing the central role that the Commission on Science and Technology for Development plays, as the
United Nations focal point for science, technology and innovation for sustainable development, in analysing how
science, technology and innovation, including information and communications technologies, serve as enablers of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by acting as a forum for strategic planning, sharing lessons learned and

_______________
435

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2017, Supplement No. 7 (E/2017/27), chap. I, sect. A.

607

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

best practices, providing foresight about critical trends in science, technology and innovation in key sectors of the
economy, the environment and society, and drawing attention to emerging and disruptive technologies,
Reaffirming the need to enhance the science, technology and innovation programmes of the relevant entities of
the United Nations system, and in this regard recalling the mandate of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism on
science, technology and innovation for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals to promote
coordination, coherence and cooperation within the United Nations system,
Recognizing the need to strengthen the collaboration and exchange between policymakers and scientific and
technological communities,
Welcoming the convening of the first to fourth annual multi-stakeholder forums on science, technology and
innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, noting with appreciation the ongoing work of the United Nations
inter-agency task team on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, and looking
forward to the development of an online platform as a gateway for information on existing science, technology and
innovation initiatives, mechanisms and programmes, as the three components of the Technology Facilitation
Mechanism,
Noting the ongoing efforts of the World Intellectual Property Organization to assist Member States in
establishing intellectual property strategies and national ecosystems that promote innovation and creativity and
support the flow of knowledge and technical expertise,
Noting also the existing efforts and contributions of the regional economic commissions on science, technology
and innovation for sustainable development,
Recalling the importance of supporting the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as its 10-year plan of action,
as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next 50 years, and
its continental programme embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and regional initiatives, and in this context noting the Declaration of Sharm el-Sheikh, adopted by the
African Union in October 2019, which commits to work towards an integrated and inclusive Digital Society and
Economy in Africa that improves the quality of life of Africa’s citizens,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Reaffirms its commitments made in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development436 on, inter alia, science, technology and innovation, as an important action area for
sustainable development;
2. Also reaffirms its commitment to continue promoting the use of science, technology and innovation in
facilitating efforts to address global challenges, such as efforts to eradicate poverty; achieve food security and
nutrition; increase agricultural productivity; enhance access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for
all; fight diseases; improve education; protect the environment and address climate change;
3. Further reaffirms its commitment to the actions agreed upon by the least developed countries and
development partners on science, technology and innovation, as outlined in paragraphs 52 and 53 of the Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020;437
4. Notes the central role of Governments, with active contribution from stakeholders from the private sector,
civil society, academia and research institutions, in creating and supporting an enabling environment at all levels,
including enabling regulatory and governance frameworks, in accordance with national priorities, to nurture science,
innovation, entrepreneurship and the dissemination of knowledge and technologies that is on mutually agreed terms,
particularly to micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, as well as industrial diversification and value added to
commodities;

_______________
Resolution 69/313, annex.
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
436
437

608

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Underscores the need to adopt science, technology and innovation strategies as integral elements of
national sustainable development plans and strategies that help to strengthen knowledge-sharing on mutually agreed
terms and collaboration and scale up investment in science, technology, engineering and mathematics education, and
enhance technical, vocational and tertiary education and training;
6. Recognizes the importance of addressing the gap in capabilities across and between countries, sectors and
segments of society so that all parts of society, especially people in vulnerable situations and the poor, can adapt and
benefit from technological changes;
7. Also recognizes the importance of the creation of a conducive environment that attracts and supports
private investment, entrepreneurship and corporate social responsibility, including an efficient, adequate, balanced
and effective intellectual property framework, while encouraging access to science, technology and innovation by
developing countries;
8. Encourages Member States to strengthen and foster investment in research and development for
environmentally sound technologies and to promote the involvement of the business and financial sectors in the
development of those technologies, and invites the international community to support those efforts;
9. Encourages all stakeholders in an effort to prepare for existing and future opportunities and challenges
presented by technological change, including the fourth industrial revolution, among others, to explore ways and
means of conducting inclusive national, regional and international technology assessment and foresight exercises on
existing, new and emerging technologies to help to evaluate their development potential and mitigate possible
negative effects and risks;
10. Encourages Member States, individually and collectively, to support policies that increase financial
inclusion, including through making use of financial technology, with a view to deepening and diversifying the
sources of financing and of direct investments towards science, technology and innovations that address the
Sustainable Development Goals;438
11. Also encourages Member States to promote local innovation capabilities for inclusive and sustainable
economic development by bringing together local scientific, vocational and engineering knowledge, mobilizing
resources from multiple channels, improving information and communications technology and supporting
infrastructure development;
12. Further encourages Member States to promote digital inclusion and literacy and to consider incorporating
digital competencies into the education system, with a special focus on encouraging girls and enhancing digital skills
and competences development, including through investment in digital qualification, specialization in digital
technologies, digital infrastructure, public policies and institutional development and multi-stakeholder and
international collaboration;
13. Underlines that addressing barriers to equal access for women and girls to science, technology and
innovation requires a systematic, comprehensive, integrated, sustainable, multidisciplinary and multisectoral
approach, and in this regard urges Member States to mainstream a gender perspective in legislation, policies and
programmes, and encourages efforts to mentor, attract and retain women and girls in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics education and research and to support women in leveraging science and technology for
entrepreneurship and economic empowerment in the changing world of work;
14. Emphasizes the importance of the participation of women and girls in science, technology and innovation,
and further encourages the United Nations development system to support efforts to reduce gender disparity in these
areas, with the cooperation of Member States and international collaborative research organizations;
15. Notes the importance of facilitating access to and sharing accessible and assistive technologies, through
the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms and other actions, to advance disability-inclusive development,
ensure accessibility for persons with disabilities and promote their empowerment;
16. Encourages efforts to increase the availability of data to support the measurement of national innovation
systems (such as the existing Global Innovation Index) and empirical research on innovation and development to

_______________
438

See resolution 70/1.

609

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

assist policymakers in designing and implementing innovation strategies in order to measure the impact of digital
technologies for sustainable development;
17. Emphasizes the need to effectively harness technology to bridge the digital divides within countries and
between developed and developing countries;
18. Encourages enhanced capacity-building support for developing countries in order to generate the use of
high-quality, timely and reliable disaggregated data, and also encourages international cooperation, including through
technical and financial support, to strengthen the capacity of national statistical systems;
19. Also encourages existing arrangements and the further promotion of international, regional, subregional
and interregional joint multi-stakeholder research and development projects, as well as training programmes and
university-to-university collaborations where feasible, by mobilizing scientific and research development resources,
facilities and equipment;
20. Calls upon Member States and the United Nations development system, and encourages other
stakeholders, as appropriate, to continue to initiate, implement and support measures to improve the level of
participation of scientists and engineers from developing countries in international collaborative research, science,
technology and innovation projects;
21. Also calls upon Member States and the United Nations development system, and encourages other
stakeholders, as appropriate, to continue to strengthen their support for the different science, technology and
innovation partnerships with developing countries in primary, secondary and higher education, vocational education
and continuing education; business opportunities for the private sector; science, technology and innovation
infrastructure; and science, technology and innovation advice for developing countries;
22. Requests the Commission on Science and Technology for Development to continue to assist the Economic
and Social Council as the focal point in the system-wide follow-up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the
Information Society432 and to continue its science, technology and innovation activities;
23. Encourages the Commission on Science and Technology for Development to discuss and explore
innovative financing models, such as impact investment, as a means of attracting new stakeholders, innovators and
sources of investment capital for science, technology, engineering and innovation-based solutions, in collaboration
with other organizations, where appropriate;
24. Encourages the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in collaboration with relevant
partners, such as the World Intellectual Property Organization, the International Telecommunication Union, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations University, to continue to undertake
science, technology and innovation policy reviews, with a view to assisting developing countries, upon request, in
identifying the measures needed to integrate science, technology and innovation policies into their national
development strategies and ensuring that they are supportive of national development agendas, as appropriate, and in
this regard takes note of the new science, technology and innovation policy review framework developed by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
25. Emphasizes the importance of better coordination and coherence among existing mechanisms, including
the Technology Facilitation Mechanism, United Nations agencies and international organizations in providing support
to Member States in the field of science, technology and innovation directed towards development priorities and
needs;
26. Invites the Commission on Science and Technology for Development and the Technology Facilitation
Mechanism to strengthen synergies and mutually reinforce their work on science, technology and innovation, and
invites the Secretariat to coordinate the dates of their meetings in order to avoid overlap and to ensure coherence and
coordination between both entities;
27. Continues to encourage the United Nations inter-agency task team on science, technology and innovation
for the Sustainable Development Goals to further refine and update its mapping of science, technology and innovation
activities in the United Nations system with a view to guiding further efforts at collaboration and capacity-building
and formulating coherent advice for Member States advancing national science, technology and innovation
frameworks within the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,438 including through developing STI for SDGs
road maps;
610

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

28. Reiterates its call for voluntary contributions for resources from both the private and the public sectors to
support the full operationalization of all components of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism, in particular the
online platform;
29. Encourages the World Intellectual Property Organization to continue to undertake technical support
activities, including helping countries to design, develop and implement national intellectual property and innovation
strategies aligned with their development strategies;
30. Welcomes the operationalization of the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries, and calls
upon Member States and other stakeholders to provide voluntary funding to the trust fund of the Technology Bank so
that it can pursue its objectives in the area of science, technology and innovation for the least developed countries;
31. Continues to encourage the United Nations system to take an active role in forging a closer link with
national science advisory bodies to optimally leverage science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable
Development Goals, and looks forward to receiving updates and outcomes of the actions through the report of the
Commission on Science and Technology for Development;
32. Calls upon the United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, at the request of
Member States, to support, as appropriate, technical and scientific cooperation and North-South, South-South,
triangular, regional and international cooperation on access to science, technology, innovation and knowledge-sharing,
on mutually agreed terms;
33. Reiterates its call for continued collaboration between United Nations entities and other international
organizations, civil society and the private sector in implementing the outcomes of the World Summit on the
Information Society;
34. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and recommendations for future follow-up, including lessons learned in
integrating science, technology and innovation policies into national development strategies as well as concrete
recommendations in supporting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and decides
to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the sub-item entitled “Science, technology and innovation for sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 74/230
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/382/Add.3, para. 8)439

74/230. Culture and sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 41/187 of 8 December 1986, 46/158 of 19 December 1991, 51/179 of 16 December
1996, 52/197 of 18 December 1997, 53/184 of 15 December 1998, 55/192 of 20 December 2000, 57/249 of
20 December 2002, 65/166 of 20 December 2010 and 66/208 of 22 December 2011 concerning culture and
development, 66/288 of 27 July 2012, entitled “The future we want”, and 68/223 of 20 December 2013, 69/230 of
19 December 2014, 70/214 of 22 December 2015 and 72/229 of 20 December 2017 on culture and sustainable
development,

_______________
439

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

611

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also the Paris Agreement440 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change441 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Welcoming the holding of the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on
23 September, taking note of the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit, and taking
note also of the Youth Climate Summit, held on 21 September,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Welcoming the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador, from 17 to 20 October 2016,442 calling for its full, effective
and timely implementation at all levels, and reaffirming that culture and cultural diversity are sources of enrichment
for humankind and provide an important contribution to the sustainable development of cities, human settlements and
citizens, empowering them to play an active and unique role in development initiatives,
Recalling that, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, inter alia, the natural and cultural diversity of
the world is acknowledged and it is recognized that cultures and civilizations can contribute to, and are crucial enablers
of, sustainable development,
Recalling also the 2005 Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions,443
as well as other international conventions of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization that
acknowledge cultural diversity and economic and social development,444
Recognizing that culture is an essential component of human development, that it represents a source of identity,
innovation and creativity for the individual and the community and that it is an important factor in social inclusion
and poverty eradication, providing for sustainable economic growth and ownership of development processes,
Recognizing also the growing importance of the digital environment in the diffusion of cultural and creative
content,

_______________
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
442
Resolution 71/256, annex.
443
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2440, No. 43977.
444
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, of 1954 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 249,
No. 3511); Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,
of 1970 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 823, No. 11806); Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural
Heritage, of 1972 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1037, No. 15511); Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage,
of 2001 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2562, No. 45694); and Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, of
2003 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2368, No. 42671).
440
441

612

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing further the importance of respect and understanding for cultural diversity throughout the world and
of working together and not against each other and of fostering intercultural understanding and dialogue, mutual
listening and learning and an ethic of global citizenship and solidarity,
Recalling its resolution 73/130 of 13 December 2018 on the return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin, aware of the importance attached to the return of cultural property that is of fundamental
spiritual, historical and cultural value, and expressing deep concern about the continuing illicit trafficking in
cultural property and its damage to the cultural heritage of nations,
Recalling also the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, on
13 September 2007,445 and its call for States to enable access to and/or the repatriation of ceremonial objects and
human remains in their possession through fair, transparent and effective mechanisms developed in conjunction with
indigenous peoples concerned,
Recalling further the principles of the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,446 and acknowledging that cultural diversity is a source of
enrichment for humankind and an important contribution to the sustainable development of local communities,
peoples and nations, supporting their ability to play an active and unique role in development initiatives,
Recognizing the importance of multilingualism as a means of promoting, protecting and preserving the diversity
of languages and cultures globally and that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity and international
understanding, and recognizing also the importance for the peoples of the world to communicate in their own
language,
Recalling its resolution 71/178 of 19 December 2016, in which it proclaimed the year beginning on 1 January
2019 the International Year of Indigenous Languages, to draw attention to the critical loss of indigenous languages
and the urgent need to preserve, revitalize and promote indigenous languages,
Noting the fourth international conference on the theme “Preservation of world languages and development of
linguistic diversity in cyberspace: context, policy, practice”, held under the auspices of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in Yakutsk, Russian Federation, from 1 to 5 July 2019,
Recalling the concerns expressed in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action447 on the underrepresentation
of women in decision-making positions in the area of culture, which has prevented women from having a significant
impact in the area of culture and development,
Recalling also the importance of the promotion of national cultures, artistic creation in all its forms and
international and regional cultural cooperation, and reaffirming in this regard the relevance of strengthening national
efforts and regional and international cooperation mechanisms for cultural action and artistic creation and recognizing
respect for cultural pluralism, as defined by the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, as policies for the
inclusion and participation of all citizens that guarantee social cohesion and the vitality of civil society and peace,
enhance cultural development and contribute to sustainable development,
Recognizing the linkages between cultural and biological diversity and the positive contribution of local and
indigenous traditional knowledge in addressing environmental challenges in a sustainable manner,
Recalling the United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017–2030,448 and acknowledging that, in many regions,
forests have important cultural and spiritual value,
Taking note of the declaration adopted in Florence, Italy, on 4 October 2014, at the third United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization World Forum on Culture and Cultural Industries, the Hangzhou
outcomes, adopted at the conference on the theme “Culture for sustainable cities”, held in Hangzhou, China, from

_______________
Resolution 61/295, annex.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-first Session, Paris,
15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25, annex I.
447
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
448
See resolution 71/285.
445
446

613

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10 to 12 December 2015, the Bali Declaration, adopted at the second World Culture Forum, held in Bali, Indonesia,
from 10 to 14 October 2016, the global report on culture for sustainable urban development of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, entitled Culture: Urban Future, of October 2016, the new strategy
for the integration of culture and creativity in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
adopted at the eleventh annual meeting of the Creative Cities Network, held in Enghien-les-Bains, France, from
30 June to 2 July 2017, the twelfth annual meeting of the Creative Cities Network, held in Krakow and Katowice,
Poland, from 12 to 15 June 2018, and the thirteenth annual meeting of the Creative Cities Network, held in Fabriano,
Italy, from 10 to 15 June 2019, as well as its discussions on the role of culture across development areas, including
education, entrepreneurship, innovation, inclusiveness and environmental sustainability,
Recognizing the role of museums as crucial partners for protecting and promoting culture, from safeguarding
world heritage to countering illicit trafficking in cultural property, in particular through their preservation, research,
communication and education efforts,
Recognizing also that culture in diplomacy remains an important component of strengthening international
relations,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization;449
2. Reaffirms the role of culture as an enabler of sustainable development that provides people and
communities with a strong sense of identity and social cohesion and contributes to more effective and sustainable
development policies and measures at all levels, and stresses in this regard that policies responsive to cultural contexts
can yield better, sustainable, inclusive and equitable development outcomes;
3. Recognizes the power of culture as a driver of sustainable development, which contributes to fostering
social inclusion and developing a strong and viable economic sector by generating income, creating decent jobs and
addressing both the economic and social dimensions of poverty through cultural heritage, including its protection and
preservation, and cultural and creative sectors, while providing innovative and effective solutions to cross-cutting
issues, such as education, health, gender equality and women’s empowerment, technology and the environment;
4. Emphasizes the important contribution of culture to the three dimensions of sustainable development and
to the achievement of national development objectives, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development450 and its
Sustainable Development Goals, as well as other internationally agreed development goals, and in this regard
acknowledges:
(a) That culture contributes to inclusive economic development, as cultural heritage preservation, cultural and
creative sectors, sustainable cultural tourism and cultural infrastructure, including urban regeneration, can be sources
of income generation, job creation and decent work for all, including at the community level, thus improving living
conditions and fostering community-based economic growth, and contribute to the empowerment of individuals;
(b) That culture contributes to inclusive social development for all, including local communities and
indigenous peoples, with respect for cultural diversity, safeguarding of the cultural and natural heritage, fostering of
cultural institutions and strengthening of cultural and creative sectors, in urban and rural contexts;
(c) That culture contributes to environmental sustainability, since the protection of cultural and biological
diversity and natural heritage is important for sustainable development, and that support for traditional systems of
environmental protection, and resource management, can contribute to the increased sustainability of fragile
ecosystems and the conservation, preservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and to avoiding land degradation
and addressing climate change;

_______________
449
450

614

A/74/286.
Resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

5. Reaffirms that sustainable development cannot be realized without peace and security and that peace and
security will be at risk without sustainable development, and acknowledges that culture can contribute to sustainable
development by constituting a valuable resource for enabling communities to participate fully in social and cultural
life, facilitating inclusive governance and dialogue at the national, regional and international levels and contributing
to conflict prevention and resolution, as well as to reconciliation, recovery and resilience;
6. Reaffirms its commitment to embracing diversity in cities and human settlements, to strengthening social
cohesion, intercultural dialogue and understanding, tolerance, mutual respect, gender equality and women’s
empowerment, innovation, entrepreneurship, inclusion, identity and safety, and the dignity of all people, including
people in vulnerable situations, as well as to fostering liveability and a vibrant urban economy and to taking steps to
ensure that local institutions promote pluralism and peaceful coexistence within increasingly heterogeneous and
multicultural societies;
7. Recognizes that culture should be taken into account in the promotion and implementation of new
sustainable consumption and production patterns that contribute to the responsible use of resources and address the
adverse impacts of climate change;
8. Acknowledges that quality education, non-formal education and lifelong learning are enriched by culture,
transmitting shared values, knowledge and skills, and also acknowledges that arts education can make a direct
contribution to the constructive transformation of educational systems to meet the needs of learners in a rapidly
changing world and the need for a creative and adaptive workforce;451
9. Calls for the promotion of education for the protection of natural spaces and places of memory whose
existence is necessary for expressing the intangible cultural heritage;
10. Recalls the inclusion in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of several targets reflecting the
contribution of culture to sustainable development, also recalls that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets
are integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development, and in this regard looks
forward to their achievement, building on the positive results and impact of programmes utilizing culture as an enabler
of sustainable development;
11. Welcomes the efforts and initiatives of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, as the mandated United Nations agency on culture, to strengthen and measure the transformational
impact of culture on the realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
12. Decides to give consideration, as appropriate, to the contribution of culture to sustainable development in
the follow-up and review framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
13. Takes note with appreciation of the high-level event on culture and sustainable development in May 2019,
convened by the President of the General Assembly on the occasion of the World Day for Cultural Diversity for
Dialogue and Development, pursuant to resolution 72/229;
14. Welcomes the convening of the Forum of Ministers for Culture by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on 19 November 2019, on the theme “Culture and public policy for sustainable
development”, the first forum of its kind to be held in 21 years, with a focus on the contribution of culture to achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals and its linkages to education, social transformation, employment and the
environment;
15. Looks forward to the multi-partner international alliance on nature and culture to be launched in 2020 at
the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, which will aim to
strengthen international cooperation on the linkages between biological and cultural diversity to achieve the 2050
Vision for Biodiversity of humanity living in harmony with nature;

_______________
As stated in the preamble to the outcome document of the second World Conference on Arts Education, held in Seoul from 25 to 28 May
2010, namely, the Seoul Agenda: Goals for the Development of Arts Education.
451

615

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Invites all countries, as well as intergovernmental bodies and organizations of the United Nations system,
within their respective mandates and resources, relevant non-governmental organizations and all other relevant
stakeholders:
(a) To raise public awareness of the importance of cultural diversity for sustainable development, promoting
its positive value through education and media tools;
(b) To ensure a more visible and effective integration and mainstreaming of culture into economic, social and
environmental development policies and strategies at all levels;
(c) To ensure that women and men can equally access, participate in and contribute to cultural life and
decision-making, and to further commit themselves to the development of cultural policies and programmes with a
gender perspective at the local, national and international levels in order to achieve gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls;
(d) To undertake relevant intercultural dialogue and cooperation and cultural diversity programmes for youth
to engage in a multicultural society, participate in the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
achieve better educational results and acquire a broader and more diverse range of skills and competences;
(e) To promote capacity-building, where appropriate, at all levels for the development of dynamic cultural
and creative sectors, in particular by encouraging creativity, innovation and entrepreneurship, supporting the
development of cultural institutions and cultural and creative sectors, providing technical and vocational training for
culture professionals and increasing employment opportunities in the cultural and creative sectors for sustained,
inclusive and equitable economic growth and development;
(f) To actively support the emergence of local markets for cultural goods and services and to facilitate the
effective and licit access of such goods and services to international markets, taking into account the expanding range
of cultural production and consumption and, for States parties thereto, the provisions of the Convention on the
Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions;443
(g)

To promote the diversity of and the access to cultural expressions in the digital environment;

(h) To preserve and maintain local and indigenous traditional knowledge and community practices of
environmental management, which are valuable examples of culture as a vehicle for sustainable development, and to
foster synergies between modern science and technology and local and indigenous knowledge, practices and
innovation;
(i) To accelerate efforts to protect cultural and natural heritage from extreme weather events, sea level rise,
desertification and other threats exacerbated by climate change, which jeopardize its integrity and preservation for
present and future generations;
(j) To promote global awareness of the linkages between cultural and biological diversity, including through
the protection and preservation and encouragement of the customary use of biological resources, in accordance with
traditional cultural practices, as an important element of a comprehensive approach to sustainable development;
(k) To support national legal frameworks and policies for the protection and preservation of cultural heritage
and cultural property, encouraging initiatives to fight against illicit trafficking in cultural property, and for the return
of cultural property, in accordance with national legislation and applicable international legal frameworks;
(l) To support national legal frameworks and policies to enable intellectual property rights to sustain those
involved in cultural creativity, including by promoting international cooperation to prevent the misappropriation of
creative works;
(m) To promote access to and/or the repatriation of ceremonial objects and human remains in their possession
through fair, transparent and effective mechanisms developed in conjunction with indigenous peoples concerned;
(n) To note that, in achieving these objectives, innovative mechanisms of financing, public and private, can
make a positive contribution in assisting developing countries in mobilizing additional resources for development
on a stable, predictable and voluntary basis, and to reiterate that such voluntary mechanisms should be effective,
should aim to mobilize resources that are stable and predictable, should supplement and not be a substitute for
616

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

traditional sources of financing, should be disbursed in accordance with the priorities of developing countries and
should not unduly burden such countries;
(o) To mobilize culture as a vehicle to foster tolerance, mutual understanding, peace and reconciliation in the
context of conflict-prevention, conflict-resolution and peacebuilding processes;
17. Expresses deep concern that cultural property, including religious sites, shrines and cemeteries, and
objects, is increasingly targeted by terrorist attacks and vandalism, often resulting in its damage, theft or complete
destruction, and condemns such attacks;
18. Encourages all countries, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system, as
appropriate, within their existing mandates, relevant non‑governmental organizations and all other relevant
stakeholders to enhance international cooperation in supporting the efforts of developing countries towards the
development and strengthening of cultural and creative sectors, cultural tourism and culture-related microenterprises
and to assist those countries in developing the necessary infrastructure and skills, as well as in mastering information
and communications technologies and in gaining access to new technologies on mutually agreed terms;
19. Encourages initiatives to foster cultural cooperation agreements and networks at the regional level for
knowledge- and information-sharing for sustainable development;
20. Also encourages programmes that facilitate social benefits and economic rights for artists and cultural
professionals, including opportunities for decent work, fair remuneration and equal pay for work of equal value, as
well as training in the light of technological advancement and digitalization;
21. Invites the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, to continue to provide support, to facilitate financing and to assist countries,
upon their request, in developing their national capacities to optimize the contribution of culture to sustainable
development, including through information-sharing, the exchange of best practices, data collection, research and
study and the use of appropriate evaluation indicators, as well as to implement applicable international cultural
conventions, taking into account the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
22. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other relevant United
Nations bodies to continue to assess, in consultation with countries, the contribution of culture to the achievement of
sustainable development through the compilation of quantitative data, including indicators and statistics, with a view
to informing development policies and relevant reports, where appropriate, and to continue to act as a platform for
exchange among countries on the nexus between culture and sustainable development, including through the Forums
of Ministers for Culture;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations country teams continue to further integrate
and mainstream culture into their programming exercises, in particular United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Frameworks, in consultation with relevant national authorities, when assisting countries in the pursuit of
their development objectives;
24. Encourages all countries, intergovernmental bodies, organizations of the United Nations system, relevant
non-governmental organizations and all other relevant stakeholders to give due consideration to the contribution of
culture to the achievement of sustainable development in the formulation of national, regional and international
development policies and international cooperation instruments, and in this regard, building upon the discussion at
the previous high-level event on culture and sustainable development, invites the President of the General Assembly
to host a one-day high-level event on this subject, within existing resources, during the seventy-fifth session of the
Assembly, and to invite the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to support him or her,
within its existing mandates;
25. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth
session, under the item entitled “Globalization and interdependence”, the sub-item entitled “Culture and sustainable
development”.
617

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 74/231
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/382/Add.4, para. 8)452

74/231. Development cooperation with middle-income countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields, including the outcomes of the international conferences on development cooperation
with middle-income countries,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement453 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change454 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Reaffirming the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,455 noting the findings of the 2019
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, expressing concern that disaster risk and disaster economic
losses are increasing in many middle-income countries, thus undermining the financing available for investment in
sustainable development and stimulation of economic growth, and recognizing that financing disaster risk reduction
efforts and building resilience to economic and environmental shocks remain a challenge in many middle-income
countries,
Welcoming the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador, from 17 to 20 October 2016,456
Recalling its resolutions 70/215 of 22 December 2015 and 72/230 of 20 December 2017,
Recalling also that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes, inter alia, that middle-income
countries still face significant challenges to achieve sustainable development and that, in order to ensure that
achievements made to date are sustained, efforts to address ongoing challenges should be strengthened through the
exchange of experiences, improved coordination and better and focused support of the United Nations development
system, the international financial institutions, regional organizations and other stakeholders,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
454
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
455
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
456
Resolution 71/256, annex.
452
453

618

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system, in which it recognized that middle-income
countries still face specific challenges,
Welcoming the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General with regard to the repositioning of the United Nations
development system, acknowledging the progress achieved thus far in advancing the mandates of its resolution 71/243
and its resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018, and welcoming in this regard the discussions at the operational activities
for development segment of the 2019 session of the Economic and Social Council,
Noting with appreciation the convening of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to discuss the gaps
and challenges of middle-income countries in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
held on 4 December 2018 at United Nations Headquarters,
Taking note of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization Strategic Framework for Partnering
with Middle-Income Countries, adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization at its eighteenth session, held in Abu Dhabi from 3 to 7 November 2019, in its resolution GC.18/Res.9
of 7 November 2019,457
Emphasizing that cohesive, nationally owned sustainable development strategies, supported by integrated
national financing frameworks, will be at the heart of efforts by Member States, reiterating that each country has
primary responsibility for its own economic and social development and that the role of national policies and
development strategies cannot be overemphasized, highlighting the need to respect each country’s policy space
and leadership in the implementation of policies for poverty eradication and sustainable development while
remaining consistent with relevant international rules and commitments, recognizing that national development
efforts need to be supported by an enabling international economic environment, including coherent and mutually
supporting world trade, monetary and financial systems and strengthened and enhanced global economic
governance, and highlighting the fact that processes to develop and facilitate the availability of appropriate
knowledge and technologies globally, on mutually agreed terms, as well as capacity-building, are also critical,
including pursuing policy coherence and an enabling environment for sustainable development at all levels and by
all actors and reinvigorating the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development and for the achievement of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recognizing that, as per capita income increases above low-income thresholds, access to external public finance
often decreases faster than can be offset by commensurate increases in tax revenues in per capita terms,
Recognizing also that the enhanced and revitalized Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, led by
Governments, will be a vehicle for strengthening international cooperation and the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, while noting that multi-stakeholder partnerships and the resources, knowledge
and ingenuity of the private sector, civil society, the scientific community, academia, philanthropy and foundations,
parliaments, local authorities, volunteers and other stakeholders will be important in mobilizing and sharing
knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, complementing the efforts of Governments and supporting
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, in particular in developing countries,
Recalling that the most vulnerable countries and, in particular, African countries, the least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States deserve special attention, as do countries in
situations of conflict and post-conflict countries, and that there are also serious challenges within many middle-income
countries,
Recognizing that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to development and that development cooperation by the
United Nations development system should respond to the varying development needs of programme countries,
including those of middle-income countries, in a manner that addresses their specific challenges while mindful of
their diversity, and recognizing also that revitalized, strategic, flexible and results- and action-oriented United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Frameworks should be prepared and finalized in full consultation and
agreement with national Governments and aligned with national development plans, strategies and circumstances in
support of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,

_______________
457

See GC.18/INF/4.

619

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting that, over the past 15 years, 35 low-income countries have transitioned to middle-income country status,
reflecting the sustained economic growth achieved in most parts of the developing world,
Noting also that national averages based on criteria such as per capita income do not always reflect the actual
particularities and development needs of middle-income countries and that, despite notable progress in reducing
poverty levels in both absolute and relative terms, poverty remains a problem in many middle-income countries, as
they are still home to 73 per cent of the world’s people living in poverty,
Noting further the willingness to develop a wider analysis of new measures, building on existing experiences
with eligibility exception, for concessional finance and multidimensional assessments to address the limitations of an
income-only assessment of development and graduation readiness,
Recognizing with concern that hunger and malnutrition have been increasing in many countries, most of those
(44 out of 65) being middle-income countries and countries that rely heavily on international trade in primary
commodities,
Recognizing that inequality, or even a rise in inequality, remains pervasive in middle-income countries, even in
those with high levels of economic growth, that further investments in social services and economic opportunities are
needed in order to reduce inequalities and that economic growth needs to be sustained, inclusive and equitable,
Stressing that middle-income countries continue to face challenges related to, inter alia, job creation, natural
resource management, reliance on primary commodity exports, the adverse effects of disaster risks and climate
change, high levels of external debt and the volatility of exchange rates and capital flows and, in this regard, that
efforts to create a national enabling environment for development should be complemented by a global enabling
environment,
Stressing also the importance that middle-income countries need access to and development of better
technologies, research and innovation and better management practices, which can foster skills development, boost
productivity and achieve sustainable and inclusive growth,
Recognizing that connectivity through quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, with a focus on
affordable and equitable access for all, contributes to the sustainable development of middle-income countries,
Recalling that, for all countries, public policies and the mobilization and effective use of domestic resources,
underscored by the principle of national ownership, are central to our common pursuit of sustainable development,
including achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recalling also the resolve of Member States to enhance and strengthen domestic resource mobilization and
fiscal space, including, where appropriate, through modernized tax systems, more efficient tax collection, the
broadening of the tax base and the effective combating of tax evasion and capital flight, and reiterating that, while
each country is responsible for its tax system, it is important to support national efforts in these areas by strengthening
technical assistance and enhancing international cooperation and participation in addressing international tax matters,
Recalling further the importance of international support, in various forms, including North-South, South-South
and triangular cooperation, that is well aligned with national priorities to contribute to addressing the development
needs of middle-income countries, including through capacity-building,
Recognizing the need to better understand the multidimensional nature of development and poverty, and
acknowledging the significant role that the United Nations system has played and should continue to play in this
regard,
Expressing concern that climate change is adversely affecting productivity in every country, in particular
developing countries, including middle-income countries, as extreme weather shocks directly affect productivity
through the destruction of infrastructure and labour force displacement, and that a number of middle-income countries
have sizeable sectors that are exposed to climate change, such as agriculture, construction, mining, tourism and
transport,
Reaffirming that achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls, and the full realization of their
human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable
development, and in that regard reiterating the need for gender mainstreaming, including targeted actions and
investments in the formulation and implementation of all financial, economic, environmental and social policies,
620

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with concern that the debt service of middle-income countries has increased since 2011, reaching more
than 14 per cent of total exports and primary income,
Recognizing with concern that total external debt stocks in middle-income countries, excluding small island
developing States, grew by 8 per cent per annum over the period from 2009 to 2018, total external debt has grown by
over 20 per cent since 2016 and the current debt represents 26.8 per cent of their combined gross domestic product,
and that the debt of middle-income countries is not only growing at a faster pace than anticipated, but is a more costly
debt with a shorter maturity,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;458

2. Acknowledges the efforts made and successes achieved by many middle-income countries in eradicating
poverty and achieving the internationally agreed development goals, as well as their significant contribution to global
and regional development and economic stability;
3. Also acknowledges that identifying structural gaps can improve the understanding of development needs
of developing countries, including middle-income countries;
4. Underlines that, for many middle-income countries, official development assistance, including financing
on concessional terms from different multilateral financial institutions, remains important;
5. Also underlines the need for sustained efforts towards achieving debt sustainability in middle-income
countries in order to avoid a debt crisis, and the importance of debt restructurings being timely, orderly, effective, fair
and negotiated in good faith;
6. Recognizes that, with 73 per cent of the world’s poor population concentrated in middle-income countries,
development cooperation, policy dialogue and partnerships with those countries can contribute to the achievement of
the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals and targets;
7. Welcomes the solidarity of middle-income countries with other developing countries, in particular the
financial, technical, technology transfer on mutually agreed terms and capacity-building support being provided by
middle-income countries, particularly to the least developed countries, through South-South and triangular
cooperation, while stressing that South-South cooperation is a complement to, and not a substitute for, North-South
cooperation, and in this regard calls upon the United Nations development system to continue its ongoing efforts to
mainstream support to South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation;
8. Also welcomes the outcome document of the second High-level United Nations Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation, held in Buenos Aires from 20 to 22 March 2019;459
9. Recalls that the creation, development and diffusion of new innovations and technologies and associated
know-how, including the transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms, are powerful drivers of economic growth
and sustainable development;
10. Requests the United Nations development system to ensure that it addresses the diverse development
needs of middle-income countries in a coordinated manner through, inter alia, an accurate assessment of the national
priorities and needs of these countries, taking into account the use of variables that go beyond per capita income
criteria;
11. Calls upon the United Nations development system, in line with its resolution 71/243, to continue to
support developing countries in their efforts to achieve the internationally agreed development goals and their
development objectives, requests the development system to address, within existing resources and mandates, the
special challenges facing the most vulnerable countries, as well as the specific challenges facing middle-income
countries, in line with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for

_______________
458
459

A/74/269.
Resolution 73/291, annex.

621

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Development460 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,461 and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to present, as part of his report on the implementation of the present resolution, an assessment of the outcomes
of existing strategies within the United Nations development system related to middle-income countries;
12. Invites the President of the General Assembly to convene a meeting during the seventy-fifth session of the
Assembly, within existing resources and in a format decided by the President, to discuss the gaps and challenges of
middle-income countries in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with a focus on
the economic dimension of sustainable development, and requests the Secretary-General to consider these discussions
in the drafting of his report on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Recognizes the importance of the role of the private sector, as well as of the role of public-private
partnerships, in meeting the challenges of sustainable development for middle-income countries and other developing
countries;
14. Encourages Member States to advance innovative pathways to achieve sustainable consumption and
production, in line with United Nations Environment Assembly resolution 4/1 of 15 March 2019;462
15. Welcomes the establishment of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism and the work of the United
Nations inter-agency task team on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, urges
the operationalization of the online platform, and in this regard welcomes the convening of the annual
multi‑stakeholder forums on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, held at
United Nations Headquarters;
16. Recognizes the great importance of providing trade-related capacity-building for developing countries,
including African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing
States, countries in conflict and post-conflict situations and middle-income countries, including for the promotion of
regional economic integration and interconnectivity;
17. Acknowledges that good governance and the rule of law at the national and international levels are essential
for sustained economic growth, sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and hunger;
18. Notes with concern that access to concessional finance is reduced as countries’ incomes grow, and that
countries may not be able to access sufficient affordable financing from other sources to meet their needs, encourages
shareholders in multilateral development banks to develop graduation policies that are sequenced, phased and gradual,
and encourages multilateral development banks to explore ways to ensure that their assistance best addresses the
opportunities and challenges presented by the diverse circumstances of middle-income countries;
19. Recognizes that Governments will have the primary responsibility for follow-up and review at the
national, regional and global levels in relation to the progress made in implementing the Sustainable Development
Goals and targets and that quality, accessible, timely and reliable disaggregated data, including through strengthened
capacity in improving access to data at the national and local levels, will be needed to help with the measurement of
progress and to ensure that no one is left behind, and in this regard reiterates the commitment to intensifying efforts
to strengthen statistical capacities in developing countries, including middle-income countries;
20. Welcomes progress by middle-income countries in implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030455 and in reporting through the Sendai Framework monitor, and encourages the United Nations
system to support middle-income countries to develop national and local disaster risk reduction strategies by 2020;
21. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, within
existing resources, an action-oriented report on the implementation of the present resolution, including a
comprehensive and in-depth analysis of the particular challenges faced by middle-income countries, along with a

_______________
Resolution 69/313, annex.
Resolution 70/1.
462
UNEP/EA.4/Res.1.
460
461

622

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

concrete set of recommendations to promote and enhance their efforts in the achievement of the economic dimension
of sustainable development, while recognizing that particular challenges in the environmental and social dimensions
will require further analysis in subsequent reports;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled
“Globalization and interdependence”, the sub-item entitled “Development cooperation with middle-income
countries”.
RESOLUTION 74/232
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/383/Add.1, para. 9)463

74/232. Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Istanbul Declaration464 and the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020,465 adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in
Istanbul, Turkey, from 9 to 13 May 2011, and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/280 of 17 June
2011, in which the Assembly called upon all the relevant stakeholders to commit to implementing the Programme
of Action, and recalling also the Political Declaration adopted at the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review
of the Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011–2020, held in Antalya, Turkey, from 27 to 29 May 2016, and endorsed by the Assembly in its resolution
70/294 of 25 July 2016,
Reaffirming the overarching goal of the Istanbul Programme of Action of overcoming the structural challenges
faced by the least developed countries to eradicate poverty, achieve the internationally agreed development goals and
enable graduation from the least developed country category,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming further its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement466 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully implement
the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change467 that have not yet
done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as
possible,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. I.
465
Ibid., chap. II.
466
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
467
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
463
464

623

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming also the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador, from 17 to 20 October 2016,468 and
acknowledging that, in implementing the New Urban Agenda, particular attention should be given to the unique and
emerging urban challenges by the least developed countries,
Recalling the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030469 and its guiding principles, recalling
also its promotion of regular disaster preparedness, response and recovery exercises, at the national and local levels,
with a view to ensuring a rapid and effective response to disasters and related displacement, including access to
essential food and non-food relief supplies, as appropriate to local needs, and acknowledging that its implementation
can contribute to the achievement of the goals and objectives of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the Paris Agreement, and noting with concern the findings contained in the special
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the
global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty,
Recalling its resolution 73/242 of 20 December 2018 on the follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/3 of 6 June 2019 on the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,
Taking note of the 2019 Ministerial Declaration of the Least Developed Countries,470
Recalling its resolutions 59/209 of 20 December 2004 and 67/221 of 21 December 2012 on a smooth transition
for countries graduating from the list of least developed countries,
Reaffirming its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system, as well its resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018 on
the repositioning of the United Nations development system in the context of the quadrennial comprehensive policy
review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system, and emphasizing the importance of
their full and timely implementation,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020;471
2. Calls upon the least developed countries, their development partners, the United Nations system and all
other actors to further strengthen the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development for the least developed countries
in all priority areas of the Istanbul Programme of Action465 in order to ensure the timely, effective and full
implementation of the Programme of Action during the remainder of the decade, in the context of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development,472 the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development,473 which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, supports and complements it and helps to
contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete policies and actions, the Paris Agreement466 adopted
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,467 the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030469 and the New Urban Agenda;468
3. Invites the private sector, civil society, academia and foundations to contribute to the implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action in their respective areas of competence, in line with the national priorities of the
least developed countries;

_______________
Resolution 71/256, annex.
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
470
A/74/475, annex.
471
A/74/69-E/2019/12.
472
Resolution 70/1.
473
Resolution 69/313, annex.
468
469

624

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Recalls the agreement contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development that effective linkages
will be made with the follow-up and review arrangements of all relevant United Nations conferences and processes,
including on the least developed countries, underlines the importance of strong synergy in the implementation of the
recently adopted agendas and the Istanbul Programme of Action at all levels, and encourages coordination and
coherence in the follow-up of their implementation;
5. Reaffirms that the least developed countries, as the most vulnerable group of countries, need enhanced
global support to overcome the structural challenges that they face in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and in this regard calls upon the international community to prioritize and strengthen support from all
sources to facilitate the coordinated implementation and coherent follow-up and monitoring of the Istanbul
Programme of Action, the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda in the least developed countries;
6. Calls upon the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to focus, within existing resources,
its analytical work on the least developed countries, with an emphasis on productive capacities, and their
measurement, on structural transformation and on their trade and development linkages, as a contribution to the
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms leading the least developed countries to overcome their structural
handicaps and reach their development goals;
7. Recognizes that significant additional domestic public and private resources, including at the subnational
level, supplemented by international assistance and foreign direct investment, as appropriate, will be critical for the
realization of sustainable development and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, and that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda acknowledge the centrality of domestic
resource mobilization, underscored by the principle of national ownership;
8. Also recognizes that, while the least developed countries have made considerable efforts to mobilize
domestic resources and attract private investment, further progress is needed;
9. Expresses its concern that, while the least developed countries are in need of increased global support,
bilateral official development assistance to those countries declined by 3 per cent in real terms in 2018 compared with
2017 after increasing by 4 per cent in 2017 compared with 2016, and, expressing its appreciation to those countries
that have met or surpassed their commitments to providing at least 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official
development assistance to developing countries and the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for
official development assistance to the least developed countries, urges all others to step up efforts to increase their
official development assistance and to make additional concrete efforts towards the official development assistance
targets, reiterates that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments remains crucial, calls upon
developed countries to fulfil their respective official development assistance commitments to the least developed
countries, and encourages official development assistance providers to consider setting a target to provide at least
0.2 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to the least developed countries, while
reiterating that an important use of international public finance, including official development assistance, is to
catalyse additional resource mobilization from other sources, public and private;
10. Is encouraged by those countries that are allocating at least 50 per cent of their official development
assistance to the least developed countries;
11. Welcomes continued efforts to improve the quality, impact and effectiveness of development cooperation
and other international efforts in public finance, including adherence to agreed development cooperation effectiveness
principles;
12. Calls upon the developing countries, guided by the spirit of solidarity and consistent with their capabilities,
to provide support for the effective implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action in mutually agreed areas of
cooperation within the framework of South-South cooperation, which is a complement to but not a substitute for
North-South cooperation;
13. Notes that exports of goods and services of the least developed countries increased by 12 per cent in 2018
compared with 2017, expresses its concern that the share of goods and services exports, which stood at 0.94 per cent
in 2018, remains far from the target of 2 per cent of global exports called for in the Istanbul Programme of Action and
target 17.11 of the Sustainable Development Goals, also expresses its concern that the overall trade deficit of the least
developed countries continues to increase and has doubled since 2011, and calls upon the least developed countries
and their development partners to take the measures necessary to further accelerate progress, with a view to achieving
the targets of the Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
625

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

14. Urges the least developed countries and their development partners to make use of existing initiatives and
programmes, such as the relevant ministerial decisions of the World Trade Organization on duty-free and quota-free
market access for the least developed countries and on preferential rules of origin for those countries, as well as aid
for trade, reiterates its commitment to increasing aid-for-trade support, in particular for the least developed countries,
striving to allocate an increasing proportion of aid for trade to the least developed countries, in accordance with
development cooperation effectiveness principles, welcomes additional cooperation among developing countries to
that end, and encourages the least developed countries to mainstream trade in their national development plans;
15. Recognizes that the least developed countries face significant infrastructure gaps, including in the areas of
transport, energy, water, sanitation and information and communications technology, and reaffirms the need to
promote quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure and to enhance infrastructure connectivity with
concrete actions, maximizing synergies in infrastructure planning and development;
16. Emphasizes that the acute energy gap faced by the least developed countries is a severe constraint on their
structural transformation, and stresses that special attention should be given to the least developed countries, focusing
on the specific sustainable energy challenges of the least developed countries with specific programmes and multistakeholder partnerships tailored to meet the needs of those countries, throughout the United Nations Decade of
Sustainable Energy for All (2014–2024), including UN-Energy, with a view to ensuring the realization of the objective
of access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all by 2030 and to addressing the infrastructure
needs of the least developed countries;
17. Recognizes the significant potential of regional economic integration and interconnectivity to promote
trade, inclusive growth and sustainable development in the least developed countries, and stresses the need to
strengthen regional cooperation to improve connectivity and competitiveness, increase productivity, lower transaction
costs, expand markets and enable the least developed countries to integrate into regional and global value chains;
18. Also recognizes that maintaining sustainable debt levels is the responsibility of the borrowing countries,
while acknowledging that lenders also have a responsibility to lend in such a way that does not undermine a country’s
debt sustainability, recalls the need to strengthen information-sharing and transparency to make sure that debt
sustainability assessments are based on comprehensive, objective and reliable data, encourages Member States to
work towards global consensus and best practices on guidelines for debtor and creditor responsibilities in borrowing
by and lending to sovereigns, building on existing initiatives, and underlines that the debt sustainability framework
for the least developed countries should systematically take into account their structural constraints and longer-term
investment requirements for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals;
19. Expresses its deep concern that a number of the least developed countries are in debt distress or at high
risk of debt distress474 and that the ratio of debt service to exports has worsened sharply, rising from 4.2 per cent in
2008 to 9.4 per cent in 2018, underlines the urgent need to address the debt problems of the least developed countries,
stresses the need for the international community to remain vigilant in monitoring the debt situation of the least
developed countries and to continue to take effective measures, preferably within existing frameworks, when
applicable, to address the debt problem of those countries, including through coordinated policies aimed at fostering
debt financing, debt relief, debt restructuring and sound debt management, as appropriate, for the multilateral and
bilateral debt owed by the least developed countries to creditors, both public and private, reiterates its commitment to
working through existing initiatives, such as the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and the Multilateral Debt
Relief Initiative, and reaffirms the importance of transparency in debt management;
20. Notes that foreign direct investment flows to the least developed countries increased by 15 per cent in
2018 compared with 2017, after two consecutive years of decline, by 17 per cent in 2017 and 13 per cent in 2016, and
continued to concentrate on extractive and related industries, and underlines the need to take the measures necessary
at all levels to further accelerate foreign direct investment in the least developed countries;
21. Encourages the least developed countries, in accordance with their national plans and priorities and with
the full support of their development partners, to develop their capacities to track financial transactions, administer
taxation and regulate customs and to redouble their efforts to substantially reduce illicit financial flows by 2030, with
a view to eventually eliminating them, including by combating tax evasion and corruption through strengthened

_______________
474

626

See International Monetary Fund, Debt Sustainability Analysis: Low-Income Countries.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

national regulation, and also encourages the United Nations and other relevant international bodies to help to support
these efforts, in accordance with their respective mandates;
22. Recalls target 17.5 of the Sustainable Development Goals, in which the General Assembly decided to
adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for the least developed countries, and underlines the need for its
early implementation, invites the Secretary-General, in his capacity as the Chair of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, to retain the issue of investment promotion regimes for the least developed
countries on the agenda of the Board, with a view to enhancing the overall effectiveness of the support provided by
the United Nations system to increase the flow of foreign direct investment to the least developed countries and the
ability of those countries to attract such investment, and in that context recalls the initiative of the Office of the High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing
States, jointly with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the International Labour Organization, the Enhanced Integrated Framework and the
World Association of Investment Promotion Agencies, to set up a capacity-development programme for the
investment promotion agencies of the least developed countries, and calls for financial support to operationalize this
programme;
23. Notes the importance of the work of the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries in improving
the scientific research and innovation base of such countries, promoting networking among researchers and research
institutions, helping such countries to access and utilize critical technologies, and drawing together bilateral initiatives
and support by multilateral institutions and the private sector, and implementing projects contributing to the use of
science, technology and innovation for economic development in the least developed countries, takes note with
appreciation of the contributions that Bangladesh, Guinea, India, Norway and Turkey have made, as well as the
pledges made by the Sudan, and invites Member States, as well as international organizations, foundations and the
private sector, to provide voluntary financial contributions and technical assistance to the Technology Bank to ensure
its effective operation;
24. Expresses its deep concern that the least developed countries are facing unprecedented challenges owing
to rapidly escalating climate risks and significant capacity constraints and are disproportionately affected by the
adverse impacts of climate change as well as the impact and the rise in frequency of natural and human-made disasters,
which further threaten food security, health and efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals, and expresses its concern that women and girls are often disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate
change and other environmental issues;
25. Welcomes the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on 23 September, and
notes the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit;
26. Recognizes that disasters, many of which are exacerbated by climate change, and which are increasing in
frequency and intensity, significantly impede progress towards sustainable development, and also recognizes the
synergies between the implementation of the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
acknowledges the importance of continued support for and international cooperation on adaptation and mitigation
efforts and on strengthening resilience, stresses the necessity of adequate and predictable financial resources from a
variety of sources, including public and private ones, highlights the specific needs and special circumstances of
developing countries, especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change,
recognizes that effective disaster risk management contributes to sustainable development, and in this regard
underlines the importance of strengthening disaster risk reduction and early warning systems in order to minimize the
consequences of disasters;
27. Underlines the need to reduce the vulnerability of the least developed countries to economic, natural and
environmental shocks and disasters, as well as climate change, and to enhance their ability to meet these and other
challenges by strengthening their resilience, and in this regard stresses that it is important that all countries and other
actors work together to further develop and implement concrete measures, on an urgent basis, at the national and
international levels so as to build the resilience of the least developed countries to withstand economic shocks and
mitigate their adverse effects, to withstand and overcome the adverse effects of climate change, to enhance sustainable
growth and protect biodiversity and to withstand natural hazards in order to reduce the risk of disasters, as agreed
upon in the Istanbul Programme of Action;
28. Also underlines the need to address the economic, social and environmental impacts of climate change,
and emphasizes the need for national and international action to enhance efforts to build resilience, especially for the
627

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

most vulnerable, including by mainstreaming resilience into investment decision-making, building resilience through
the sustainable management of ecosystems and value chains, building the resilience of health systems and building
resilience to reduce the impact and cost of natural disasters;
29. Further underlines the importance of improving the coordination and effectiveness of resilience-building
initiatives for the least developed countries by leveraging existing measures at the national, regional and global levels
to respond to various types of disasters and shocks, as elaborated in the report of the Secretary-General on crisis
mitigation and resilience-building for the least developed countries;475
30. Encourages countries to develop national and local disaster risk reduction strategies by 2020 in
accordance with target (e) of the Sendai Framework, recognizes the importance of promoting their alignment and
integration with sustainable development and climate change adaptation strategies, also recognizes that the
development of climate change adaptation and national disaster risk reduction strategies by 2020 is an opportunity to
maximize synergies across the Sustainable Development Goals, the Paris Agreement and the Sendai Framework, and
in this regard calls for disaster risk reduction to be considered in the review of and follow‑up to the Istanbul
Programme of Action;
31. Reiterates the call to substantially enhance international cooperation with developing countries through
adequate and sustainable support to complement their national actions for the implementation of the Sendai
Framework by 2030;
32. Underlines the importance of peaceful and inclusive societies for the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, and recalls the objectives of the Istanbul Programme of Action of enhancing good governance
at all levels by strengthening democratic processes, building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions and the
rule of law; increasing efficiency, coherence, transparency and participation; advancing gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls; protecting and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms; reducing
corruption and curbing illicit financial flows; and strengthening the capacity of the Governments of the least developed
countries to play an effective role in their economic and social development;
33. Recognizes the importance of developing domestic capital markets in the least developed countries, which
can help to channel the growing pool of domestic savings towards productive investments, reaffirms its commitment
to enhancing international support in developing domestic capital markets in developing countries, in particular in the
least developed countries, and reaffirms its commitment to working to strengthen capacity-building in this area,
including through regional, interregional and global forums for knowledge-sharing, technical assistance and datasharing, on mutually agreed terms;
34. Reaffirms that achieving gender equality, the empowerment of all women and girls and the full realization
of the human rights of all people is essential to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and
sustainable development, and reiterates the need for gender mainstreaming, including targeted actions and
investments in the formulation and implementation of all financial, economic, environmental and social policies in
the least developed countries;
35. Notes with concern that continued rapid population growth in the least developed countries, which is
currently 2.3 per cent annually, is projected to double the population of many of them between 2019 and 2050, notes
that, in the least developed countries, the number of adolescents and youth aged from 15 to 24 years is projected to
grow from 207 million in 2019 to 336 million in 2050, and underlines the importance of integrating population
dynamics into national development strategies and plans to facilitate targeted investment in the health and modern
science-based education of the young people who will soon join the labour force, with a view to ensuring their
successful integration into the labour market and leveraging the opportunities presented by the demographic dividend;
36. Recognizes that particular efforts are needed to ensure that all young people, including girls, enjoy access
to lifelong learning opportunities and equal access to quality education at all levels, inclusive of early childhood,
primary, secondary and tertiary education, as well as technical and vocational training, notes with concern, in this
regard, the lack of progress in closing gender gaps in access to, retention in and completion of secondary education,
recognizes the need to continue to provide and encourage, as appropriate, institutes of higher education to allocate
places and scholarships for students and trainees from the least developed countries, in particular in the fields of

_______________
475

628

A/72/270.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

science, technology, business management and economics, and to strengthen support for institutions in relation to
gender equality and the empowerment of women at the global, regional and national levels, and recognizes that the
least developed countries have the most to gain from sustainable development and utilizing the full skills and talents
of their people, including women and girls;
37. Also recognizes that increasing participation, supporting the empowerment of civil society, youth and
women and strengthening collective action will contribute to the eradication of poverty and the achievement of
sustainable development;
38. Congratulates those countries that have met the criteria for graduation from least developed country status,
notes with appreciation that several of the least developed countries have expressed their intention to reach the status
of graduation by 2020, invites those countries to start the preparations for their graduation and transition strategy, and
requests all relevant organizations of the United Nations system, led by the Office of the High Representative, to
extend the necessary support in this regard, in a coordinated manner;
39. Acknowledges that the graduation of a country symbolizes its considerable long-term socioeconomic
progress, prevailing over the structural handicaps to socioeconomic development, and that it also presents many
challenges for graduated countries, which continue to face vulnerabilities to various shocks and crises;
40. Invites the least developed countries and development partners to integrate graduation and smooth
transition strategies into their respective national development and aid strategies, as appropriate, including capacitybuilding and technical assistance to diversify sources of financing;
41. Notes with appreciation that some development partners have extended some of the benefits specific to
the least developed countries to countries that have graduated, taking into account the challenges that they continue
to face, and invites all development partners to strengthen their support for graduation and smooth transition so that
graduating and recently graduated countries can minimize disruption in their development trajectory;
42. Invites countries that are found eligible for graduation to establish a consultative mechanism, in line with
General Assembly resolution 67/221, to prepare the transition strategy as early as possible, engaging all relevant
donors and stakeholders;
43. Recognizes that the activities relating to the least developed countries carried out within the Secretariat
need to be further coordinated and consolidated in order to ensure the effective monitoring and follow-up of the
Istanbul Programme of Action, led by the Office of the High Representative, and to provide well-coordinated support
to realizing the goal of enabling half of the least developed countries to meet the criteria for graduation by 2020;
44. Welcomes the work of the Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Least Developed Countries, led by the
Office of the High Representative, notes the steps taken by the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination and the High-level Committee on Programmes in supporting the coordination and follow-up of the
implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action on a system-wide basis, and reiterates its invitation to
the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the Chief Executives Board, to include the implementation of the
Programme of Action in the agenda of the Board;
45. Welcomes and accepts with appreciation the generous offer of the Government of Qatar to host the Fifth
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries in Doha;
46. Decides to convene the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries in Doha from
21 to 25 March 2021 at the highest possible level, including Heads of State and Government, in line with the mandate
specified in its resolution 73/242;
47. Also decides that the meeting of the intergovernmental preparatory committee agreed upon in
paragraph 43 of its resolution 73/242 shall be organized in New York in two parts, from 27 to 30 July 2020 and
from 11 to 15 January 2021, of no more than five working days each;
48. Further decides to establish the bureau of the Preparatory Committee, consisting of two members of each
regional group, that Qatar, as the host country, and Malawi, as the Chair of the Group of Least Developed Countries,
will serve as ex officio members of the bureau and that the bureau will be co-chaired by two Member States, one a
developed State and one a developing State;

629

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

49. Invites Qatar to host, with the assistance of the Office of the High Representative, within its existing
mandate and resources, a segment during the Conference to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the
establishment of the Group of Least Developed Countries, and encourages relevant representatives of Member States
to participate therein;
50. Invites the Secretary-General to convene a United Nations system high-level event during the
Conference, with a view to ensuring the full mobilization of the United Nations system in support of the least
developed countries;
51. Requests the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Economic and Social Council to
organize a half-day dedicated thematic event in the first semester of 2020 in order to provide substantive input to the
Conference;
52. Stresses the importance of the effective participation of all relevant stakeholders, including
parliamentarians, civil society and the private sector, in the Conference and its preparatory process, and decides:
(a) To invite non-governmental organizations that are in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council to register with the Secretariat in order to participate in the Conference and its preparatory process;
(b) To request the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of representatives of other relevant
non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who may
participate in the Conference and its preparatory process as observers, taking into account the principles of
transparency and of equitable geographical representation and with due regard for the participation of women, and to
submit the proposed list to Member States for their consideration on a non-objection basis and bring the list to the
attention of the Assembly;476
53. Requests the organs, organizations, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to undertake
sectoral appraisals in their respective fields of competence on the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of
Action, with special emphasis on areas where implementation has remained insufficient, and to make proposals for
new measures, as necessary, as further inputs to the preparation for the Conference, and in this regard affirms that
appropriate inter-agency meetings should be convened in order to ensure the full mobilization and coordination of the
entire United Nations system, including the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, the World Bank Group, the International Monetary Fund and regional bodies according
to their respective mandates;
54. Decides that the Office of the High Representative shall be the focal point for the substantive and
organizational preparations for the Conference, in accordance with mandates given in General Assembly resolution
56/227 of 24 December 2001, to ensure that those preparations are carried out effectively and to mobilize and
coordinate the active involvement of the entire United Nations system;
55. Also decides that the Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States shall serve as the Secretary-General
of the Conference, and be responsible for making the arrangements necessary for carrying out the work of the
Conference;
56. Reiterates the critical importance of the full and effective participation of the least developed countries in
the Conference and its preparatory processes at the national, regional and global levels, stresses that adequate
resources should be provided, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to mobilize voluntary contributions
in order to cover the cost of the participation of government representatives from the least developed countries;
57. Invites Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, major groups and other
donors to contribute in a timely manner to the trust fund in support of activities undertaken by the Office of the High
Representative to support the implementation, follow-up and monitoring of the Istanbul Programme of Action and
the participation of the representatives from the least developed countries in the high-level political forum on

_______________
The list of proposed as well as final names will be brought to the attention of the General Assembly. Where a name is objected to, the
objecting Member State will, on a voluntary basis, make known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly the general basis of
its objections and the Office will share any information received with any Member State upon its request.
476

630

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

sustainable development of the Economic and Social Council as well as in other relevant forums and the Conference
and its preparatory process, and in this regard expresses its appreciation to those countries that have made voluntary
contributions to the trust fund;
58. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of relevant organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, including the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat, in collaboration with the
Office of the High Representative, to take the measures necessary to intensify their public information efforts and
other appropriate initiatives to enhance public awareness of the Conference, including by highlighting its objectives
and its significance;
59. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report
on the implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action over the past 10 years, identifying, inter alia, progress
made, lessons learned and best practices, as well as structural constraints and handicaps encountered in achieving the
objectives of the Programme of Action, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session,
under the item entitled “Groups of countries in special situations”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries”.
RESOLUTION 74/233
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/383/Add.2, para. 9)477

74/233. Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration478 and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014–2024,479
Reaffirming the overarching goal of the Vienna Programme of Action of addressing the special development
needs and challenges of landlocked developing countries arising from their landlockedness, remoteness and
geographical constraints in a more coherent manner and thus contributing to an enhanced rate of sustainable and
inclusive growth, which can contribute to the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme
poverty,
Recalling its resolutions 71/239 of 21 December 2016, 72/232 of 20 December 2017 and 73/243 of
20 December 2018,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Resolution 69/137, annex I.
479
Ibid., annex II.
477
478

631

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement480 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change481 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Recalling the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,482 while
recognizing that landlocked developing countries face some specific disaster risk challenges, and reiterating the
commitment to addressing disaster risk reduction and building resilience to disasters within the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication,
Reaffirming the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,483 and recognizing the importance of
sustainable urban development for landlocked developing countries,
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the sea, aggravated by remoteness from world markets and high
transit costs and risks, continues to pose serious constraints on the overall growth and socioeconomic development of
landlocked developing countries,
Acknowledging the importance of promoting collaboration between landlocked developing countries and transit
countries on the basis of common interest, and noting that collaboration efforts need to be supported by an enabling
international economic environment, taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of
development and respecting national priorities, while remaining consistent with international rules and commitments,
Recognizing the transport infrastructure gap in landlocked developing countries and the need to bring the level
of transport infrastructure up to global standards and, in this regard, the crucial importance of strong national and
international partnerships to bridging the gap and enhancing existing transport infrastructure facilities,
Acknowledging the need to promote meaningful regional integration to encompass cooperation among countries
for the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action,
Recognizing that it is important for all countries, including landlocked developing countries, to commit to a
world in which all women and girls enjoy full gender equality with men and boys and all legal, social and economic
barriers to their empowerment and equality have been removed,
Taking note of the declaration of the annual Ministerial Meeting of Landlocked Developing Countries, held at
United Nations Headquarters on 25 September 2019 on the theme “Midterm review of the Vienna Programme of
Action: renewed strength to accelerate implementation and transformation in landlocked developing countries”,
Recognizing that the Vienna Programme of Action, which is integral to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, is based on renewed and strengthened partnerships for supporting landlocked developing countries in
harnessing benefits from international trade, structurally transforming their economies and achieving more inclusive
and sustainable growth,
Reaffirming the recognition of the special needs and challenges of landlocked developing countries in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development, and affirming further that their effective implementation, together with the
implementation of the six priority areas of the Vienna Programme of Action, which builds upon the Almaty
Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global
Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries,484 can drive the
social and economic progress of landlocked developing countries and assist in their transformation from landlocked
to land-linked countries,

_______________
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
482
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
483
Resolution 71/256, annex.
484
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003
(A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
480
481

632

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024;485
2. Welcomes the convening of the comprehensive high-level midterm review of the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024479 in New York on
5 and 6 December 2019 and the high-level Political Declaration,486 in which all the relevant stakeholders are called
upon to commit to the accelerated implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action;
3. Notes the convening of the regional review meetings in preparation for the comprehensive high-level
midterm review of the Vienna Programme of Action for the Euro-Asia region in Bangkok on 11 and 12 February
2019, for the Africa region in Marrakech, Morocco, on 18 and 19 March 2019 and for the Latin America region in
Santiago on 11 and 12 June 2019;
4. Underlines the need to give particular attention to the concerns and specific challenges of landlocked
developing countries in all relevant major United Nations conferences and processes;
5. Invites the landlocked developing countries, transit countries, their development partners, the United
Nations system and all other actors to implement the relevant actions, consistent with national priorities, agreed upon
in the Vienna Programme of Action in its six priority areas in a coordinated, coherent and expeditious manner;
6. Invites Member States that have not yet done so to mainstream the Vienna Programme of Action into their
national and sectoral development strategies in order to ensure its effective implementation, and encourages
development partners, the United Nations system and the relevant international and regional organizations to continue
to provide technical support, within their respective mandates, to the landlocked developing countries in their efforts
to mainstream the Vienna Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development487 into their
national development strategies;
7. Stresses that the harmonization, simplification and standardization of rules and documentation should be
promoted, including the full and effective implementation of international conventions on transport and transit and
bilateral, subregional and regional agreements, and invites Member States that have not joined the existing
conventions to consider the possibility of accession;
8. Calls upon the landlocked developing countries and transit countries, in a coordinated manner, to develop
and upgrade international transport and transit corridors encompassing all modes of transportation, including roads,
railroads, inland waterways, ports and pipelines, to address the special development needs and challenges of
landlocked developing countries;
9. Encourages multilateral financial and development institutions and multilateral development banks,
including regional banks, in collaboration with other stakeholders, including the private sector, to make investments
in addressing gaps in renewable energy, information and communications technology, e-commerce, trade, transport
and transit-related regional infrastructure;
10. Calls for the full and timely implementation of the Agreement on Trade Facilitation annexed to the
Protocol amending the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, and in this regard urges
members and relevant international and regional organizations to continue to provide and enhance technical and
capacity-building assistance, particularly for the effective implementation of the provisions of articles on the release
and clearance of goods, border agency cooperation, formalities connected with importation, exportation and transit,
freedom of transit and customs cooperation;
11. Also calls for renewed and strengthened partnerships to support landlocked developing countries in
diversifying their economic base and enhancing value addition to their exports in order to eradicate poverty and
achieve sustainable, inclusive and sustained economic growth;
12. Reiterates its invitation to development partners to provide targeted technical and financial support, as
appropriate, towards the implementation of the specific actions listed in the Vienna Programme of Action;

_______________
A/74/113.
Resolution 74/15.
487
Resolution 70/1.
485
486

633

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

13. Underlines that South-South and triangular cooperation are vital to the landlocked developing countries,
especially in the areas of productive capacity-building, infrastructure, energy, science and technology, trade,
investment and transit transport cooperation, and in this regard highlights the importance of the second High-level
United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation in addressing the needs of countries in special situations;
14. Recognizes that landlocked developing countries and their transit country neighbours need to effectively
mobilize adequate domestic and external resources for the effective implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action, reaffirms that, for all countries, public policies and the mobilization and effective use of domestic resources,
underlined by the principle of national ownership, are central to the common pursuit of sustainable development,
including the implementation of the Programme of Action, and also recognizes that international public finance plays
an important role in complementing those efforts, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable countries with limited
domestic resources;
15. Underlines the prominent role that foreign direct investment plays in accelerating development and
poverty reduction through employment, the transfer of managerial and technological know-how, on mutually agreed
terms, and non-debt-creating flows of capital, recognizes the considerable role and potential of private sector
involvement in infrastructure development for transport, telecommunications and utilities for landlocked developing
countries, encourages Member States to facilitate foreign direct investment flows to landlocked developing countries
in this regard, and calls upon landlocked and transit developing countries to promote an enabling environment to
attract foreign direct investment and private sector involvement;
16. Reiterates that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments remains crucial, with
providers of official development assistance reaffirming their respective commitments;
17. Recognizes the essential role of the private sector in the development of landlocked developing countries,
and in this regard underlines the need to continue to promote the participation of the private sector in achieving
sustainable development and the critical importance of mobilizing private resources, including through foreign direct
investment, for the development of landlocked developing countries, taking into account the leading role of Member
States in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for Development488 and the Vienna Programme of Action;
18. Invites development partners to effectively implement the Aid for Trade initiative in assisting landlocked
developing countries to address their special needs and requirements, including capacity-building for the formulation
of trade policies, participation in trade negotiations and the implementation of trade facilitation measures, as well as
the diversification of export products;
19. Recognizes that landlocked developing countries are vulnerable to and remain negatively affected by the
adverse impacts of climate change, land degradation, desertification, deforestation, receding glaciers, floods, including
glacial lake outburst floods, and droughts, recognizes the potential benefits of mutually addressing these challenges,
and calls upon the international community to continue to support the efforts of landlocked developing countries
towards climate change mitigation, adaptation and resilience-building;
20. Takes note of scientific research undertaken by the International Think Tank for Landlocked Developing
Countries, encourages the International Think Tank to continue to undertake its role of supporting the development
efforts of the landlocked developing countries, urges those landlocked developing countries that have not yet done so
to ratify, at their earliest convenience, the Multilateral Agreement for the Establishment of an International Think Tank
for Landlocked Developing Countries, and invites relevant stakeholders to support the International Think Tank;
21. Urges that coherent and effective linkages be made between the implementation, follow-up and review
arrangements for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and those of all relevant United Nations conferences
and processes, including the Vienna Programme of Action;
22. Calls upon relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, and invites international
organizations and relevant regional and subregional organizations, to integrate the Vienna Programme of Action into
their programmes of work, as appropriate, within their respective mandates, and to support landlocked and transit
developing countries in their implementation of the Programme of Action in a well-coordinated and coherent manner;

_______________
488

634

Resolution 69/313, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

23. Stresses that, in accordance with the mandate given by the General Assembly, the Office of the High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing
States should continue to ensure the coordinated follow-up to, effective monitoring of and reporting on the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action and the outcome of its midterm review and undertake advocacy
efforts at the national, regional and global levels;
24. Strongly encourages Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, major
groups and other donors to contribute in a timely manner to the trust fund in support of activities undertaken by the
Office of the High Representative to support the implementation of, follow-up to and monitoring of the Vienna
Programme of Action;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a progress
report on the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action, and decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Groups of countries in special situations”, the sub-item entitled
“Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries”.
RESOLUTION 74/234
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/384/Add.1, para. 8)489

74/234. Implementation of the Third United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 72/233 of 20 December 2017, 73/246 of 20 December 2018 and all other resolutions
related to the eradication of poverty,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement,490 and encouraging all its parties to fully implement the Agreement,
and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change491 that have not yet done so to deposit
their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the Paris Agreement, and noting with concern the findings contained in the special
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 degrees Celsius
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the
global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
491
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
489
490

635

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador, from 17 to 20 October 2016,492
Noting with concern the insufficient progress made in reducing the non-income dimensions of poverty, and
noting with concern also that, after steadily declining for more than a decade, global hunger is once again on the rise,
affecting 821.6 million people in 2018, up from 785.4 million in 2015, and that conflict, drought and flooding, among
other factors, have exacerbated the food insecurity situation in some parts of the world,
Recalling the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development493 and the
Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,494
Welcoming the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General, as well as the high-level
political forum on sustainable development, the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, the High-level
Dialogue on Financing for Development and the high-level meeting to review progress made in addressing the
priorities of small island developing States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway,495 convened under the auspices of the General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system and its general guidelines and principles, as well
as its resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018 and Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/15 of 8 July 2019, and
welcoming the efforts of the Secretary-General to better position the United Nations operational activities for
development to support countries in their efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in
the context of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system,
Recalling the adoption of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,496 and recognizing
the links between disaster resilience and poverty eradication and in this regard the need for a broader and more peoplecentred preventive approach to disaster risk,
Recognizing that trade and development can contribute to the eradication of poverty and that the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development therefore has a role to play in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
Recognizing also that the feminization of poverty persists and that the eradication of poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is an indispensable requirement for women’s economic empowerment and
sustainable development, and acknowledging the mutually reinforcing links between the achievement of gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and the eradication of poverty,
Concerned that the global economy is still facing difficult macroeconomic conditions and that, in recent years,
poverty reduction has started to stagnate in developing countries, owing to, inter alia, the global economic slowdown,
conflicts and the vulnerability of States to climate change and disasters, noting the heightened international policy
uncertainty with regard to trade and weaker global growth and that per capita gross domestic product growth in many
regions is significantly below the rates needed to eradicate poverty, and reiterating that those left behind are becoming
increasingly harder to reach, especially those living in rural areas and in vulnerable situations,
Underlining that the Third United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027), on the theme
“Accelerating global actions for a world without poverty”, will be important for maintaining the momentum generated
by the implementation of the Second Decade towards poverty eradication and ensuring that markets work better for
people living in poverty,

_______________
Resolution 71/256, annex.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
494
Resolution 63/239, annex.
495
Resolution 69/15, annex.
496
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
492
493

636

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time, that its adverse impacts undermine
the ability of all countries to achieve sustainable development, that increases in global temperature, sea level rise,
ocean acidification and other climate change impacts are seriously affecting coastal areas and low-lying coastal
countries, including many least developed countries and small island developing States, and that the survival of many
societies and of the biological support systems of the planet is at risk, which further threatens food security and efforts
to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development, and thus requires urgent action to maintain, preserve and
sustain the development gains achieved in the past decades,
Urging all countries that have not yet done so to ratify and accede to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption,497 encouraging parties to review its implementation, committing to making the Convention an effective
instrument to deter, detect, prevent and counter corruption and bribery, prosecute those involved in corrupt activities
and recover and return stolen assets to their country of origin, as appropriate, encouraging the international community
to develop good practices on asset return, expressing support for the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative of the United
Nations and the World Bank and other international initiatives that support the recovery of stolen assets, urging that
regional conventions against corruption be updated and ratified, and striving to eliminate safe havens that create
incentives for the transfer abroad of stolen assets and illicit financial flows,
Committed to working to strengthen regulatory frameworks at all levels to further increase the transparency and
accountability of financial institutions and the corporate sector, as well as public administrations, and to strengthening
international cooperation and national institutions to combat money-laundering and the financing of terrorism,
Reaffirming that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge facing the world today and an overarching objective of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, of which the Addis Ababa Action Agenda is an integral part, as well as an ethical, social, political,
environmental and economic imperative for all humankind and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, particularly in Africa, in least developed countries, in landlocked developing countries, in small island
developing States and in some middle-income countries, as well as countries in conflict and post-conflict situations,
and underlining the importance of addressing the multidimensional nature of development and poverty and
accelerating sustainable, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development, including full,
productive employment and decent work for all, with a view to reducing inequalities within and among countries,
Recognizing the importance of supporting countries in their efforts to eradicate poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, and to promote the empowerment of the poor and people in vulnerable
situations, including women, children and youth, indigenous peoples and local communities, older persons, persons
with disabilities, migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons,
Reaffirming the political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, held in New York
on 23 September 2019, entitled “Universal health coverage: moving together to build a healthier world”,498
Underlining the primary responsibility of Member States to promote universal health coverage that comprises
universal and equitable access to quality health services and ensures affordable and quality service delivery, especially
through primary health care and social protection mechanisms, with the support of enhanced international cooperation
and with a view to providing access to health services for all, including those who are in vulnerable situations, and
underlining also that women and children are particularly affected by disasters and outbreaks,
Recognizing the centrality of mobilizing financial and non-financial resources for development at the national
and international levels and the effective use of those resources, as well as the importance of policy coherence and a
coordinated approach that involves participation at all levels by all actors to promote an enabling environment for
sustainable development, and of reinvigorating the global partnership for sustainable development in support of the
achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, in particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which builds upon the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals,
Underscoring that, for all countries, public policies and the mobilization and effective use of domestic resources,
underscored by the principle of national ownership, are central to the common pursuit of sustainable development,
including achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, recognizing that domestic resources are first and foremost

_______________
497
498

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.
Resolution 74/2.

637

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

generated by economic growth, supported by an enabling environment at all levels, including well-functioning,
efficient and transparent tax systems, and acknowledging the important role that multi-stakeholder partnerships,
including with the private sector, can play in generating new investments, employment and financing for development,
Reaffirming that official development assistance remains an important source of financing for development in
developing countries,
Acknowledging that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South
cooperation, and acknowledging also the contributions of South-South and triangular cooperation to the efforts of
developing countries to eradicate poverty and pursue sustainable development,
Emphasizing the essential role of inclusive and sustainable industrial development as part of a comprehensive
strategy of structural economic transformation in eradicating poverty and supporting sustained economic growth and
thus in contributing to achieving sustainable development in developing countries,
Taking note of the work done under the inter-agency, system-wide plan of action for poverty eradication
coordinating the efforts of the United Nations system in its advisory and programmatic support to Member States,
involving more than 21 agencies, funds, programmes and regional commissions, and encouraging the alignment of
that work with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Underlining the priority and urgency given by Heads of State and Government to the eradication of poverty in
all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, as expressed in the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General499 examining the progress made in eradicating poverty,
outlining the progress made by the United Nations system in implementing the inter-agency, system-wide plan of
action for poverty eradication and presenting recommendations for making the Third United Nations Decade for the
Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027) effective, in support of poverty eradication-related internationally agreed
development goals;
2. Recognizes the importance of strengthening national statistical capacity and monitoring systems to ensure
access to data that are of high quality, accessible, timely, reliable and disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity,
migration status, disability and geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts, harnessing
partnerships, fostering the global exchange of ideas and experiences and showcasing innovative and efficient
initiatives and strategies to eradicate poverty, reduce inequalities within and among countries and promote decent
work for all;
3. Reaffirms that the objective of the Third Decade is to maintain the momentum generated by the
implementation of the Second Decade and to support, in an efficient and coordinated manner, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,500 and its Sustainable Development Goals, especially Goal 1, and their objective of leaving
no one behind and reaching the furthest behind first, as well as other internationally agreed development goals;
4. Also reaffirms that each country must take primary responsibility for its own sustainable development and
that the role of national policies and development strategies for the achievement of sustainable development and
poverty eradication cannot be overemphasized, and recognizes that increased effective national efforts should be
complemented by concrete, effective and supportive international programmes, measures and policies aimed at
expanding the development opportunities of developing countries, while taking into account national conditions and
ensuring respect for national ownership strategies and sovereignty;
5. Notes that the world as a whole is not on track to eradicate extreme poverty by 2030, and stresses the
resolve to eradicate extreme poverty for all people everywhere as well as the efforts to reduce, at least by half, the
proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all its forms and dimensions, according to
national definitions;
6. Expresses its deep concern that, while there has been progress in reducing poverty, such progress remains
uneven, with 1.3 billion people still living in multidimensional poverty, this number continues to be significant and

_______________
499
500

638

A/74/210.
Resolution 70/1.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

unacceptably high, the levels of inequality in income, wealth and opportunities remain high or are increasing within
and between many countries, and the non-income dimensions of poverty and deprivation, such as access to quality
education or basic health services, and relative poverty remain major concerns;
7. Calls upon the international community, including Member States and the organizations of the United
Nations development system, including the funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, in accordance with
their mandates, to continue to accord the highest priority to poverty eradication within the United Nations
development agenda and to urgently take measures to address the root causes and challenges of poverty in all its forms
and dimensions, including extreme poverty, hunger, and all forms of malnutrition, in the light of their negative impacts
on sustainable development, through integrated, coordinated and coherent strategies at all levels, in accordance with
the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields, and
calls upon donor countries, multilateral organizations and other development partners in a position to do so to support
the effective national efforts of developing countries in this regard through predictable financial resources and
technical assistance on bilateral and multilateral bases;
8. Also calls upon the international community, including Member States, to continue their ambitious efforts
to strive for more inclusive, equitable, balanced, stable and development-oriented sustainable socioeconomic
approaches to overcoming poverty, and, in view of the negative impact of all forms of inequality, including gender
inequality and inequality within and between countries, on poverty, emphasizes the importance of structural
transformation that leads to inclusive and sustainable industrialization for employment creation and poverty reduction,
investing in sustainable agriculture and develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including
regional and transborder infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being, with a focus on
affordable and equitable access for all, enhancing interconnectivity and achieving access to energy, and improving
access to financial services, as well as promoting decent work in the rural economy, improving access to quality
education, promoting quality health-care services, including through the acceleration of the transition towards
equitable access to universal health coverage, providing affordable and secure housing for people in vulnerable
situations, advancing gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, expanding social protection
coverage, climate change mitigation and adaptation and combating inequality within and between countries and social
exclusion, especially of the furthest behind;
9. Recognizes the urgent need to address poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty,
hunger, malnutrition and food insecurity, which will lead to rich payoffs across the Sustainable Development Goals,
and encourages the international community to enhance international cooperation and to devote resources to
developing rural and urban areas and sustainable agriculture and fisheries and to supporting smallholder farmers,
especially women farmers, herders and fishers in developing countries, particularly in the least developed countries;
10. Invites all relevant stakeholders, including organizations of the United Nations system and civil society
organizations, to share good practices relating to programmes and policies that address inequalities for the benefit of
those living in extreme poverty and promote the active participation of those living in extreme poverty in the design
and implementation of such programmes and policies, with the aim of achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
11. Welcomes the contributions of South-South cooperation to poverty eradication and sustainable
development, in this regard also welcomes the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation, held in Buenos Aires from 20 to 22 March 2019, and its outcome document,501 reaffirms that SouthSouth cooperation is an important element of international cooperation for development as a complement to, not a
substitute for, North-South cooperation, recognizes that South-South and triangular cooperation contribute to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and to achieving the overarching goal of eradication
of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, and commits to strengthening South-South and triangular cooperation as a
means of bringing relevant experience and expertise to bear in development cooperation;
12. Emphasizes the importance of the outcome of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of
Poverty of promoting and supporting the integration of decent work and poverty eradication into national and
international policies, strategies and programmes, with a particular focus on those who risk being left behind, by, inter
alia, implementing measures to formalize employment, consider introducing or strengthening minimum wages,

_______________
501

Resolution 73/291, annex.

639

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

guarantee respect for freedom of association and collective bargaining rights, combat all forms of discrimination in
employment and end child and forced labour, including in agriculture and rural areas;
13. Notes with concern the continuing high levels of unemployment and underemployment, with 172 million
people unemployed globally in 2018, a number that is expected to increase to 174 million in 2020, recognizes that
decent work for all remains one of the best routes out of poverty, and in this regard invites donor countries, multilateral
organizations and other development partners to continue to assist Member States, in particular developing countries,
in adopting policies consistent with the Global Jobs Pact adopted by the International Labour Conference at its ninetyeighth session;
14. Also notes with concern that 262 million children and young people between the ages of 6 and 17 were
out of school in 2017, in this regard recognizes that substantial and efficiently spent investments are needed to improve
the quality of and access to education and in order to enable millions of people to acquire skills for decent work, and
takes note with appreciation of the report of the International Commission on Financing Global Education
Opportunity and the recommendations contained therein, as appropriate;
15. Encourages the international community to support developing countries in their efforts to eradicate
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, and achieve gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls, the poor and people in vulnerable situations, with a view to achieving the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, as established by the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which builds upon the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and addresses
their unfinished business, improving tax systems and access to financial services, including affordable microfinance
and credit, removing barriers to opportunity, enhancing productive capacity, entrepreneurship, creativity and
innovation, encouraging the formalization and growth of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, developing
sustainable agriculture and promoting full and productive employment and decent work for all, emphasizing the
important role of national efforts aimed at bringing workers from the informal to the formal economy, guided, as
appropriate, by the Transition from the Informal to the Formal Economy Recommendation, 2015 (No. 204), of the
International Labour Organization, complemented by national efforts on effective social policies, including social
protection floors, and in this regard takes note of the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), of
the International Labour Organization;
16. Reaffirms that, while social protection has proved to be effective in reducing poverty and inequality,
including non-contributory social protection programmes and cash transfers, coverage remains extremely low in
countries with the highest poverty rates, also reaffirms that investments and innovation in the social sector, in particular
in education and health, contribute to the alleviation of poverty and reduction of inequalities and enhance human
resource development, and emphasizes the importance of ensuring that social protection systems and measures for
all, including floors, are consistent with national development strategies, well designed, efficiently operated,
responsive to shocks and sustainable in the long term;
17. Stresses the importance of taking targeted measures to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, of implementing nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all,
including social protection floors, and of achieving substantial coverage of the poor and the vulnerable, and
encourages Member States to continue to develop and implement social protection floors based on national priorities,
paying particular attention to women, children, older persons, indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities;
18. Reaffirms its commitment to embracing diversity in cities and human settlements, to strengthening social
cohesion, intercultural dialogue and understanding, tolerance, mutual respect, gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls, innovation, entrepreneurship, inclusion, identity and safety, and the dignity of all people, as
well as to fostering liveability and a vibrant urban economy and to taking steps to ensure that local institutions promote
pluralism and peaceful coexistence within increasingly heterogeneous and multicultural societies;
19. Acknowledges that good governance at the national and international levels and sustainable, inclusive,
sustained and equitable economic growth, supported by full employment and decent work for all, and social
integration, rising productivity and a favourable environment, including public and private investment, inter alia,
public-private partnerships in a wide range of areas and entrepreneurship, are necessary to eradicate poverty, to
achieve the internationally agreed development goals, in particular the Sustainable Development Goals, and to realize
a rise in living standards, and that corporate social responsibility initiatives play an important role in maximizing the
impact of public and private investment;

640

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

20. Stresses the importance of using multidimensional indicators and developing transparent measurements
of progress on sustainable development that complement gross domestic product in order to effectively reflect the
reality of the populations of all developing countries, eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, and reduce inequality everywhere, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and encourages the United Nations system to continue to support developing countries in capacity
development in such areas as building national statistical systems, data analysis and disaggregation, policy
formulation and the mainstreaming of the Sustainable Development Goals into national development plans and
strategies;
21. Recognizes that social and economic development depends on the sustainable management of the natural
resources of the planet, and stresses the importance of conserving and sustainably using oceans and seas, freshwater
resources, forests, mountains and drylands and protecting biodiversity, ecosystems and wildlife, as well as promoting
sustainable tourism, tackling water scarcity and water pollution, strengthening cooperation on desertification, dust
storms, degraded land and soil and drought, promoting resilience and disaster risk reduction, addressing decisively
the threat posed by climate change and environmental degradation and implementing the 10-Year Framework of
Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns;502
22. Also recognizes that sustainable, inclusive, sustained and equitable economic growth is essential for
eradicating poverty and hunger, in particular in developing countries, and stresses that national efforts in this regard
should be complemented by an enabling international environment and by ensuring greater coherence among
macroeconomic and social policies at all levels;
23. Stresses the importance of policies and actions that are not just gender-responsive but that actively seek to
advance the goal of gender equality and women’s and girls’ empowerment as well as to address longer-term structural
issues, including structural constraints faced by women as economic agents, and to remove any barriers that prevent
women from being full participants in the economy, by, inter alia, undertaking legislation and administrative reforms,
as appropriate, to give women equal rights with men in political and economic decision-making and access to
economic resources and to promote the reconciliation of work and family responsibilities, including through paid
maternity and parental leave and the redistribution of the disproportionate work burden of women engaged in unpaid
work, including domestic and care work, encourages the private sector, in accordance with national legislation, to
contribute to advancing gender equality by striving to ensure women’s full and productive employment and decent
work, equal pay for equal work or work of equal value and equal opportunities, as well as by protecting them against
discrimination and abuse in the workplace, and underlines that globally, gross domestic product could increase
significantly if every country achieved gender equality and increased participation of women in the formal labour
force;
24. Emphasizes the reference in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to the need to ensure the
significant mobilization of financial and non‑financial resources from a variety of sources, including through
enhanced development cooperation, as well as regional, subregional and interregional cooperation, in order to provide
predictable means for all developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, to implement programmes
and policies to end poverty in all its forms and dimensions;
25. Stresses that the achievement of sustainable development and the eradication of poverty also hinge on the
ability and readiness of countries to effectively mobilize domestic resources, attract foreign direct investment, fulfil
official development assistance (ODA) commitments and use ODA effectively, and facilitate the transfer of
technology, on mutually agreed terms, to developing countries, also stresses that the resolution of unsustainable debt
situations is critical for heavily indebted poor countries, while remittances, the transaction costs for which should be
reduced, have become a significant source of income and finance for receiving economies and their contribution to
the achievement of sustainable development;
26. Welcomes the increasing efforts to improve the quality of ODA and to increase its development impact,
recognizes the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council, notes other initiatives, such as
the high-level forums on aid effectiveness, which produced, inter alia, the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the
Accra Agenda for Action503 and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, which make

_______________
502
503

A/CONF.216/5, annex.
A/63/539, annex.

641

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made commitments to them, including through the
adoption of their fundamental principles, and bears in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that will guarantee
effective assistance and that the specific situation of each country needs to be fully considered;
27. Recognizes that domestic resources mobilization, underscored by the principle of national ownership and
supplemented by international assistance, as appropriate, will be critical to realizing sustainable development and
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals;
28. Emphasizes that international public finance plays an important role in complementing the efforts of
countries to mobilize public resources domestically, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable countries with
limited domestic resources;
29. Recognizes that private business activity, entrepreneurship, investment and innovation are major drivers
of productivity, inclusive economic growth and job creation and that private international capital flows, particularly
foreign direct investment, along with a stable international financial system, are vital complements to national
development efforts, also recognizes that more can be done to create competitive business and investment climates in
support of sustainable development that are well placed to attract private sector investment and participation, and
encourages an increase in the volume, quality, in particular its alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals,
diversification and long-term nature of foreign direct investment to all developing countries;
30. Notes that an important use of international public finance, including ODA, is to catalyse additional
resource mobilization from other sources, public and private, and through appropriately designed risk-sharing
instruments, including co‑investments, public-private partnerships and guarantees, and also notes that it can support
improved tax collection, help to strengthen domestic enabling environments and build essential public services and
can also be used to unlock additional finance through blended or pooled financing and risk mitigation, notably for
infrastructure and other investments that support private sector development;
31. Stresses the importance of mobilizing greater domestic support towards the fulfilment of ODA
commitments, including by raising public awareness, providing disaggregated data on aid effectiveness and
demonstrating tangible results, encourages partner countries to build on progress achieved in ensuring that ODA is
used effectively to help to achieve development goals and targets, also encourages the publication of forward-looking
plans that increase the clarity, predictability and transparency of future development cooperation, in accordance with
national budget allocation processes, and urges countries to track and report resource allocations for advancing gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls;
32. Expresses its concern that, according to preliminary data in 2018, ODA fell by 2.7 per cent, compared
with 2017, while bilateral (country-to-country) aid to least developed countries fell by 3 per cent, and that ODA was,
on average, 0.31 per cent of the aggregate donor gross national income in 2014, below the commitment of 0.7 per cent,
reiterates that the fulfilment of all ODA commitments remains crucial and that, for many least developed countries
and landlocked developing countries, ODA remains the largest source of external financing, therefore emphasizes the
importance of the commitments made by many countries to achieve the national target of 0.7 per cent of gross national
income and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for ODA to the least developed countries, and calls upon
developed countries to deliver on their commitments in relation to ODA;
33. Encourages all relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, to strengthen United Nations funding for the
eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, through voluntary contributions to
existing poverty-related system-wide funds;
34. Welcomes the ongoing work by the relevant organizations of the United Nations system to support the
implementation of the Third Decade, acknowledges the complexity of the challenge of poverty eradication, in this
regard emphasizes the need to strengthen the leadership role of the United Nations in promoting international
cooperation for development in accelerating poverty eradication and effectively implementing the Third Decade, and
that the organizations of the United Nations development system must be driven by national priorities, including
through the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, with the development of national
capacities and development strategies in developing countries continuing to be a core area of focus, and operate in an
integrated, coordinated and coherent manner, through development programmes and projects that address poverty
eradication as their underlying objective, within their respective mandates, in order to ensure that gains are irreversible,
making full use of the interlinked and mutually reinforcing pillars of the United Nations development system, and
encourages the use of diverse strategies;
642

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

35. Calls upon the international community to give priority to addressing the impacts of natural disasters,
climate change, conflicts and major outbreaks of disease, which are severely hampering efforts to achieve poverty
eradication, in particular in developing countries;
36. Recognizes the importance of addressing the diverse needs of and challenges faced by countries in special
situations, in particular African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States, as well as the specific challenges facing many middle-income countries and countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations, and therefore requests the United Nations development system, the international
financial institutions, regional organizations and other stakeholders to ensure that these diverse and specific
development needs are appropriately considered and addressed, in a tailored fashion, in their relevant strategies and
policies, with a view to promoting a coherent and comprehensive approach towards individual countries;
37. Welcomes the commemoration, on 17 October 2019, of the twenty-seventh anniversary of the
International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, on the theme “Acting together to empower children, their families
and communities to end poverty”, invites all States, organizations of the United Nations system, intergovernmental
organizations concerned and interested national organizations, including non-governmental organizations, to consider
organizing activities for the celebration in 2020 of the twenty-eighth anniversary of the International Day for the
Eradication of Poverty, in order to raise public awareness to promote the eradication of poverty and extreme poverty
in all countries, and in this regard recognizes the useful role that the observance of the International Day continues to
play in raising public awareness and mobilizing all stakeholders in the fight against poverty and promoting the active
participation of those living in extreme poverty in the design and implementation of programmes and policies that
affect them, with the aim of achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the gaps, challenges and progress made in the implementation of the Third Decade, and decides to include in the
provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Eradication of poverty and other development
issues”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the Third United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2018–2027)”, unless otherwise agreed.
RESOLUTION 74/235
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/384/Add.2, para. 23)504

74/235. Women in development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/104 of 20 December 1995, 52/195 of 18 December 1997, 54/210 of 22 December
1999, 56/188 of 21 December 2001, 58/206 of 23 December 2003, 59/248 of 22 December 2004, 60/210 of
22 December 2005, 62/206 of 19 December 2007, 64/217 of 21 December 2009, 66/216 of 22 December 2011,
68/227 of 20 December 2013, 69/236 of 19 December 2014, 70/219 of 22 December 2015 and 72/234 of
20 December 2017 and all its other resolutions on women in development, and the resolutions and agreed conclusions
adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women, as well as the declarations adopted at its forty‑ninth,505 fiftyfourth506 and fifty-ninth sessions,507
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
505
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2005/27 and E/2005/27/Corr.1),
chap. I, sect. A.
506
Ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2010/27 and E/2010/27/Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A.
507
Ibid., 2015, Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I, sect. C.
504

643

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Welcoming and recalling the commitments made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to promote
gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, including through the Sustainable Development Goal to
achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls and the commitments to gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls made across the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recalling the commitment of completing the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals,
including those related to maternal health and maternal mortality,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015, by which it endorsed the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the
Third International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing
and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and
solidarity,
Reaffirming also the recognition in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda that gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls and women’s full and equal participation and leadership in the economy are vital to the
achievement of sustainable development and significantly enhance economic growth and productivity,
Reaffirming further the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,508 while noting with appreciation that 2020
will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of their adoption and acknowledging the progress made since then, the
outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”509 and the international commitments made at relevant United
Nations summits and conferences in the area of gender equality and the empowerment of women, including in the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development510 and the key actions for its
further implementation,511
Reaffirming the importance of supporting Agenda 2063, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, as well as its 10‑year plan of action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive
socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next 50 years, its continental programme, embedded in the
resolutions of the General Assembly on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development512 and regional initiatives,
which promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls,
Reaffirming also the Paris Agreement513 and its early entry into force, and encouraging all parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change514 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Noting that action to address climate change should respect and promote gender equality and the empowerment
of women, bearing in mind the Lima Work Programme on Gender and its Gender Action Plan,

_______________
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
509
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
510
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
511
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
512
A/57/304, annex.
513
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
514
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
508

644

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming the political declaration of the 2019 high-level meeting on universal health coverage,515
Recalling the successful conclusion of the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,516
Recalling also its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system, which reaffirms that promoting gender equality
and empowerment of all women and girls, in accordance with the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcomes of relevant United Nations conferences and resolutions of the General Assembly, including through
investing in the development of women and girls and promoting their economic and political participation and equal
access to economic and productive resources and education, is of fundamental importance and has a multiplier effect
for achieving sustained and inclusive economic growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development,
Noting the importance of the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular its funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies, in facilitating the advancement and empowerment of women in
development, in line with resolution 71/243 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for development of the United Nations system,
Reiterating the importance and value of the mandate of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), welcoming the leadership of UN-Women in providing a strong voice for
women and girls at all levels, and reaffirming its important role in leading, coordinating and promoting accountability
of the United Nations system in its work on gender equality and the empowerment of women,
Taking note of the reports of the High-level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment, which outline the
transformative impact of unlocking the potential of women to participate in the economy and achieve financial
independence in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Strongly condemning the persistence and pervasiveness of violence against women and girls, stressing the need
to eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in public and private spaces, and encouraging Member
States to respond to all forms of violence against women and girls through multisectoral and coordinated approaches
and to end impunity and to adopt specific preventive measures to protect women, youth and children from any form
of abuse, including sexual abuse, harassment, exploitation, trafficking and violence,
Recognizing that the remaining effects of the world financial and economic crises have the potential to
undermine progress towards achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable
Development Goals, and that women remain especially affected by the slow pace of the global economic recovery,
Underlining that, globally, the gross domestic product growth rate could increase significantly if every country
achieved gender equality and the full participation of women in the workforce, and recognizing that the economic and
social losses owing to a lack of progress in achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls are
significant,
Reaffirming the provisions concerning the pursuit of full and productive employment and access to decent work
and social protection for all in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development,517 and calling upon States to adopt forward-looking macroeconomic policies that promote sustainable
development and lead to sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, increase productive employment
opportunities and promote agricultural and industrial development,
Recognizing that men and women workers should have equal access to quality education, skills training, lifelong
learning opportunities, health-care services, social security, fundamental rights at work, social and legal protections,
including occupational safety and health, and decent work opportunities, as well as, inter alia, equal pay for equal
work or work of equal value and equal opportunities for employment, leadership positions and decision-making at all
levels,

_______________
Resolution 74/2.
See resolution 71/256, annex.
517
Resolution 66/288, annex.
515
516

645

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing also that, in general, women and girls undertake a disproportionate share of unpaid care and
domestic work and that women spend less time in paid work, and that this unequal distribution of unpaid care and
domestic work contributes to greater time burdens on women and substantially limits their participation in the social,
political and economic spheres, and acknowledging the need to implement concrete measures to recognize, reduce
and equitably redistribute the disproportionate share of unpaid care and domestic work done by women, including
through the promotion of the equal sharing of responsibilities between women and men and by prioritizing, inter alia,
social protection policies and infrastructure development,
Noting with concern that women and girls are often disproportionately affected by natural disasters, the
unprecedented biodiversity loss and land degradation, desertification, deforestation, the adverse impact of climate
change and other environmental issues that have a differentiated impact on women and girls, owing to gender
inequality and the dependence of many women on natural resources for their livelihoods, emphasizing the need to
address disaster risk reduction and strengthen resilience with a renewed sense of urgency in the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication, recognizing the need to better understand the effects of natural disasters on
women and girls and to reduce their vulnerability by increasing their access to information and facilitating more
effective protection, assistance and evacuation measures, and recognizing that they should therefore be meaningfully
engaged, as appropriate, in efforts to address such matters,
Reaffirming that in nutrition and other related policies, special attention should be paid to the empowerment of
women and girls, thereby contributing to women’s full and equal access to social protection and resources, including
income, agricultural inputs, land, water, finance, education, training, science and technology and health care, thus
promoting food security and health,
Recognizing that the feminization of poverty persists and that the eradication of poverty in all its forms and
dimensions, including extreme poverty, is an indispensable requirement for women’s economic empowerment and
sustainable development, and acknowledging the mutually reinforcing links between the achievement of gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and the eradication of poverty,
Recognizing also, in this context, the importance of respect for all human rights, including the right to
development, and of a national and international environment that promotes, for women and girls, inter alia, justice,
gender equality, equity, civil and political participation and civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to achieve gender equality and the advancement and empowerment of women and
girls,
Recognizing further the challenges and obstacles to changing discriminatory attitudes, negative social norms
and gender stereotypes, which perpetuate multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination against women and girls
and stereotypical roles of men and women, and stressing that challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation
of international standards and norms to eliminate gender inequality,
Recognizing that poverty eradication and the achievement and preservation of peace are mutually reinforcing,
and recognizing also that peace is inextricably linked to gender equality and the empowerment of women and to
development,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;518

2. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development;519
3. Reaffirms that the realization of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls will make a
crucial contribution to progress across all the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, that the achievement of full
human potential and of sustainable development is not possible if one half of humanity continues to be denied its full
human rights and opportunities, that women and girls must enjoy equal access to quality education, economic

_______________
518
519

646

A/74/279.
A/74/111.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

resources and political participation, as well as equal opportunities with men and boys for employment, leadership
positions and decision-making at all levels, that it will work for a significant increase in investments to close the
gender gap and strengthen support for institutions in relation to gender equality and the empowerment of women at
the global, regional and national levels, that all forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls will be
eliminated, including through the engagement of men and boys, and that the systematic mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development520 is crucial;
4. Also reaffirms the commitment to promoting social inclusion in domestic policies and to promoting and
enforcing non-discriminatory laws, social infrastructure and policies for sustainable development, as well as to
enabling women’s full, equal and effective participation in the economy and their equal access to decision-making
processes and leadership;
5. Emphasizes the need to link policies on economic, social and environmental development to ensure that
all people, in particular women and children living in poverty and in vulnerable situations, benefit from inclusive
economic growth and development, in accordance with the goals of the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development,521 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome
document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation
of the Monterrey Consensus522 and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development;523
6. Reaffirms that achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls and the full realization of their
human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable
development, reiterates the need for gender mainstreaming, including targeted actions and investments in the
formulation and implementation of all financial, economic, environmental and social policies, and further reaffirms
the commitment to adopting and strengthening sound policies and enforceable legislation and transformative actions
for the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls at all levels to ensure women’s equal
rights, access and opportunities for participation and leadership in the economy and to eliminate gender-based
violence and discrimination in all its forms;
7. Stresses the importance of the creation by Governments, international organizations, including the United
Nations, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other stakeholders of a favourable and
conducive national and international environment in all areas of life for the effective integration of women and girls
in development, and of their undertaking and disseminating a gender analysis of legislation, policies and programmes
related to macroeconomic stability, structural reform, taxation, investments, including foreign direct investment, and
all relevant sectors of the economy;
8. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other international and regional organizations,
within their respective mandates, and all sectors of civil society, including non-governmental organizations, as well
as all women and men, to fulfil their respective commitments to intensify their contributions to the implementation
and follow-up of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,508 the outcomes of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly509 and the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development,510 as well as the outcomes of their reviews;
9. Recognizes the importance of the full engagement of men and boys as strategic partners, allies, agents and
beneficiaries of change for the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, and
commits to taking measures to fully engage men and boys in efforts to achieve the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the outcome document of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, the declarations adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women on the
occasions of the tenth,505 fifteenth506 and twentieth507 anniversaries of the Fourth World Conference on Women and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;

_______________
Resolution 70/1.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18−22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
522
Resolution 63/239, annex.
523
Resolution 69/313, annex.
520
521

647

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Also recognizes the mutually reinforcing links between gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls and poverty eradication, as well as the need to elaborate and implement, where appropriate, in
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, participatory, comprehensive, gender-sensitive poverty eradication
strategies that address social, structural and macroeconomic issues in order to ensure an adequate standard of living
for women and girls throughout the life cycle, including through social protection systems;
11. Urges States to scale up efforts to accelerate the transition of women from informal employment to formal
employment, including access to decent work, improved wages, social protection and quality childcare, and to
effectively support the recognition, reduction and equitable redistribution of unpaid care and domestic work by
women, including through sustained investments in the care economy;
12. Recognizes that unremunerated work, including unpaid care and domestic work, plays an essential role in
improving well-being in the household and in the functioning of the economy as a whole, and acknowledging the
need to recognize and consider, where appropriate, policies and programmes that would contribute to reducing the
unequal burden of unremunerated work, including unpaid care and domestic work, for which women and girls
continue to carry a disproportionately high level of responsibility, and to promote shared responsibility within the
household;
13. Calls for closing the gender gap in access to financial and productive resources, including assets,
information and services in agriculture, noting with concern that the gender gap persists with respect to many assets,
inputs and services, and stresses the need to invest in and strengthen efforts to empower women, in particular rural
women, to address their own food and nutritional needs and those of their families, to promote adequate standards of
living for them, as well as decent conditions of work, and to promote their personal health, well-being and security,
and guarantee their full access to land and natural resources and access to local, regional and global markets;
14. Recognizes the critical role and contribution of rural women in agricultural development, including
smallholders and women farmers, and indigenous women and women in local communities, and their traditional
knowledge in enhancing agricultural and rural development, improving food security and eradicating rural poverty,
and stresses the importance of reviewing agricultural policies and strategies to ensure that women’s critical role in
providing food security and nutrition is recognized and addressed as an integral part of both short- and long-term
responses to food insecurity, malnutrition, excessive price volatility and food crises in developing countries;
15. Reaffirms the need to end hunger and famine and achieve food security as a matter of priority, and to end
all forms of malnutrition, and in this regard reaffirms the inclusive nature of the Committee on World Food Security,
reaffirms the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action,524 and also reaffirms the commitment to
devote resources to developing rural areas and sustainable agriculture and fisheries and supporting smallholder
farmers, especially women farmers, herders and fishers in developing countries, particularly the least developed
countries;
16. Stresses the need to take action to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against
women and girls, including in the world of work, through the strengthening of institutional mechanisms and legal
frameworks, given that violence and discrimination, including multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination,
against women and girls in private and public spaces are a major impediment to the achievement of the empowerment
of women and girls and their social and economic development that no country has managed to eliminate, and
encourages the adoption of specific preventive measures to protect women and girls, youth and children from
violence, abuse and neglect, sexual abuse, exploitation, harassment, trafficking in persons and harmful practices, such
as child, early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation, taking into account the need to address negative
social norms, structural barriers and gender stereotypes that affect women in the world of work and to develop
measures to promote the re-entry of victims and survivors of violence into the labour market;
17. Recognizes that investment in health contributes to reducing inequality and increasing sustainable and
inclusive economic growth and to social development, environmental protection and the eradication of poverty,
hunger and malnutrition, and urges Governments to provide equal access to adequate health-care services for women
and girls in order to achieve the realization of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health;

_______________
524

648

World Health Organization, document EB136/8, annexes I and II.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

18. Also recognizes that achieving the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, through, inter
alia, equitable and universal access to affordable and quality health-care services and preventive health-care
information, including in the area of sexual and reproductive health, is critical to women’s economic advancement
and empowerment, that a lack of economic empowerment and independence increases women’s vulnerability to a
range of negative consequences, including violence and the risk of contracting HIV and AIDS, and that the neglect of
women’s full enjoyment of human rights severely limits their opportunities in public and private life, including the
opportunities for receiving an education and for achieving economic and political empowerment;
19. Expresses deep concern that, globally, women and girls are still the most affected by the HIV/AIDS
epidemic, that they bear a disproportionate share of the caregiving burden and that they are more vulnerable to
violence, stigmatization, discrimination, poverty and marginalization from their families and communities as a result
of HIV/AIDS, notes that progress towards gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls has been
unacceptably slow and that the ability of women and girls to protect themselves from HIV continues to be
compromised by physiological factors, gender inequalities, including unequal power relations in society between
women and men and boys and girls, and unequal legal, economic and social status, insufficient access to health-care
services, including sexual and reproductive health, multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and violence in
the public and private spheres, including trafficking in persons, sexual violence, exploitation and harmful practices,
and calls upon Governments and the international community to urgently scale up responses towards achieving the
goal of universal access to comprehensive HIV prevention, treatment, care and support and to ending the HIV/AIDS
epidemic by 2030;
20. Urges Governments and all sectors of society to promote and pursue gender-based approaches to the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases based on appropriately disaggregated data, including by sex
and age, in their efforts to address the critical differences in the rapidly growing magnitude of non‑communicable
diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes, which affect people of
all ages, gender, race and income levels, as noted in the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,525 and notes that people living in vulnerable
situations, in particular in developing countries, bear a disproportionate burden and that non-communicable diseases
can affect women and men differently, because, inter alia, women undertake an unequal share of caregiving;
21. Expresses deep concern that maternal health remains one area constrained by some of the largest health
inequities in the world, and over the uneven progress in improving newborn, child and maternal health, in this context
calls upon States to implement their commitments to prevent and reduce newborn, child and maternal mortality and
morbidity, and in this regard takes note with appreciation of commitments in support of the Global Strategy for
Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health (2016–2030), as well as national, regional and international initiatives
contributing to the reduction in the number of maternal deaths and deaths of the newborn and children under 5 years
of age;
22. Encourages Governments, with the support of their development partners, to invest in appropriate
infrastructure and other projects, including the provision of water and sanitation for all to rural areas and urban slums,
in order to increase health and well-being, relieve the workload of women and girls and release their time and energy
for other productive activities, including entrepreneurship;
23. Expresses deep concern that the lack of adequate sanitation facilities and related challenges, such as water
scarcity and unsafe water, disproportionately affect women and girls, including their labour force and school
participation rates, and increase their vulnerability to violence, and in this regard calls for the strengthening of efforts
to achieve sanitation for all and to end open defecation, paying special attention to women and girls, through efforts
to ensure access to sanitation and hygiene facilities, including menstrual hygiene management;
24. Urges all Governments to eliminate discrimination against women and girls in the field of education and
to promote and respect their right to education, ensure their safe and equal access to and encourage their participation
in education, throughout the life cycle and at all levels, especially for those who have been left furthest behind, and
address gender disparities, including by investing in public education systems and infrastructure, eliminating
discriminatory laws and practices, providing universal access to inclusive and equitable quality education, including
free and compulsory primary and secondary education, promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all, eliminating

_______________
525

Resolution 66/2, annex.

649

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

female illiteracy and promoting financial and digital literacy, ensuring that women and girls have equal access to
career development, training, scholarships and fellowships, adopting positive actions to build women’s and girls’
leadership skills and influence and supporting women and girls in diversifying their educational and occupational
choices in emerging fields, such as science, technology, engineering and mathematics and information and
communications technology, to strive to ensure the completion of early childhood, primary and secondary education
and expand vocational and technical education for all women and girls, and foster, as appropriate, intercultural and
multilingual education for all, and to address negative social norms and gender stereotypes in education systems,
including in curricula and teaching methodologies, that devalue girls’ education and prevent women and girls from
having access to, completing and continuing their education;
25. Encourages Governments to consider adopting and pursuing national financial inclusion strategies and
gender-responsive strategies to end the structural barriers to women’s equal access to economic resources and to
expand peer learning, experience-sharing and capacity-building among countries and regions in this respect;
26. Recognizes the need to build dynamic, sustainable, innovative and people-centred economies, promoting
youth employment, and women’s economic empowerment in particular, and decent work for all, and to ensure that
labour market regulations and social provisions create a level playing field for women, for example, by enacting and
enforcing minimum wage legislation, eliminating discriminatory wage practices and promoting measures such as
public works programmes, in order to enable women to cope with recurrent crises and long-term unemployment;
27. Reaffirms its commitment to diversity in cities and human settlements, to strengthening social cohesion,
intercultural dialogue and understanding, tolerance, mutual respect, gender equality, innovation, entrepreneurship,
inclusion, identity and safety and the dignity of all people, as well as to fostering liveability and a vibrant urban
economy and to taking steps to ensure that local institutions promote pluralism and peaceful coexistence within
increasingly heterogeneous and multicultural societies;
28. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement, as appropriate, gender-sensitive legislation and
policies, protect women’s labour and human rights in the workplace, including with respect to minimum wages, social
protection and equal pay for equal work or for work of equal value, through specifically targeted measures, reduce
horizontal and vertical occupational segregation and gender-based wage gaps, promote collective bargaining and
provide for recruitment, retention and promotion policies targeting women;
29. Urges Member States to adopt and implement legislation and policies, as appropriate, that are designed to
promote the reconciliation of work and family responsibilities and that recognize, value, assess, reduce and redistribute
women’s disproportionate share of unpaid and domestic work and the work burden of women engaged in unpaid
work, including domestic and care work, including through increased flexibility in working arrangements, such as
part-time work, and the facilitation of breastfeeding for working mothers, to provide support through the development
of infrastructure and technology and the provision of public services, including accessible, affordable and quality
social services, childcare and care facilities for children and other dependants, and to ensure that both women and
men have access to inclusive and gender-responsive social protection systems, including floors, and maternity or
paternity, parental and other forms of leave and allowances and are not discriminated against when availing
themselves of such benefits;
30. Encourages Governments, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other
stakeholders to promote and protect the rights of women workers, to take action to remove structural and legal barriers
to, as well as eliminate stereotypical attitudes towards, gender equality at work and implement labour market policies
to achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all, to implement measures to achieve equal pay for
equal work or for work of equal value, as well as to encourage women’s full participation in the formal economy, in
particular in economic decision-making and resource allocation, and to take measures to increase women’s access to
productive resources and assets, including digital technology, land, property and financial services, including
microfinance, as appropriate;
31. Encourages the United Nations system and donor countries to support Member States in increasing their
investments in gender-responsive policies and programmes, in order to promote full employment and decent work
for women, and in delivering relevant social protection and social services;
32. Urges Governments to develop, adequately resource and implement active labour market policies on full
and productive employment and decent work for all, including the full participation of women and men in both rural
and urban areas, as well as policies that encourage the full and equal participation of women and men, including
650

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

persons with disabilities, in the formal labour market, to enact or strengthen and enforce laws and regulatory
frameworks that ensure equality and prohibit discrimination against women, in particular in the world of work,
including their participation in and access to labour markets, inter alia, laws and frameworks that prohibit
discrimination based on pregnancy, motherhood, marital status or age, as well as other multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination, to take appropriate measures to ensure that women, throughout the life cycle, have equal
opportunities for decent work in the public and private sectors, while recognizing that temporary special measures
aimed at accelerating de facto equality between men and women should not be considered discrimination, to address
the root causes of gender inequality, gender stereotypes and unequal power relations between men and women and to
provide, as appropriate, effective means of redress and access to justice in cases of non-compliance and accountability
for violations and abuses of human rights;
33. Urges the United Nations system and other international organizations, upon the request of Member
States, to support and promote innovative programme responses to ensure women’s access to decent work, to
recognize, reduce and redistribute the unequal burden of unpaid care and domestic work, to promote genderresponsive social protection initiatives and measures for women and girls and to support and encourage the scalingup of existing good practice programmes and initiatives, including to assess and address the impact of information
and communications technology, digitalization and digital markets on the labour market;
34. Reaffirms the commitment to women’s equal rights and opportunities in political and economic decisionmaking and resource allocation, to the removal of all barriers that prevent women from being full participants in the
economy, and to the resolve to undertake legislative and administrative reforms to give women equal rights with men,
as well as girls and boys as applicable, to economic resources, including access to ownership and control over land
and other forms of property, credit, inheritance, natural resources and appropriate new technology, encourages the
private sector to contribute to advancing gender equality by striving to ensure women’s full and productive
employment and decent work, equal pay for equal work or for work of equal value and equal opportunities, as well
as protecting them against discrimination, sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace, including by supporting the
women’s empowerment principles established by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the United Nations Global Compact, and encourages increased
investment in female-owned companies or businesses;
35. Encourages Member States to pursue, by effective means, policies of preventing and eliminating sexual
harassment in the workplace, including in digital contexts, with an emphasis on effective legal, preventive and
protective measures, including raising awareness regarding the rights of women who are victims of sexual harassment
in the workplace or those who are at risk of sexual harassment;
36. Urges Governments to take measures to facilitate women’s access to land and property rights by providing
training designed to make the judicial, legislative and administrative system gender-responsive, to provide legal aid
for women seeking to claim their rights, to support the efforts of women’s groups and networks and to carry out
awareness campaigns in order to draw attention to the need for women’s equal rights to land and property;
37. Stresses the importance of mobilizing and allocating resources to develop and implement policies and
programmes, to support women’s entrepreneurship and to support in particular opportunities for new women
entrepreneurs, which will lead to business expansion for existing women-owned microenterprises and small and
medium-sized enterprises, and encourages Governments to create a climate that is conducive to increasing the number
of women entrepreneurs and the size of their businesses by providing them with training and advisory services in
business, administration and information and communications technologies, facilitating networking and informationsharing and increasing their participation on advisory boards and in other forums so as to enable them to contribute to
the formulation and review of policies and programmes being developed, especially by financial institutions;
38. Encourages the international community, including Governments, and all relevant stakeholders, including
the entities of the United Nations system, international financial institutions, other intergovernmental bodies, regional
and national development banks, domestic financial institutions, credit unions, multi-stakeholder partnerships and
relevant non-governmental organizations, as appropriate, to further develop financial literacy and financial education
programmes that include an emphasis on the impact of finance on sustainable development, as appropriate, in order
to ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to access financial services and financial products,
in particular women and girls, farmers and those working in micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises;
39. Encourages all Governments to work towards full and equal access to formal financial services and
financial products for all women, to adopt or review their financial inclusion strategies, in consultation with relevant
651

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

stakeholders, and to consider including financial inclusion as a policy objective in financial regulation, in accordance
with national priorities and legislation, encourages commercial banking systems to serve all, including those who
currently face barriers to accessing financial services and information, and to support microfinance institutions,
development banks, agricultural banks, mobile network operators, agent networks, cooperatives, postal banks and
savings banks, as appropriate, also encourages the use of innovative tools, including mobile banking, payment
platforms and digitalized payments, and the expansion of peer learning and experience-sharing among countries,
regions and regional organizations, commits itself to strengthening capacity development for developing countries,
including through the United Nations development system, and encourages mutual cooperation and collaboration
between financial inclusion initiatives;
40. Urges Governments and all relevant stakeholders to take all appropriate measures to eliminate
discrimination against women with regard to their access to all types of financial services and products, including
bank loans, bank accounts, mortgages and other forms of financial credit, regardless of their economic and social
status, to support women’s access to legal assistance and to encourage entities in the financial sector to mainstream
gender perspectives in their policies and programmes;
41. Recognizes the role of microfinance, including microcredit, in the eradication of poverty, the
empowerment of women and the generation of employment, notes in this regard the importance of sound national
financial systems, and encourages the strengthening of existing and emerging microcredit institutions and their
capacities, including through the support of international financial institutions;
42. Urges Governments to ensure that microfinance programmes focus on the development of savings
products that are safe, convenient and accessible to women and that support women’s efforts to retain control over
their savings;
43. Recognizes that women and girls account for almost half of all international migrants at the global level
and the need to address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and girls by, inter alia, incorporating
a gender perspective into policies and strengthening national laws, institutions and programmes to prevent and combat
gender-based violence, trafficking in persons and discrimination against women and girls, and calls upon
Governments to strengthen efforts to protect the rights of, and ensure decent work conditions for, domestic workers,
including migrant women and girls, in relation to, inter alia, working hours, working conditions and wages, and to
promote access to health-care services and other social and economic benefits;
44. Also recognizes that the positive contributions of migrant women and girls, in particular women migrant
workers, have the potential to foster inclusive growth and sustainable development in countries of origin, transit and
destination, further underlines the value and dignity of migrant women’s labour in all sectors, including the labour of
domestic and care workers, and concerned that many migrant women, particularly those who are engaged in informal
employment, are especially vulnerable to abuse and exploitation;
45. Further recognizes the special needs of women and girls living in areas affected by complex humanitarian
emergencies and in areas affected by terrorism, and that global health threats, climate change, more frequent and
intense natural disasters, conflicts, violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, and related humanitarian
crises and the forced displacement of people threaten to reverse much of the development progress made in recent
decades and have particular negative impacts on women and girls that need to be comprehensively assessed and
addressed;
46. Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to ensure systematic attention to, recognition
of and support for the crucial role of women at all levels and at all stages in the prevention and resolution of conflict,
in mediation and peacebuilding efforts and in the rebuilding of post-conflict societies, inter alia, by promoting
women’s capacity, leadership, participation and engagement in political and economic decision-making and by
preventing, combating and eliminating sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations, and, in this regard, to promote and facilitate an active and visible policy of mainstreaming a gender
perspective into all policies and programmes;
47. Encourages Governments and all sectors of society to take sustainable measures to ensure equal access to
full and productive employment and decent work on an equal basis and ensure that labour markets and work
environments are open, inclusive and accessible to persons with disabilities, and to take positive measures to increase
the employment of women with disabilities and to eliminate discrimination on the basis of disability with regard to
all matters concerning all forms of employment, including recruitment, retention and promotion, and the provision of
652

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

safe, secure and healthy working conditions, in consultation with relevant national mechanisms and organizations of
persons with disabilities, including by promoting access to inclusive education systems, skills development and
vocational and entrepreneurial training, in order to enable persons with disabilities to attain and maintain maximum
independence, as noted in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities526 and in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and notes the need to strengthen efforts aimed at addressing the rights and needs of women
and children with disabilities;
48. Urges States to promote the integration of a gender perspective into environmental and climate change
policies and to strengthen mechanisms and provide adequate resources to ensure the full and equal participation of
women in all levels of decision-making on environmental issues, stresses the need to address the challenges for
women and girls posed by climate change, and emphasizes the importance of gender mainstreaming in developing
and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness, response and recovery strategies, taking into account the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030;527
49. Stresses the importance of improving and systematizing the collection, analysis and dissemination of highquality, accessible, timely and reliable data, disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migration status,
disability, geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts, and of developing gendersensitive indicators that are specific and relevant with respect to supporting policymaking and national systems for
monitoring and reporting on progress and impact, and in this regard encourages developed countries and relevant
entities of the United Nations system to provide support and assistance to developing countries, upon their request,
with respect to establishing, developing and strengthening their databases and information systems;
50. Encourages Governments, in cooperation with the United Nations system, including the Committee of
the Chief Statisticians of the United Nations System, which coordinates data within the United Nations statistical
system, and other relevant international organizations, upon the request of Governments, to collect, analyse and
disseminate sex-disaggregated data and statistics and to assess the impact of associated policy measures on women’s:
(a)

Employment, entrepreneurship and access to decent work and social protection;

(b) Unpaid care and domestic work through regular time-use surveys and the establishment of satellite
accounts to assess the contribution of such work to national income;
(c) Informal employment, including agricultural work, disaggregated by sex, income, age, race, ethnicity,
migratory status, disability and geographic location;
51. Urges all Member States to undertake a gender analysis of national labour laws and standards and to
establish gender-sensitive policies and guidelines for employment practices, including for transnational corporations,
with particular attention to export-processing zones, building, in this regard, on multilateral instruments, including the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and conventions of the International
Labour Organization;
52. Urges Member States to incorporate a gender perspective, commensurate with national gender equality
goals, into the design, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of national sustainable development
strategies, to ensure alignment between national action plans on gender equality and national development strategies
and to encourage the involvement of men and boys in the promotion of gender equality, and in this regard calls upon
the United Nations system to support national efforts to develop methodologies and tools and to promote capacitybuilding and evaluation;
53. Encourages Member States to ensure the inclusive and more effective participation of national
mechanisms for gender equality and the empowerment of women in the formulation of national development
strategies, including strategies aimed at eradicating poverty and reducing inequalities, and to strengthen capacities for
gender mainstreaming by allocating adequate financial and human resources to national women’s machineries, as
well as to, and within, line ministries, establishing and/or strengthening dedicated units for gender equality and the
empowerment of women, providing capacity development for technical staff and developing tools and guidelines,
and calls upon the United Nations system to support national efforts in this regard;

_______________
526
527

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
Resolution 69/283, annex II.

653

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

54. Also encourages Member States to continue to increase, as appropriate, the participation of civil society,
including women’s and youth organizations, in government decision-making processes in national policy areas,
including sustainable development;
55. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and donor countries to strengthen and implement
gender-responsive planning and budgeting processes and to develop and strengthen methodologies and tools for this
purpose, as well as for the monitoring and evaluation of investments for gender equality results, as appropriate, and
encourages donors to mainstream a gender perspective into their practices, including joint coordination and
accountability mechanisms;
56. Stresses that there is a need for all donors to maintain and deliver on their existing respective bilateral and
multilateral official development assistance commitments and targets and that the full implementation of those
commitments will substantially boost resources available to push forward the international development agenda, and
urges countries to track and report resource allocations for gender equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls;
57. Urges the donor community, Member States, international organizations, including the United Nations,
the private sector, non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other stakeholders to strengthen the focus and
impact of development assistance targeting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls through gender
mainstreaming and the funding of targeted activities and enhanced dialogue between donors and partners, and also to
strengthen the mechanisms needed to measure effectively the resources allocated to incorporating gender perspectives
in all areas of development assistance;
58. Recognizes the need to strengthen the capacity of Governments to incorporate a gender perspective into
policies and decision-making, and encourages all Governments, international organizations, including the
organizations of the United Nations system, and other relevant stakeholders to assist and support the efforts of
developing countries in integrating a gender perspective into all aspects of policymaking, including through the
provision of technical assistance and financial resources;
59. Encourages the international community, the United Nations system, the private sector and civil society
to continue to provide the financial resources necessary to assist Governments in their efforts to meet the development
targets and benchmarks agreed upon at the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on
Women, the International Conference on Population and Development, the Millennium Summit, the International
Conference on Financing for Development, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the Second World
Assembly on Ageing, the twenty-third and twenty-fourth special sessions of the General Assembly, the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, at which the outcome document entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”520 was adopted, and other relevant United Nations conferences and summits;
60. Urges Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations to accelerate their efforts and to provide adequate resources to increase the voice and full, equal and
effective participation of women in all decision-making bodies at the highest levels of government and in the
governance structures of international organizations, including by eliminating gender stereotyping in appointments
and promotions, to build women’s capacity as agents of change and to empower them to participate actively and
effectively in the design, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of national sustainable development,
poverty eradication and environmental policies, strategies and programmes;
61. Urges multilateral donors and invites international financial institutions, within their respective mandates,
and regional development banks to review and implement policies that support national efforts to ensure that a higher
proportion of resources reaches women and girls, in particular in rural and remote areas;
62. Recognizes the ongoing intergovernmental efforts to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls, and urges the United Nations system to continue efforts to achieve gender balance in appointments
to all categories of staff, including the Professional and higher categories, within the United Nations system at the
Headquarters, regional and country levels, bearing in mind the principle of equitable geographical representation and
in line with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, with due regard to the representation of women from
developing countries, and convinced of the need to guarantee equal opportunities for women and men in gaining
access to senior decision-making positions, including to the post of Secretary-General, and in this regard notes the
Secretary-General’s system-wide strategy on gender parity;
654

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

63. Calls upon all organizations of the United Nations system, within their organizational mandates, to
mainstream a gender perspective and to pursue gender equality in their country programmes, planning instruments,
investment frameworks and sector-wide programmes and to articulate specific country-level goals and targets in this
domain in accordance with national development strategies, welcomes the work of UN-Women with United Nations
country teams in assisting Member States, at their request, in the integration of a gender perspective into national
development policies and strategies, including sustainable development policies and strategies, in accordance with
their national priorities, and stresses its important role in leading, coordinating and promoting the accountability of
the United Nations system so as to ensure that the commitment to gender equality and gender mainstreaming translates
into effective action throughout the world;
64. Calls upon organizations of the United Nations development system, within their organizational
mandates, to further improve their institutional accountability mechanisms and to include intergovernmentally agreed
gender equality results and gender-sensitive indicators in their strategic frameworks, as set out in its resolution 71/243;
65. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
66. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session,
under the item entitled “Eradication of poverty and other development issues”, the sub-item entitled “Women in
development”, and also requests the Secretary-General to update the World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development for the consideration of the Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 74/236
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/384/Add.3, para. 8)528

74/236. Human resources development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/196 of 18 December 1997, 54/211 of 22 December 1999, 56/189 of 21 December
2001, 58/207 of 23 December 2003, 60/211 of 22 December 2005, 62/207 of 19 December 2007, 64/218 of
21 December 2009, 66/217 of 22 December 2011, 68/228 of 20 December 2013, 70/220 of 22 December 2015 and
72/235 of 20 December 2017,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,

_______________
528

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.

655

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming its resolution 73/342 of 16 September 2019, in which it welcomed the adoption by the International
Labour Conference, at its 108th session, of the International Labour Organization Centenary Declaration for the
Future of Work,529 and encouraged its implementation,
Stressing that human resources development lies at the heart of sustainable development in its three dimensions
and that health and education are at the core of human resources development,
Stressing also that human resources development is vital to the efforts to achieve the internationally agreed
sustainable development goals, and to expand opportunities for people, in particular, for people in vulnerable
situations,
Welcoming the considerable efforts made over the years, yet recognizing that many countries continue to face
formidable challenges in developing a sufficient pool of human resources capable of meeting national economic and
social needs and that the formulation and implementation of effective human resources strategies often require
resources and capacities not always available in developing countries, and recognizing also the need for new ways to
address human resources development,
Stressing that climate change is a significant development challenge and that improving educational and
institutional capacities to tackle climate change is linked to human resources development efforts to ensure that
populations can lead healthy and prosperous lives, including investing in teacher training and ensuring that all learners
acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development,
Stressing also that technological changes and breakthroughs are expanding at a rapid pace and having an impact
on the world of work and that, in this regard, the development of human resources needs to keep pace and be supported
by proactive strategies, investments and normative frameworks to address emerging issues relating to the future of
work, education and training,
Recognizing that the ongoing digital revolution has an impact on the nature, quality and productivity of work
and affects the organization and the choice of location of production, and thus the quantity, quality and distribution
of jobs,
Noting that technological change can lead to both highly skilled employment opportunities as well as disruptions
in labour markets, which can have adverse distributional effects, including rising inequality among and within
countries,
Recognizing the uneven status of access to and development of digital infrastructure within and among countries
and the barriers faced by developing countries, such as the lack of electricity and broadband Internet connection, to
bridging the digital divide and leapfrogging to frontier technologies,
Recognizing also that the benefits of human resources development are best realized in national and international
environments that support full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, young people
and persons with disabilities, equal pay for work of equal value and equality of opportunity and treatment, access to
education and non-discrimination and that maintain an enabling environment for job creation,
Recognizing further the evidence of an uneven recovery and the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on
development, of the world financial and economic crisis that continue to diminish the ability of many countries,
especially developing countries, to cope with and address human resources development challenges and to formulate
and implement effective strategies for poverty eradication and sustainable development,
Acknowledging the important synergies between international migration and development and the need to deal
with the challenges and opportunities that migration presents to countries of origin, transit and destination, recognizing
that migration brings benefits as well as challenges to the global community, recognizing also the role that migrants
returning to their country of origin can play through the utilization of their skills, and stressing that the brain drain
continues to be a severe problem in many developing and transitioning countries, undermining efforts in the area of
human resources development,

_______________
529

656

A/73/918, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing the emergence of new types of employment based on sharing-economy models, and the need to
extend social protection rights and benefits that are accessible and portable to workers whose conditions of
employment are non-standard, as appropriate and in accordance with national circumstances,
Recognizing also the need to align science, technological knowledge and innovation systems with national
development objectives, fully integrated with national human resources development, labour needs and poverty
eradication strategies and supported by appropriate institutional and policy frameworks, which can lead to positive
transformations in people’s lives,
Noting that science, technological knowledge and innovation policies should take into account the specific
features of the economy in developing countries, including the size of the traditional sector, indigenous knowledge,
the limited access to skilled labour and capital, weak infrastructure and inadequate institutional frameworks, in order
to generate solutions that address the specific challenges of those countries and to foster synergies between modern
science and technology and indigenous and local knowledge,
Reaffirming that gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls are of fundamental importance
for achieving sustained economic growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development, in accordance with the
relevant General Assembly resolutions and United Nations conferences, and that investing in the development of
women and girls has a multiplier effect, in particular on productivity, efficiency and sustained economic growth, in
all sectors of the economy, especially in key areas such as agriculture, industry and services, including health,
Recognizing that education is the key to promoting the development of human potential, equality and
understanding among peoples, as well as to sustaining economic growth and eradicating poverty, and recognizing
also that, to achieve those ends, it is essential that quality education be available to all, including indigenous peoples,
girls and women, rural inhabitants and persons with disabilities,
Stressing that Governments have the primary responsibility for defining and implementing appropriate policies
for human resources development, and the need for continued support from the international community for the
national efforts of developing countries,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;530

2. Calls upon the international community to place human resources development at the core of economic
and social development and to develop short-, medium- and long-term strategies to effectively enhance human
resources capacities, as educated, skilled, healthy, capable, productive and adaptable workforces are the foundation
for achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and development;
3. Encourages giving appropriate consideration to human resources development strategies in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;531
4. Stresses the need for Member States to emphasize and integrate human resources development into
national development strategies, including national development policies and strategies to eradicate poverty and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, in order to address structural and multidimensional challenges to
enhancing national productive capacities and to ensure that human resources development implications are taken into
account by all national development stakeholders;
5. Recognizes that comprehensive approaches to human resources development that address poverty
eradication and the creation of a skilled workforce are also critical in reducing unemployment and brain drain and in
promoting greater social inclusion;
6. Also recognizes that the future of work, affected by progress in science and technology, requires
adaptability and faster learning and relearning of new skills, which, in turn, require a shift towards early childhood
education, work-based learning, lifelong learning and a comprehensive life-cycle approach to education and training,

_______________
530
531

A/74/284.
Resolution 70/1.

657

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

enabled, inter alia, through enhanced investment in teacher training and professional development and improved
access to digital learning resources, especially in developing countries;
7. Encourages States, the private sector and other relevant stakeholders to take appropriate steps, in
accordance with their plans and policies, to help individuals to make well-informed choices in education, training and
careers, develop an integrated system of quality education and training that responds to constantly evolving needs,
promote employer recognition and career development based on skills and foster a culture that supports and celebrates
lifelong learning, in order to provide opportunities for all to develop their fullest potential throughout life, regardless
of their starting points, thereby improving their chances of staying gainfully employed, and calls for more effective
support for developing countries in this regard, including from the United Nations system;
8. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement comprehensive human resources development
strategies premised on national development objectives that ensure a strong link between quality education, training
and employment, help to maintain a productive and competitive workforce and are responsive to the needs of the
economy;
9. Stresses that human resources development policies should focus on supporting the emergence of a
sufficiently wide and flexible pool of skilled human resources, especially among women and youth, to support all
sectors of the economy and be matched with present and future workforce needs, which requires well-sequenced
investments in basic education, vocational training, on-the-job training and more advanced managerial, engineering
and scientific education to increase the supply of technological knowledge that can be absorbed by national innovation
systems;
10. Emphasizes the need to adopt cross-sectoral approaches and mechanisms to identify human resources
development needs in the medium and long term for all sectors of the economy, to formulate and implement policies
and programmes to address those needs and to acknowledge the role of the private sector in training, education and
employment;
11. Recognizes the need for comprehensive and flexible science, technological knowledge and innovation
strategies that encompass all sectors of the economy, which are critical to ensuring that skills are matched with labour
market demand and ready to adapt to and benefit from a constantly evolving technology landscape;
12. Acknowledges the need to promote and support quality education and lifelong learning to ensure that all
children, youth and adults are empowered with the relevant knowledge and skills to shape more resilient, inclusive
and sustainable societies that are able to adapt to rapid technological change, and stresses the need to foster
international cooperation to support developing countries in addressing their constraints in access to technologies and
education;
13. Emphasizes that, when science, technological knowledge and innovation and human resources
development approaches are mutually reinforcing, they can help to implement sustainable development in its three
dimensions;
14. Encourages the international community to bridge the technological divide, which is an important
precondition for closing the economic divide within and among countries, including through appropriate ecosystems
for innovation and targeted support for enabling access for all to appropriate digital infrastructure;
15. Calls for proactively responding to the opportunities offered by and the adverse impacts of technological
changes on the labour market, as appropriate and in accordance with national circumstances, by adopting effective
social protection systems, the recognition and credentialing of non-formal and informal learning, targeted support for
disadvantaged groups and support for adaptation during transition periods;
16. Stresses that investment in human resources development should be an integral part of national
development policies and strategies, and in this regard calls for the adoption of policies to facilitate investment focused
on physical and social infrastructure, including education, in particular skills upgrading and vocational training in
areas such as science and technology, including information and communications technology, as well as in capacity
development, health and sustainable development;
17. Encourages Member States, as appropriate, to continue to implement nationally appropriate social
protection systems and measures for all, including social protection floors, to adopt policies that strengthen existing
658

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

safety nets and protect people in vulnerable situations and to take other appropriate actions, including boosting national
economic performance, recognizes that social protection floors, defined according to national priorities and the
individual circumstances of States, can provide systemic approaches to addressing poverty and vulnerability and can
contribute significantly to successful human resources development strategies, acknowledges, in this regard, that
many developing countries lack the necessary financial resources and capacity to implement such countercyclical
measures, and in this regard recognizes the need for continued mobilization of additional domestic and international
resources, as appropriate;
18. Encourages States to consider policies consistent with the International Labour Organization Declaration
on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and their obligations under all relevant ratified conventions of the
International Labour Organization, and recalls the importance of promoting decent work for all and of increasing
quality jobs, including through measures aimed at ensuring occupational health and safety and through working
relationships based on effective social dialogue;
19. Stresses that human resources development strategies should include measures aimed at reducing
unemployment and underemployment among young men and women and the long-term unemployed, who have been
disproportionately affected by slow growth in jobs recovery and by labour-displacing technological changes, and to
integrate underutilized human resources into the labour market through policies that promote skills development and
productivity, facilitate adaptation during transition periods and reduce barriers to employment, including gender
barriers, including by providing incentives, as appropriate, for recruiting, retaining and retooling, assistance in jobfinding, job-matching and vocational and on-the-job training, and by promoting, inter alia, youth entrepreneurship;
20. Recognizes that an ageing workforce can have positive and negative implications for labour markets, and
stresses the importance of lifelong learning to ensure the inclusion of older workers in the future of work;
21. Emphasizes the need for development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job
creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourages the formalization and growth of micro-, smalland medium-sized enterprises, including through access to financial services;
22. Stresses the need for Member States to retain and further enhance national human resources by boosting
job-rich recovery and promoting decent work, including by adopting policies and incentives that enhance labour
productivity and stimulate private investment and entrepreneurship and strengthen the role of labour administration
and institutions in order to foster job creation, address the gender wage gap, reduce occupational segregation and
increase the participation of people in vulnerable situations, including workers in the informal economy;
23. Emphasizes the need to address the interlinkages among human resources development, energy and food
security, agriculture and rural development, and encourages countries to strengthen capacity in agriculture and rural
development;
24. Encourages Member States to facilitate access to and apply environmentally sound technologies, and
notes with appreciation the launch of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism established in the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,532 based on a multi‑stakeholder
collaboration among States, civil society, the private sector, the scientific community, United Nations entities and
other stakeholders, in order to support the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals;
25. Stresses that sustainable development is dependent, inter alia, on healthy people, calls upon Governments
to continue their efforts to strengthen national health systems, urges the further strengthening of international
cooperation in the area of health, inter alia, by considering the promotion of universal health coverage and through
the exchange of best practices in the areas of strengthening health systems, access to medicines, expanding and
transforming the health workforce, recruitment, training and development of health personnel, transfer of technology
on mutually agreed terms and production of affordable, safe, effective and good-quality medicine, and in this regard
also stresses that international cooperation and assistance, including funding, need to become more predictable and to
be better aligned with national priorities and channelled to recipient countries in ways that strengthen national health
systems;

_______________
532

Resolution 69/313, annex, para. 123.

659

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

26. Calls upon the international community, including the relevant entities of the United Nations system, to
support the efforts of developing countries to address the adverse effects of HIV and AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and
other infectious diseases and to halt the spread of epidemic diseases, as well as the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases in Africa, Asia and other regions, and their effects on human resources;
27. Encourages Governments to facilitate investments in education, skills and decent job creation in the health
and social sectors by taking note of the recommendations of the Secretary-General’s High-level Commission on
Health Employment and Economic Growth and to avert the shortfall of 18 million health workers by 2030, building
the human capital required to accelerate universal health coverage and global health security, recognizes that these
actions are not only essential to the achievement of the health-related Sustainable Development Goals but will also
generate benefits across the Goals, including the creation of decent jobs, the reduction of youth unemployment, the
enhancement of women’s economic empowerment and participation and inclusive growth;
28. Calls upon relevant United Nations entities to support national efforts to build institutional capacities to
address long-term national human resources development needs in addition to providing training to individuals;
29. Calls upon the international community to assist developing countries in the implementation of national
human resources development strategies and encourages the international community, including the private sector
and relevant civil society actors, to provide and mobilize financial resources, capacity-building, technical assistance
and technology transfer on mutually agreed terms and to supply expertise from all sources, as available;
30. Calls for steps to integrate a gender perspective into human resources development, including through
policies, strategies and targeted actions aimed at promoting women’s capacities and access to productive activities,
and in this regard emphasizes the need to ensure the full participation of women in the formulation and implementation
of such policies, strategies and actions;
31. Stresses the important contributions of the public and private sectors, respectively, in meeting national
training and education needs to support the efficient functioning of enterprises and matching the needs of a rapidly
changing economy, and encourages the integration of those contributions, including through the greater use of publicprivate partnerships and incentives;
32. Calls for actions at the national, regional and international levels that will give high priority to improving
and expanding literacy, as well as science proficiency, including by providing tertiary, technical vocational and adult
education, and stresses the need to ensure that, by 2030, children everywhere, girls and boys alike, will be able to
complete free, equitable and quality primary and secondary education, leading to relevant and effective learning
outcomes;
33. Encourages Governments to consider appropriate measures at the national level, such as upgrading human
skills, better aligning educational and training systems to labour market needs and strengthening labour institutions
and regulations to respond to economic fluctuations;
34. Encourages countries to maintain or consider enhancing measures to boost job-rich recovery, such as
policies and incentives to enhance labour productivity and stimulate private investment;
35. Encourages efforts by Member States and the international community to promote a balanced, coherent
and comprehensive approach to international migration and development, in particular by building partnerships and
ensuring coordinated action to develop capacities, including for the management of migration, and in this regard
reiterates the need to consider innovative measures to maximize the benefits of migration while minimizing the
negative effects on origin, transit and destination countries of the migration of both highly skilled and low-skilled
workers from developing countries, taking into account the principle of national sovereignty;
36. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
37. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its seventy-sixth session, an actionoriented report on the implementation of the present resolution in line with the 2030 Agenda, and decides to include
in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Eradication of poverty and other
development issues”, the sub-item entitled “Human resources development”.
660

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 74/237
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 126 to 49, with 2 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/384/Add.4, para. 8)533
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Palau, Turkey

74/237. Eradicating rural poverty to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/244 of 20 December 2018, entitled “Eradicating rural poverty to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015, on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets
with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of
financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement534 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change535 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
534
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
535
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
533

661

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reaffirming the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador, from 17 to 20 October 2016,536
Bearing in mind that the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations in 2020 and the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the 2030 Agenda present an opportunity to reaffirm collective commitment to multilateralism and to
the United Nations, and reaffirming the urgent need to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, including
the Sustainable Development Goals, in particular the eradication of poverty,
Recalling its declaration, in its resolution 47/196 of 22 December 1992, of 17 October as the International Day
for the Eradication of Poverty,
Recalling also its resolution 72/233 of 20 December 2017, in which it considered that the theme of the Third
United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027) should be “Accelerating global actions for a world
without poverty”, and all other resolutions related to the eradication of poverty,
Reaffirming that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge facing the world today and is an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, particularly
in Africa, in the least developed countries, in landlocked developing countries, in small island developing States and
in some middle-income countries, noting with concern that, out of 734 million people living in extreme poverty,
38 million fewer will escape extreme poverty by 2030, because of the slowdown in the global economy, and
underlining the importance of accelerating sustainable, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable
development, including full, productive employment and decent work for all, with a view to reducing inequalities
within and among countries,
Commending the efforts and remarkable progress achieved by developing countries in eradicating rural poverty,
while noting with concern that key gaps still remain, such as: a lack of adequate data; inadequate investment in
agricultural and rural development; lower and inadequate human capital formation relevant for rural livelihoods;
scarce non-farm income-generating opportunities; a lack of productive capacity and agricultural transformation;
persistent gender inequality; a lack of social protection; insufficient basic infrastructure and services; a lack of or poor
adaptive capacity and resilience to cope with the adverse effects of climate change and disasters; and a lack of effective
rural institutions and of sufficient resources,
Recognizing the leading role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, together with
other United Nations entities, including the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the International Labour
Organization and the United Nations Development Programme, in the global efforts to reduce rural poverty, while
addressing other interlinked challenges such as eliminating hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition and increasing
the resilience of livelihoods to threats and crises,
Noting with appreciation the aspirations, embedded in Agenda 2063 of the African Union, to lift huge sections
of the population out of poverty, improve incomes and catalyse economic and social transformation, and recognizing
the importance of the international community helping African countries to achieve such goals, especially in the rural
areas of the African continent,
Noting that, while considerable progress has been made over the past decade across all areas of development,
the pace of progress observed in recent years is insufficient and uneven to fully meet the Sustainable Development
Goals and targets by 2030, especially in the area of rural poverty eradication,
Recognizing that poverty is a serious impediment to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls, including those living in rural areas, and that the feminization of poverty persists, emphasizing
that the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is an indispensable
requirement for sustainable development, acknowledging the mutually reinforcing links between the achievement of
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and the eradication of poverty, and stressing the
importance of support for countries in their efforts to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
Emphasizing that the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development depends crucially on
the transformation of rural areas, where most of the poor and hungry live, and that in order to eradicate rural poverty,
investment should be channelled towards sectors that have a bigger impact, such as education and health, agriculture
and infrastructure, while noting an annual financing gap for reaching universal pre-primary, primary and secondary

_______________
536

662

Resolution 71/256, annex.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

education of good quality in low-income and lower middle-income countries of $39 billion over the period 2015–2030,
and that at least $80 billion in annual investment will be needed to meet the demand for food that is projected to
increase by 70 per cent by 2050, and that the investments that are needed for climate change mitigation and adaptation
also remain underfunded,
Welcoming the proclamation of 2019–2028 as the United Nations Decade of Family Farming, to raise the profile
of the role of family farming537 in contributing to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and reaffirming the importance of the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025) in
the promotion of activities towards the eradication of rural poverty,
Recognizing the interlinkages and integrated nature of the Sustainable Development Goals, and reiterating that
the eradication of rural poverty and hunger is crucial for the achievement of internationally agreed development goals,
including those contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and that rural development should be
pursued through an integrated approach which encompasses economic, social and environmental dimensions, takes
into account a gender perspective and consists of mutually reinforcing policies and programmes, and which should
be balanced, targeted, situation-specific and locally owned, include local synergies and initiatives and be responsive
to the needs of rural populations,
Recalling that nearly 80 per cent of the extreme poor live in rural areas and work in agriculture, that the extreme
poverty rate in rural areas is three times higher than in urban areas, and that devoting resources to the development of
rural areas and sustainable agriculture and supporting smallholder farmers, especially women farmers, is key to ending
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, by, inter alia, improving the welfare of farmers,
Taking into consideration the increasing number of young people who decide to leave rural areas for more
urbanized ones and the challenges this trend poses to the livelihood of rural families,
Expressing its concern that the extreme poor have limited access to productive resources, basic health, education
and social protection services, basic infrastructure such as roads, water and electricity, and off-farm employment
opportunities, and are susceptible to the impacts of natural disasters, especially weather-related hazards, including the
El Niño phenomenon, and the adverse effects of climate change, and that rural women and girls fare far worse on
most development indicators,
Emphasizing the importance of enhancing global support for national work on rural development policies and
strategies, including on commodity production as well as increased public and private investments to upgrade
productive capacity, and that tackling rural poverty requires integrated, cross-sectoral, multi-stakeholder and contextspecific interventions, with a strong emphasis on sustainable food and agricultural systems for food security, nutrition,
economic growth, revitalization and development in rural areas,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General538 and the recommendations contained therein;

2. Reaffirms that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, for all
people everywhere, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, as
well as an overarching objective of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,539 of which the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development540 is an integral part, supporting
and complementing it;
3. Expresses its deep concern that the progress in reducing poverty remains uneven, with 1.46 billion people
still living in multidimensional poverty, and that this number continues to be significant and unacceptably high,
whereas the levels of inequality in income, wealth and opportunities remain high or are increasing in a number of
countries, and the non-income dimensions of poverty and deprivation, such as access to quality education or basic
health services, and relative poverty remain major concerns, and stresses the importance of national and global efforts
to create conditions for sustainable development, inclusive and sustained economic growth, shared prosperity and
decent work for all in society, taking into account different levels of national development capacities;

_______________
Resolution 72/239.
A/74/257.
539
Resolution 70/1.
540
Resolution 69/313, annex.
537
538

663

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Recognizes the importance of promoting socioeconomic development in rural areas as an effective
strategy and important means at the global level for the eradication of poverty, including extreme poverty, and
therefore underlines the importance of shaping a rural poverty eradication pattern with the concerted efforts of the
whole of society to promote socioeconomic development in rural areas;
5. Emphasizes that economic growth continues to leave rural dwellers behind, that in 2015, 79 per cent of
the people living in extreme poverty lived in rural areas and 41 per cent of the population in sub-Saharan Africa lived
on less than $1.90 per day, and recommends that countries promote dedicated and coordinated social, economic,
agricultural and rural development in their national policies, including by adopting rural-focused poverty eradication
strategies in alignment with the 2030 Agenda, social policies aimed at improving human capital in rural areas and
ensuring access to adequate social protection coverage, agricultural policies aimed at boosting agricultural
productivity, and rural development policies aimed at improving access to rural infrastructure and basic services of
high quality and at boosting non‑farm employment opportunities;
6. Recognizes the critical role and contribution of rural women, including smallholders and women farmers,
and indigenous women and women in local communities, and their traditional knowledge in enhancing agricultural
and rural development, improving food security and eradicating rural poverty;
7. Stresses the importance of taking targeted measures to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, by formulating rural development strategies with clear poverty eradication goals,
strengthening national statistical capacity and monitoring systems and implementing nationally appropriate social
protection systems and measures for all;
8. Recognizes the importance of employment for pro-poor growth in rural areas, and encourages the United
Nations system and development partners to assist countries, upon their request, in mainstreaming employment into
investment policy and poverty reduction strategies, including those focused on rural area development, and fostering
rapid agricultural productivity growth, especially in developing countries, by increasing investment in agricultural and
related rural off-farm activities;
9. Also recognizes the need to design, implement and pursue gender-responsive economic and social policies
aimed at, inter alia, eradicating poverty, including in rural areas, and combating the feminization of poverty, ensuring
the full and equal participation of rural women in the development, implementation and follow-up of development
policies and programmes and poverty eradication strategies, supporting increased rural employment and decent work,
and promoting the participation of women at all levels and sectors of the rural economy and in diverse on-farm and
off-farm economic activities, including sustainable agricultural and fisheries production;
10. Encourages Member States, international organizations, the private sector and other partners to develop
programmes to foster the creation of decent work in rural areas and increase the investment in agricultural and related
off-farm activities, especially for young people;
11. Emphasizes that, globally, 2 billion people, primarily in rural areas in developing countries, do not have
access to formal financial services, and encourages further efforts of the international community to offer affordable
ways to access finance for the financially excluded in rural areas;
12. Also emphasizes the need to increase investment, including through enhanced international cooperation,
in rural infrastructure, especially in roads, water, sanitation and electricity;
13. Expresses its commitment to raising public awareness to promote the eradication of poverty and extreme
poverty in all countries, to mobilizing the enthusiasm and creativity of all stakeholders, especially the rural residents
living in extreme poverty, to fight against poverty, to promoting their active participation in the design and
implementation of programmes and policies which affect them, and to providing quality education for the rural poor,
with the aim of achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
14. Reiterates the need for enhanced and expanded access by developing countries to appropriate technologies
that are pro-poor and raise productivity, and underlines the need for measures to increase investment in agriculture,
including modern technologies, as well as in natural resources management and capacity-building of developing
countries;
15. Stresses that the achievement of sustainable development and the eradication of poverty also hinge on the
ability and readiness of countries to effectively mobilize domestic resources, attract foreign direct investment, fulfil
official development assistance commitments and use official development assistance effectively, and facilitate the
664

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

transfer of technology to developing countries, on mutually agreed terms, and further stresses that the resolution of
unsustainable debt situations is critical for heavily indebted poor countries, while remittances have become a
significant source of income and finance for receiving economies and their contribution to the achievement of
sustainable development;
16. Recognizes the importance of addressing the diverse needs of and challenges faced by countries in special
situations, in particular African countries, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States, as well as the specific challenges facing many middle-income countries, and therefore
requests the United Nations development system, the international financial institutions, regional organizations
and other stakeholders to ensure that these diverse and specific development needs are appropriately considered and
addressed, in a tailored fashion, in their relevant strategies and policies, with a view to promoting a coherent and
comprehensive approach towards individual countries;
17. Realizes that bridging the digital divide will require strong commitment by all relevant stakeholders at the
national and international levels, reiterates the importance of investing in infrastructure for greater access to affordable
technological devices and services for rural populations, which includes leveraging technology-enabled financial
services and financial technologies to promote financial inclusion, and encourages efforts by all relevant stakeholders,
especially United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in the spirit of win-win cooperation, to assist developing
countries in overcoming the digital divide and promoting the use of information and communication technologies to
foster economic and social development, particularly in rural areas, with the aim of building a shared future for
humankind;
18. Recognizes the devastating impact of diseases on societies, and calls for measures by relevant United
Nations bodies, in accordance with their respective mandates, and other stakeholders to make good use of their
experience and advantages to further help developing countries with the aim of improving rural development
planning, including poverty eradication and multisectoral development activities covering economic and social
aspects, including the gender perspective;
19. Reiterates the urgent need to accelerate the pace of rural poverty eradication, and requests the SecretaryGeneral, in close collaboration with the secretariat of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as
well as other relevant international organizations, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a
report on the status of the implementation of and follow-up to the present resolution in order to identify the progress
achieved, gaps and challenges faced in rural poverty eradication, especially in developing countries, as well as the
means of implementation to address this issue, and to list rural poverty eradication as a priority for an annual moment
to highlight inspiring action on the Goals, in the context of the general debate of the General Assembly;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Eradication of poverty and other development issues”, the sub‑item entitled “Eradicating rural poverty to implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”.
RESOLUTION 74/238
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/385/Add.1, para. 7)541

74/238. Operational activities for development of the United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system, including its general guidelines,
Reaffirming also its resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018 on the repositioning of the United Nations
development system in the context of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States
that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
541

665

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

development of the United Nations system and its resolution 73/248 of 20 December 2018 on operational activities
for development of the United Nations system,
Reaffirming further its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming also the Paris Agreement,542 and encouraging all its parties to fully implement the Agreement, and
parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change543 that have not yet done so to deposit their
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Reaffirming further the importance of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities,
through which the General Assembly establishes key system-wide strategic policy orientations and operational
modalities for the development cooperation and country-level modalities of the United Nations development system,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly resolution
71/243 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United
Nations system, 2019;544
2. Acknowledges the progress achieved thus far in advancing the mandates contained in General Assembly
resolutions 71/243, 72/279 and 73/248, and calls for the full implementation of all mandates, including the remaining
mandates;
3. Recalls and reiterates the requests made in Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/15 of 8 July
2019 on progress in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 71/243 on the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system;
4. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development545 to leave
no one behind, commit to taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable
countries and to reach the furthest behind first, and calls upon the entities of the United Nations development system,
within their respective mandates and resources, to assist States in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen transparency and accountability by providing, in
a timely and publicly available manner, within existing resources and avoiding duplication, briefing notes, informal
briefings, documents and reports on progress in the implementation of the mandates contained in General Assembly
resolutions 71/243, 72/279 and 73/248, including for the preparation of the Assembly resolution on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review to be negotiated at the seventy-fifth session of the Assembly, and in this regard looks
forward to the discussions at the operational activities for development segment of the 2020 session of the Economic
and Social Council;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to present a comprehensive, evidence-based and analytical report to
the Economic and Social Council covering all provisions and progress made, lessons learned and challenges in the
implementation of the mandates contained in General Assembly resolutions 71/243, 72/279 and 73/248, as part of his

_______________
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
544
A/74/73-E/2019/14, A/74/73/Add.1-E/2019/14/Add.1, A/74/73/Add.2-E/2019/14/Add.2 and A/74/73/Add.3-E/2019/14/Add.3.
545
Resolution 70/1.
542
543

666

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

annual reporting to the Council at the operational activities for development segment during its 2020 session, and to
the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session for its further consideration and to inform the next cycle of the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review, to be launched in 2020;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Operational activities for development”, the sub-item entitled “Operational activities for development of the United
Nations system”.
RESOLUTION 74/239
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/385/Add.2, para. 8)546

74/239. South-South cooperation
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 73/291 of 15 April 2019, in which it endorsed the Buenos Aires outcome document
of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation,
Reaffirming also its resolution 64/222 of 21 December 2009, in which it endorsed the Nairobi outcome
document of the High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation,
Reaffirming further its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of
Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,547
Recalling its resolutions 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 60/212 of 22 December 2005, 62/209 of 19 December 2007,
63/233 of 19 December 2008, 64/1 of 6 October 2009, 66/219 of 22 December 2011, 67/227 of 21 December 2012,
68/230 of 20 December 2013, 69/239 of 19 December 2014, 70/222 of 22 December 2015, 71/244 of
21 December 2016, 72/237 of 20 December 2017 and 73/249 of 20 December 2018,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming further the Paris Agreement548 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully
implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change549 that have
not yet done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30 August–12 September
1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and corrigendum), chap. I.
548
Adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
549
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
546
547

667

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1. Welcomes the convening of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation in Buenos Aires from 20 to 22 March 2019 and its outcome document,550 and calls upon the international
community to support the full implementation of the outcome document of the second High-level Conference;
2.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of South-South cooperation;551

3. Reaffirms its support for the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation, and calls upon the
Committee to dedicate its twentieth session, to be held in 2020, to the implementation of the Buenos Aires outcome
document of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation;
4. Reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit to
taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Operational activities for development”, the sub-item entitled “South-South cooperation for development”, and
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a comprehensive report
on the state of South-South cooperation, including the implementation of the outcome document of the second Highlevel Conference.
RESOLUTION 74/240
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/386, para. 26)552

74/240. Natural plant fibres and sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,553 the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development,554 the Paris Agreement,555 the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030556 and the New Urban Agenda adopted in Quito by the United Nations
Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III),557
Recalling also its resolution 61/189 of 20 December 2006 on the International Year of Natural Fibres, 2009,
Recalling further resolution 3/2005 of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, adopted on 25 November 2005,558

_______________
Resolution 73/291, annex.
A/74/336.
552
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Burkina Faso, Canada, Central African Republic, China, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) and Viet Nam.
553
Resolution 70/1.
554
Resolution 69/313, annex.
555
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
556
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
557
Resolution 71/256, annex.
558
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2005/REP.
550
551

668

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the definition of natural fibres, as developed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations during the International Year of Natural Fibres in 2009, and the scope of the present resolution, which focuses
on the lesser known natural plant fibres, such as jute, abaca, coir, kenaf, sisal, hemp and ramie,
Noting also that the diverse range of natural plant fibres produced in many countries provides an important
source of income for farmers, and thus can play an important role in contributing to food security and in eradicating
poverty and hence in contributing to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Reaffirming the commitment to achieve sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner,
Recognizing that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development,
Reaffirming the need to achieve sustainable development through sustainable production and use, including
through protecting and sustainably managing natural resources,
Emphasizing that the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres can make a positive contribution
towards the efforts to achieve sustainable development, poverty alleviation, improved human well-being and
addressing environmental degradation and climate change,
Stressing that natural plant fibres, like any other agricultural product, need to be produced in a manner that
respects the environment,
Welcoming the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on 23 September, and noting
the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit,
Emphasizing that nature-based solutions can contribute, among other strategies, to climate change mitigation
and reversing biodiversity loss, and in this regard recognizing the important role of nature-based solutions in
promoting the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres,
Noting the contributions and the challenges to sustainable development arising from the use of plastic and
artificial fibres, and noting also the role that natural plant fibres can play in addressing certain economic, social and
environmental challenges to sustainable development,
Taking note of resolutions 4/6 of 15 March 2019, entitled “Marine plastic litter and microplastics”,559 and 4/9 of
15 March 2019, entitled “Addressing single-use plastic products pollution”,560 adopted by the United Nations
Environment Assembly of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling the ministerial declaration of the United Nations Environment Assembly at its third session, entitled
“Towards a pollution-free planet”,561 and the ministerial declaration of the Environment Assembly at its fourth
session, entitled “Innovative solutions for environmental challenges and sustainable consumption and production”,562
Recalling also the proclamation of the United Nations Decade for Deserts and the Fight against
Desertification (2010–2020), the United Nations Decade on Biodiversity, 2011–2020, the International Decade for
Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028, the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development, 2021–2030, the United Nations Decade of Family Farming (2019–2028), the United
Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration (2021–2030) and the Third United Nations Decade for the Eradication
of Poverty (2018–2027),
Recognizing that natural plant fibres can be easily recyclable, biodegradable and renewable and can foster
energy efficiency and relatively low levels of greenhouse gas emissions, and thereby may contribute to promoting
sustainable development,
Stressing the need for cooperation, coordination and synergies in the work related to the production, distribution
and use of natural plant fibres among relevant United Nations entities, in accordance with their respective mandates,

_______________
UNEP/EA.4/Res.6.
UNEP/EA.4/Res.9.
561
UNEP/EA.3/HLS.1.
562
UNEP/EA.4/HLS.1.
559
560

669

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting that political support and commercialization factors, including price and cost of production, are needed,
as appropriate, to promote the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres, aimed at contributing to
sustainable development,
Noting also that the promotion of the use of natural plant fibres needs to be carried out in ways that balance
economic, social and environmental objectives and with the engagement of relevant stakeholders, including the
private sector, civil society and academia,
Recognizing the crucial role that women and youth play in the production, consumption and conservation of
natural plant fibres, and stressing the need for the full participation of women and youth at all levels of policymaking
and implementation for promoting the use of natural plant fibres,
1. Invites all relevant stakeholders to scale up efforts to promote awareness of the benefits of the sustainable
production and use of natural plant fibres;
2. Underlines the importance of unlocking the benefits of natural plant fibres, and encourages all
stakeholders to promote the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres in all relevant areas and sectors;
3. Recognizes that the production, processing, application and proper management and export of natural
plant fibres may well have the potential to be advantageous to the economies of many developing countries and the
livelihoods of millions of small-scale farmers and low-wage workers, and in this regard calls upon Member States to
take effective measures, as appropriate, to help to integrate small-scale holders into global production, value and
supply chains for the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres;
4. Stresses that the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres may contribute to broader efforts
towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,553 as well as of outcome documents
of other related major United Nations conferences and summits and multilateral environmental agreements, including
the Paris Agreement555 and the achievement of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets;563
5.

Encourages Member States:

(a) To foster political support, the mobilization of resources, capacity-building and proper management and
momentum for the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres at the global, regional, national and local
levels, as appropriate;
(b) To promote and support the full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders, in particular indigenous
peoples and local communities, in the decision-making process regarding the production of natural plant fibres;
(c) To promote and support measures to ensure that the production of natural plant fibres is consistent with
the conservation of natural forests and biological diversity and does not lead to the conversion of natural forests or
overexploitation of natural resources, including water;
(d) To consider mainstreaming the promotion of the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres into
policies and plans and current national development priorities, as appropriate, and address challenges, including
environmental degradation and the adverse impacts of climate change;
(e) To develop and implement policies and plans to incentivize the sustainable production and use of natural
plant fibres and to promote the identification and development of environmentally friendly alternatives to single-use
plastic products, taking into account the full life-cycle implications of those alternatives, so as to reduce the utilization
of single-use plastic, in line with national laws and priorities, as appropriate;
(f) To build on and reinforce existing initiatives in order to scale up the sustainable production and use of
natural plant fibres, as appropriate;
(g) To facilitate synergies among all stakeholders, including the private sector, civil society and academia, and
a holistic view of how to promote international partnerships and achieve national priorities related to the promotion
of the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres, as appropriate;

_______________
563

670

See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/2.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(h) To share information and best practices, in particular leveraging the platform of South-South and triangular
cooperation, regarding the multitude of innovative applications of natural plant fibres, with a view to promoting
longer-term economic, social and environmental benefits for both producers and consumers;
(i) To foster scientific research and development and cooperation at the national, regional and global levels, as
appropriate, to support, in addition to traditional use, high-end, value-added and innovative use of natural plant fibres;
(j) To preserve indigenous knowledge and technologies associated with natural plant fibres, and scale up their
sustainable production and use, as appropriate;
6. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to lead the efforts and work with
other United Nations agencies, including the United Nations Environment Programme, to scale up international
efforts to promote the sustainable production and use of natural plant fibres, within their respective mandates and
existing resources, and through voluntary contributions, as appropriate;
7. Invites Governments, international and regional organizations, the private sector, the business community
and academia to foster an effective and enduring international partnership in support of research and development and
technical know-how to promote various applications of natural plant fibres, as appropriate;
8. Invites the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly of the implementation of the present resolution
on the basis of reports prepared by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, including those prepared
for the Intergovernmental Group on Hard Fibres and the Intergovernmental Group on Jute, Kenaf and Allied Fibres, and
decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Agriculture
development, food security and nutrition”, a sub-item entitled “Natural plant fibres and sustainable development”.
RESOLUTION 74/241
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 127 to 3, with 44 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/386, para. 26)564
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland

74/241. International Tea Day
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the State of Palestine (on behalf of the States that
are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
564

671

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the
proclamation of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on
international years and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for the
proclamation of international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, in which it is stated that an international day or
year should not be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Recalling resolution 12/2019 of 28 June 2019, adopted by the Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations at its forty-first session,565
Recognizing the importance of promoting sustainable development in its three dimensions in an innovative,
coordinated, environmentally sound, open and shared manner and the urgent need to raise public awareness of the
importance of tea for rural development and sustainable livelihoods and to improve the tea value chain to contribute
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Noting that tea production and processing constitutes a main source of livelihoods for millions of families in
developing countries,
Noting also that tea constitutes the main means of subsistence for millions of poor families who live in a number
of least developed countries,
Noting further that tea production and processing contributes to the fight against hunger, the reduction of
extreme poverty, the empowerment of women and the sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
Recognizing that the tea industry is a main source of income and export revenues for some of the poorest
countries and, as a labour-intensive sector, provides jobs, especially in remote and economically disadvantaged areas,
Affirming that tea can play a significant role in rural development, poverty reduction and food security in
developing countries, being one of the most important cash crops,
Noting that tea consumption can bring health benefits and wellness, and noting also the important role of tea
education and its cultural significance,
Re-emphasizing the call from the Intergovernmental Group on Tea to direct greater efforts towards expanding
demand, particularly in tea-producing countries where per capita consumption is relatively low, and supporting efforts
to address the declining per capita consumption in traditional importing countries,
Trusting that the observance of an International Tea Day will promote and foster collective actions to implement
activities in favour of the sustainable production and consumption of tea and raise awareness of its importance in
fighting hunger and poverty,
1.

Decides to designate 21 May as International Tea Day;

2. Invites all States Members and observers of the United Nations, organizations of the United Nations
system, other international and regional organizations and other relevant stakeholders, including civil society, the
private sector and academia, to observe International Tea Day in an appropriate manner and in accordance with
national priorities, through education and activities aimed at raising public awareness of the importance of tea for,
inter alia, rural development and sustainable livelihoods;
3. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to facilitate the observance of
International Tea Day, in collaboration with other relevant organizations, mindful of the provisions contained in the
annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67;

_______________
565

672

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2019/REP, appendix I.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions, including from the private sector;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all States Members and
observers of the United Nations, the organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders,
including civil society, the private sector and academia, for appropriate observance.
RESOLUTION 74/242
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/73/386, para. 26)566

74/242. Agriculture development, food security and nutrition
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 65/178 of 20 December 2010, 66/220 of 22 December 2011, 67/228 of 21 December
2012, 68/233 of 20 December 2013, 69/240 of 19 December 2014, 70/223 of 22 December 2015, 71/245 of
21 December 2016, 72/238 of 20 December 2017 and 73/253 of 20 December 2018,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recalling the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security,567 particularly the Five Rome Principles for
Sustainable Global Food Security, and noting the Rome Declaration on Nutrition,568 as well as the Framework for
Action,569 which provides a set of voluntary policy options and strategies for use by Governments, as appropriate,
adopted at the Second International Conference on Nutrition, held in Rome from 19 to 21 November 2014,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,570 Agenda 21,571 the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21,572 the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development573 and the Plan
of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),574 the

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Vice-Chair of the Committee.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
568
World Health Organization, document EB136/8, annex I.
569
Ibid. annex II.
570
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
571
Ibid. annex II.
572
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
573
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
574
Ibid. resolution 2, annex.
566
567

673

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,575 the 2005 World Summit
Outcome,576 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International
Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,577 the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,578 the Vienna Programme of
Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024579 and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of
Action (SAMOA) Pathway,580
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement,581 and encouraging all its parties to fully implement the Agreement and parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change582 that have not yet done so to deposit their
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as possible,
Highlighting the synergies between the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement, and
noting with concern the scientific findings contained in the special reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C, The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate and Climate Change
and Land,
Welcoming the holding of the 2019 Climate Action Summit convened by the Secretary-General on
23 September, taking note of the multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented during the Summit, and taking
note also of the Youth Climate Summit, held on 21 September,
Welcoming also the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation, held in Buenos
Aires from 20 to 22 March 2019, and its outcome document,583 and recognizing the important role that South-South
and triangular cooperation play in fostering partnerships among developing countries that lead to the end of poverty
and hunger and to the achievement of food security and improved nutrition, as well as the promotion of sustainable
agriculture,
Welcoming further the Sustainable Development Goals Summit, held in New York on 24 and 25 September
2019, on gearing up for a decade of action and delivery for sustainable development, and taking note of the Global
Sustainable Development Report 2019,
Reaffirming the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,584 and reaffirming also the importance
of promoting the integration of food security and the nutritional needs of urban residents, particularly the urban poor,
in urban and territorial planning, in order to end hunger and malnutrition, as well as promoting coordination of
sustainable food security and agriculture policies across urban, peri-urban and rural areas,
Reaffirming also the importance of supporting Agenda 2063 of the African Union, as well as its 10-year plan of
action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next
50 years and its continental programme embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development and regional initiatives, such as the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme,
Recalling the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the fight against tuberculosis, held in New York
on 26 September 2018, and its outcome,585 the third high-level meeting of the Assembly on the prevention and control

_______________
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18−22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
576
Resolution 60/1.
577
Resolution 63/239, annex.
578
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. II.
579
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
580
Resolution 69/15, annex.
581
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
582
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
583
Resolution 73/291, annex.
584
Resolution 71/256, annex.
585
Resolution 73/3.
575

674

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of non‑communicable diseases, held in New York on 27 September 2018, and its political declaration,586 and the
action plan on antimicrobial resistance 2016–2020 of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
as well as resolution 6/2019 of 28 June 2019 of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, on antimicrobial resistance,587
Expressing concern that the current pace and scope of implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 2 is
unlikely to promote the transformational change needed and that its targets will not be achieved in many parts of the
world, and calling for additional efforts to support the transformational change needed,
Expressing concern also that the multiple and complex causes of the food crises that occur in different regions
of the world, affecting developing countries, especially net food importers, and their consequences for food security
and nutrition require a comprehensive and coordinated response in the short, medium and long term by national
Governments, civil society, the private sector and the international community, reiterating that the root causes of food
insecurity and malnutrition are poverty, growing inequality, inequity and lack of access to resources and incomeearning opportunities, the effects of climate change and disasters, and conflicts, and remaining concerned that
excessively volatile food prices can pose a serious challenge to the fight against poverty and hunger and to the efforts
of developing countries to attain food security and improved nutrition and to achieve internationally agreed
development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly those related to ending hunger and
malnutrition,
Recalling the United Nations strategic plan for forests 2017–2030,588 acknowledging that forests provide
essential products and ecosystem services, such as timber, food, fuel, fodder, non-wood products and shelter, as well
as soil and water conservation and clean air, that sustainable management of forests and trees outside forests is vital
to the integrated implementation of the 2030 Agenda and that forests prevent land degradation and desertification and
reduce the risks of floods, landslides and avalanches, droughts, dust and sand storms and other disasters, and stressing
in this regard the role of all types of forests, including boreal, temperate and tropical forests, in providing food security
and nutrition,
Recalling also the outcome of the forty-sixth session of the Committee on World Food Security, held in Rome
from 14 to 18 October 2019, taking note of its main outcomes, and recalling the ongoing inclusive process leading to
the development of Committee on World Food Security voluntary guidelines on food systems and nutrition, to be
endorsed at the forty-seventh session of the Committee,
Welcoming the initiative by the Secretary-General of 16 October 2019 to convene a World Food Systems
Summit in 2021,
Welcoming also resolution 7/2019 of 28 June 2019 of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, entitled “Further integration of sustainable agricultural approaches, including agroecology, in
the future planning activities of FAO”,589 and recognizing that agroecology is one approach, among others, to
contribute to sustainably feeding a growing population,
Taking note of the launch of the Sustainable Food Systems Programme under the 10-Year Framework of
Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns,590 an inclusive initiative to accelerate the shift
towards sustainable food systems,
Encouraging Member States to advance innovative pathways to achieve sustainable consumption and
production, in line with United Nations Environment Assembly resolution 4/1 of 15 March 2019,591
Recalling the operationalization of the Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries, which is helping
the least developed countries to strengthen their science, technology and innovation capacities and fostering the

_______________
Resolution 73/2.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2019/REP, appendix C.
588
See resolution 71/285.
589
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2019/REP, appendix D.
590
A/CONF.216/5, annex.
591
UNEP/EA.4/Res.1.
586
587

675

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

development of national and regional innovation ecosystems, as well as developing capacities for partnerships in
science, technology and innovation collaboration with other countries worldwide,
Noting with appreciation the work undertaken by relevant international bodies and organizations, including the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN‑Women) on agricultural development and on
enhancing food security and food safety and improving nutrition outcomes,
Recalling the declaration of 2016–2025 as the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition, based on the
Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action, and the call upon the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the World Health Organization to implement a work programme for 2016–2025, taking into
account contributions from relevant stakeholders, including the private sector, using coordinating mechanisms such
as the Standing Committee on Nutrition and multi-stakeholder platforms such as the Committee on World Food
Security,
Recalling also its resolution 72/239 of 20 December 2017, in which it proclaimed 2019–2028 the United
Nations Decade of Family Farming, which raises the profile of the role of family farming in contributing to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and to the achievement of food security and improved nutrition,
Reaffirming that agriculture remains a fundamental and key sector for developing countries, and noting the
importance of working towards eliminating all forms of protectionism,
Acknowledging the importance of promoting sustainable farming and agriculture, which will contribute to
sustainable food production systems and the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems and help to eradicate hunger
and malnutrition,
Emphasizing that water is critical for sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and hunger, that
water, energy, food security and nutrition are linked and that water is indispensable for human development, health
and well-being,
Noting with concern the findings of the first report of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations on the State of the World’s Biodiversity for Food and Agriculture, of 2019, and the Intergovernmental SciencePolicy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, and bearing in mind that the agriculture sector depends
heavily on biodiversity and its components, as well as on the ecosystem functions and services which biodiversity
underpins, and that these sectors also have an impact on biodiversity in various direct and indirect ways, as
acknowledged in the Cancun Declaration on Mainstreaming the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity
for Well-being,592
Reaffirming the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food, consistent with the right
to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully develop and
maintain their physical and mental capacities, and underlining the need to make special efforts to meet nutritional
needs, especially of women, children, older persons, indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities, as well as of
those living in vulnerable situations,
Taking note with appreciation of the publications entitled The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World
2019: Safeguarding against Economic Slowdowns and Downturns, issued by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme and the United Nations Children’s Fund, and The State of Food and Agriculture 2019: Moving
Forward on Food Loss and Waste Reduction, issued by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Remaining deeply concerned that, according to the most recent estimates of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund, the number of chronically
undernourished people in the world increased to nearly 821.6 million in 2018, from around 811.7 million in 2017,

_______________
592

676

United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/13/24.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and that global nutrition challenges are increasingly complex as multiple forms of malnutrition, including stunting,
wasting, underweight, micronutrient deficiencies, overweight and obesity, may coexist within the same country or
household,
Recognizing that economic slowdown, gender inequalities, conflict, drought and the adverse effects of climate
change, including more frequent and extreme weather events, are among the key factors contributing to a reversal in
the long-term progress in fighting global hunger, making the prospect of ending hunger and all forms of malnutrition
by 2030 more difficult,
Remaining deeply concerned about the continuing food insecurity and malnutrition being faced by hundreds of
millions of people, in particular in sub‑Saharan Africa, in South and West Asia and in parts of Latin America,
Recognizing the need to prevent the recurrence in the future of deaths of people from famine,
Expressing its concern about the growing number of obese adults in the world, from 563.7 million in 2012
to 672.3 million in 2016,
Expressing concern that, according to the Global Report on Food Crises 2019, the number of people facing
crisis-level food insecurity or worse has remained well over 100 million, in countries affected by, inter alia, conflict,
and exacerbated by climate-related events, environmental factors, including natural disasters, and extreme food price
volatility,
Noting that an increasing number of countries, in particular in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Pacific, are
integrating food security and nutrition into their agriculture policies and investment plans and that, as a result,
eradicating hunger, improving food security and ensuring adequate nutrition are being given greater prominence in
regional development strategies, such as the African Union Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth
and Transformation for Shared Prosperity and Improved Livelihoods, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
food security and nutrition strategy, the Piura Declaration on Food Security, the Framework for Multi-Year
Programme on Food Security and Climate Change and the Strategic Framework on Rural-Urban Development to
Strengthen Food Security and Quality Growth, adopted by the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the Hunger-Free
Latin America and the Caribbean 2025 Initiative, the strategy on food security and nutrition of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the Arab food security initiative, the initiative for the Adaptation of African
Agriculture to Climate Change and the climate-smart agriculture strategy for the Central American Integration System
region (2018–2030), all of which emphasized the importance of investing in agriculture, diversifying food production
and diets and providing quality nutritional education to consumers, introducing labour-saving technologies in food
production and processing, enhancing women’s access to income and strengthening capacity-building in improving
food safety at all stages of the food chain, and noting also the establishment of the Islamic Organization for Food
Security, headquartered in Nur-Sultan,
Reiterating the urgent need for action to enhance efforts to build resilience, especially for the most vulnerable,
by investing in resilience, including disaster risk reduction, strengthening adaptation strategies and enhancing joint
risk assessments and risk management strategies, to cut the impact and cost of natural disasters to address the adverse
effects of climate change on food security, in particular for women, youth, older persons, indigenous peoples, local
communities and persons with disabilities, as well as the other root causes of food insecurity and all forms of
malnutrition,
Expressing concern that climate change will disproportionately impact people in vulnerable situations,
especially women and children, and their livelihoods, ultimately putting hundreds of millions of people at risk,
and that by 2050, the risk of hunger and child malnutrition could increase by up to 20 per cent owing to climate
change,
Reiterating the importance of achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, as well as
the recognition and protection of the rights of smallholders, particularly women, reiterating also the importance, inter
alia, of supporting the empowerment of rural women, youth, small-scale farmers, family farmers and livestock
farmers, fishers and fish workers as critical agents for enhancing agricultural and rural development and food security
and for improving nutrition outcomes, and acknowledging their fundamental contribution to the environmental
sustainability and the genetic preservation of agricultural systems and to sustaining productivity on often marginal
lands,

677

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing that livestock contributes 40 per cent of the global value of agricultural output and supports the
livelihoods and food security of almost 1.3 billion people, and in this regard acknowledging that the sector offers
opportunities for agricultural development, poverty eradication and food security gains, and offers an opportunity for
raising climate awareness,
Acknowledging that social protection programmes and measures are effective in reducing poverty and hunger,
Noting the importance of initiatives under the United Nations system, including the observance of World Pulses
Day, World Tuna Day, Sustainable Gastronomy Day, World Bee Day, World Food Safety Day, World Soil Day, the
International Year of Camelids, the International Year of Plant Health, the International Decade for Action, “Water for
Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028, and the United Nations Decade of Family Farming (2019–2028), aimed at
increasing public awareness of relevant agriculture, food security and nutritional benefits, in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the proclamation of
international years and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years and
anniversaries,
Recognizing the need to increase responsible public and private investments and partnerships in the agriculture
sector, inter alia, to find inclusive solutions to and fight hunger and malnutrition and to promote rural and urban
sustainable development,
Recalling the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 and its guiding principles,593 and
recalling also its promotion of regular disaster risk preparedness, prevention, response and recovery exercises, at the
national and local levels, with a view to ensuring rapid and effective response to disasters and related displacement,
including access to essential food and non-food relief supplies, as appropriate to local needs,
Noting that in 2011, an initial estimate reported that one third of the food produced annually in the world for
human consumption, equivalent to some 1.3 billion tons, was lost or wasted, while over 821 million people suffered
from chronic undernourishment and nearly 149 million children under 5 years of age had stunted growth in 2018,
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible and balance the
three dimensions of sustainable development, and acknowledging that reaching Goal 2 and the interlinked targets of
other Goals will be critical, inter alia, in ending hunger and all forms of malnutrition,
Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;594

2. Stresses the importance of continued consideration of the issue of agriculture development, food security
and nutrition, and encourages Member States and relevant stakeholders to give due consideration to this issue while
implementing the internationally agreed development goals, in particular the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development595 and its Sustainable Development Goals;
3. Emphasizes that sustainable agricultural production, food security, food safety and nutrition are key
elements for the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, and calls for greater efforts to sustainably
enhance the agricultural production capacities, productivity and food security of developing countries;
4. Also emphasizes the need to accelerate and scale up action, as appropriate, to strengthen the resilience and
adaptive capacity of food systems and people’s livelihoods in response to climate variability and extremes to achieve
a world without hunger and malnutrition in all its forms by 2030;
5. Expresses concern that the world is not on track to eradicate hunger and malnutrition by 2030 and that
scarce and unsustainably managed natural resources, combined with insecure and uneven tenure rights for
smallholders, are severely affecting those in vulnerable situations in rural areas, that the adverse effects of climate

_______________
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
A/74/237.
595
Resolution 70/1.
593
594

678

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

change, including persistent and recurring drought, floods, extreme weather events, land degradation, coastal erosion,
ocean acidification, the retreat of mountain glaciers, sea level rise and desertification, as well as conflict and postconflict situations, are challenges with regard to food security and nutrition and diet-related non-communicable
diseases in many places, preventing progress in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, and that
countries in protracted crises are at risk of being left behind;
6. Stresses that urgent and concerted action is needed at all levels to recover momentum and accelerate efforts
to end hunger and all forms of malnutrition, comprehensively tackling both its causes and effects, and to promote
improved nutrition and sustainable agriculture and food systems;
7. Reiterates the importance of developing countries determining their own food security strategies, that
improving food security and nutrition is a global challenge and a national policy responsibility and that any plans for
addressing this challenge in the context of eradicating poverty must be nationally articulated, designed, owned, led
and built in consultation, as an inclusive process, with all key stakeholders at the national level, as appropriate, and
urges Member States, especially those affected, to make food security, food safety and nutrition a high priority and to
reflect this in their national programmes and budgets;
8. Underscores the need to safeguard food security and nutrition for all, including women, children, youth,
older persons, indigenous peoples, local communities, persons with disabilities and those living in vulnerable
situations, inter alia by promoting economic and social policies to counteract the adverse impact of economic
slowdowns and downturns on efforts to end hunger and malnutrition;
9. Calls upon the international community to continue its support for the implementation of the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and its results framework, which is an integral
component of the Programme that provides guidance on planning and implementing investment programmes;
10. Encourages Member States, in designing their national policies, to fully take into account the Rome
Declaration on Nutrition568 as well as the Framework for Action,569 which provides a set of voluntary policy options
and strategies for the use of Governments, as appropriate;
11. Urges increased political commitment by Member States to end hunger and all forms of malnutrition,
notes in this regard the Scaling Up Nutrition movement, and encourages Member States to engage in the movement
at the global and country levels to reduce the increasing level in global hunger and all forms of malnutrition, in
particular among children, especially children under 2 years of age, women, especially those who are pregnant and
lactating, and youth;
12. Underscores the need to address child stunting, which remains unacceptably high, with nearly 149 million
children under 5 years of age, or over 21.9 per cent, affected by stunting in 2018;
13. Emphasizes the six global nutrition targets set by the World Health Assembly to address global
malnutrition and the related monitoring framework;
14. Takes note of the Global Nutrition for Growth Compact, signed by more than 100 countries, companies
and civil society organizations, to reduce the number of stunted children by 20 million by 2020 and the financial
commitments made to support this goal, as well as the third Nutrition for Growth summit, held in Milan, Italy, in
November 2017, and looks forward to the upcoming Nutrition for Growth summit, to be held in Tokyo in 2020;
15. Stresses the need to increase sustainable agricultural production and productivity globally, noting the
diversity of agricultural conditions and systems, including by improving and aiming to ensure the functioning of
markets and trading systems and strengthening international cooperation, particularly for developing countries, and
by increasing responsible public and private investments and partnerships in sustainable agriculture, land management
and rural development, as well as collaboration in science, technology and innovation, and notes that the benefit of
such public and private investment and engagement should also reach, where appropriate, local smallholders in
appropriate knowledge management systems and communications systems with regard to promoting food security,
improving nutrition outcomes and reducing inequality;
16. Recognizes the need to increase the resilience and sustainability of food and agricultural production with
regard to climate change in the context of the rising demand for crops, bearing in mind the importance of safeguarding
food security and ending hunger and the particular vulnerabilities of food production systems to the adverse impacts
of climate change, and encourages efforts at all levels to support climate-sensitive agricultural practices, including
679

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

agroforestry, agroecology, conservation agriculture, water management schemes, drought- and flood-resistant seeds
and sustainable livestock management, and to establish and strengthen interfaces between scientists, decision makers,
entrepreneurs and funders of science, technology and innovation, as well as measures to strengthen the resilience of
those in vulnerable situations and of food systems, which can also have a wider positive impact, emphasizing
adaptation to climate change as a major concern and objective for all farmers and food producers, especially smallscale producers;
17. Stresses the urgent need to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to
climate change, and further urges Member States to continue to engage in adaptation planning processes and the
implementation of mitigation actions;
18. Calls for the strengthening of agriculture and food systems to improve adaptation and resilience to climate
change, including through ecosystem services and biodiversity preservation, and also calls for poverty, hunger, food
security and nutrition objectives to be incorporated into national climate change adaptation and mitigation plans;
19. Recognizes the critical role of the private sector in support of sustainable food systems and the positive
contribution and improved quality of multi-stakeholder partnerships as a means to engage all key actors, and stresses
the need for further efforts to strengthen strategic partnerships with the private sector;
20. Reaffirms the need to promote, enhance and support sustainable agriculture, including crops, forestry,
fisheries, livestock and aquaculture, that improves food security, eradicates hunger, helps to prevent malnutrition and
is economically viable, while conserving land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, biodiversity and ecosystems
and enhancing resilience to climate change and natural disasters, and recognizes the need to maintain natural
ecological processes that support sustainable and efficient food production systems and ensure food security,
underlines the importance of mainstreaming the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in the agriculture
sector, and takes note of the importance of the Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems and the Biodiversity
Mainstreaming Platform promoted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
21. Expresses concern about antimicrobial resistance, including in the agriculture sector, and in this regard
encourages the implementation of the action plan on antimicrobial resistance 2016–2020 of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, which supports the food and agriculture sectors in implementing the global action
plan on antimicrobial resistance596 developed by the World Health Organization in collaboration with, and
subsequently adopted by, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Organization
for Animal Health, in order to minimize the impact of antimicrobial resistance;
22. Recognizes that sustainable food systems have a fundamental role to play in promoting healthy diets and
improving nutrition and preventing and controlling non-communicable diseases, and welcomes the formulation and
implementation of national policies aimed at eradicating malnutrition in all its forms and transforming food systems
so as to make nutritious diets, including traditional healthy diets, available to all, while reaffirming that health, water
and sanitation systems must be strengthened simultaneously to end malnutrition;
23. Calls for closing the gender gap in access to productive resources in agriculture, noting with concern that
the gender gap persists with respect to many assets, inputs and services, and stresses the need to invest in and
strengthen efforts to support the empowerment of women and girls, in particular rural women, to address their own
food and nutritional needs and those of their families, to promote adequate standards of living for them, as well as
decent work, and to guarantee their personal health, well-being and security, full access to land and natural resources
and access to affordable, low-cost, long-term loans and to local, regional and global markets, taking into account that
the prevalence of food insecurity puts the health and lives of women and children at risk;
24. Recognizes the critical role and contribution of rural women, including smallholders and women farmers,
and indigenous women and women in local communities, and their traditional knowledge in enhancing agricultural
and rural development, improving food security and eradicating rural poverty, and in this regard stresses the
importance of reviewing agricultural policies and strategies to ensure that the critical role of women in food security
and nutrition is recognized and addressed as an integral part of both short- and long-term responses to food insecurity,

_______________
596

680

World Health Organization, document WHA68/2015/REC/1, annex 3.

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

malnutrition, potential excessive price volatility and food crises in developing countries, as well as of the recognition
and protection of the land rights of smallholders, in particular women;
25. Reaffirms the crucial role of healthy marine ecosystems, sustainable fisheries and sustainable aquaculture
in enhancing food security and access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food and in providing for the livelihoods of
millions of people, particularly those in small island developing States, and in this regard encourages the full
implementation of the Global Action Programme on Food Security and Nutrition in Small Island Developing States,
which was launched on 4 July 2017;
26. Encourages and recognizes the efforts at all levels to establish and strengthen social protection measures
and programmes, including national safety nets and protection programmes for the needy and vulnerable, such as
food and cash-for-work, cash transfer and voucher programmes, school feeding programmes and mother-and-child
nutrition programmes, and in this regard underlines the importance of increasing investment, capacity-building and
systems development;
27. Remains deeply concerned about the recurring food insecurity and malnutrition in different regions of the
world and their ongoing negative impact on health and nutrition, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, in South and West
Asia and in parts of Latin America, and in this regard underlines the urgent need for joint efforts at all levels to respond
to the situation in a coherent and effective manner;
28. Recognizes the important role of indigenous peoples and local communities, small-scale farmers, family
farmers, livestock farmers, small-scale fishers and fish workers and their traditional knowledge and seed supply
systems, as well the important role of new technologies in the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and in
aiming to ensure food security and improved nutrition;
29. Stresses the importance of the application of science, technology and innovation and related knowledge
management and communications systems in ensuring food security by 2030, and encourages the adoption of the
most advanced and appropriate information technology, such as the Internet, mobile platforms, meteorology, big data
and cloud computing, in agriculture systems in order to support the efforts of smallholder and family farmers to
increase their resilience, productivity and incomes and include them in the development of research and innovation
agendas while reducing negative environmental impacts;
30. Emphasizes the need to revitalize the agriculture sector, promote rural development and aim for ensuring
food security and nutrition, notably in developing countries, in a sustainable manner, which will contribute to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, and underlines the importance of taking the necessary actions to better
address the needs of rural communities by, inter alia, enhancing access for agricultural producers, in particular small
producers, women, youth, indigenous peoples and local communities, persons with disabilities and older persons, in
conflict and post-conflict situations, to credit and other financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health-care
services, social services, education, training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable technologies, including for
development of local crops, efficient irrigation, reuse of treated wastewater and water harvesting and storage;
31. Notes the urgent need to address the issue of food loss and waste at all stages of the food supply chain,
including through collaboration with relevant stakeholders;
32. Recognizes that, by 2050, the world urban population is expected to nearly double, making urbanization
one of the most transformative trends of the twenty-first century, underscoring the growing need to take action to fight
hunger and malnutrition among the urban poor through promoting the integration of the food security and nutrition
needs of urban residents, in particular the urban poor, in urban and territorial planning, to end hunger and malnutrition,
promoting the coordination of sustainable food security and agriculture policies across urban, peri-urban and rural
areas to facilitate the production, storage, transport and marketing of food to consumers in adequate and affordable
ways, to reduce food losses and to prevent and reuse food waste, and promoting the coordination of food policies with
energy, water, health, transport and waste and other policies in urban areas to maximize efficiencies and minimize
waste;
33. Reaffirms the need to strive for a comprehensive twin-track approach to food security and nutrition that
consists of direct action to immediately tackle hunger and address micronutrient deficiencies among the most
vulnerable alongside the development of medium- and long-term sustainable agriculture, food security and nutrition
and rural development programmes to eliminate the root causes of hunger, all forms of malnutrition and poverty,
including through revitalizing rural areas for young women and men, by creating decent jobs for all, through
681

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

agricultural education systems, information and communications technology, training, scaling up research and
development and strengthening the role of youth through education, entrepreneurship, access to markets and services,
co-financing, capacity-building and rural-based youth organizations, and through the progressive realization of the
right to adequate food in the context of national food security;
34. Also reaffirms the need to promote a significant expansion of research on food, nutrition and agriculture,
extension services, training and education, and of funding for such research from all sources, to improve agricultural
productivity and sustainability in order to strengthen agriculture as a key sector, to promote development and to build
up resilience to support better recovery from crisis, including by strengthening the work of the reformed Consortium
of International Agricultural Research Centers (CGIAR) so as to enhance its development impact, supporting national
research systems, public universities and research institutions and promoting technology transfer on mutually agreed
terms, the voluntary sharing of knowledge and practices and research to adapt to climate change and improve
equitable access to research results and technologies on mutually agreed terms at the national, regional and
international levels, while giving due consideration to the preservation of genetic resources;
35. Stresses that a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable, multilateral trading system
will promote agriculture and rural development in developing countries and contribute to achieving food security and
improving nutrition, and urges national, regional and international strategies to promote the inclusive participation of
farmers and fishers and fish workers, especially small-scale farmers, including women, in community, national,
regional and international markets;
36. Recognizes the efforts made by Member States and United Nations agencies that have already announced
their commitments to the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025), and encourages all relevant
stakeholders to actively support the implementation of the Decade, including by making commitments and
establishing action networks;
37. Also recognizes the commencement of the United Nations Decade of Family Farming (2019–2028), and
in this regard encourages the full implementation of resolution 72/239 and takes note with appreciation of the global
action plan for the Decade, which supports the development, improvement and implementation of public policies on
family farming, including national plans, as appropriate, based on inclusive and effective governance and on timely
and geographically relevant data, by 2024;
38. Stresses the need to continue to strengthen cooperation and coordination among the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food
Programme, the World Health Organization, the regional commissions and all other relevant entities of the United
Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions and international trade
and economic institutions, in accordance with their respective mandates and national development priorities, in order
to increase their effectiveness, as well as to strengthen cooperation between these organizations and with
non-governmental organizations and the public and private sectors in promoting and strengthening efforts towards
sustainable agriculture development, food security and nutrition;
39. Recognizes the contribution made thus far by early warning systems, and underlines that the reliability
and timeliness of such systems should be further strengthened at the national, regional and international levels, with a
focus on countries that are particularly vulnerable to price shocks and food emergencies;
40. Reaffirms the important role and inclusive nature of the Committee on World Food Security as a major
intergovernmental platform for a broad range of stakeholders to work together towards ensuring food security and
nutrition for all, and encourages countries to fully engage in the ongoing development by the Committee on World
Food Security of voluntary guidelines on food systems and nutrition supporting the transformation towards
sustainable food systems that contribute to the promotion of healthy diets and improved nutrition;
41. Also reaffirms the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no one behind and commit
to taking more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach
the furthest behind first;
42. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session an actionoriented report on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Agriculture development, food security and nutrition”.

682

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

RESOLUTION 74/243
Adopted at the 52nd plenary meeting, on 19 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 160 to 6, with 15 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/387, para. 12)597
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Brazil, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Guatemala, Honduras, Kiribati, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Togo, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu

74/243. Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/255 of 20 December 2018, and taking note of Economic and Social Council
resolution 2019/29 of 23 July 2019,
Recalling also its resolutions 58/292 of 6 May 2004 and 59/251 of 22 December 2004,
Reaffirming the principle of the permanent sovereignty of peoples under foreign occupation over their natural
resources,
Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, affirming the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, and recalling relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967)
of 22 November 1967, 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980, 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981 and 2334 (2016) of
23 December 2016,
Recalling its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Bearing in mind its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”,
Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,598 to the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967,
Recalling, in this regard, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights599 and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,599 and affirming that these human rights instruments must be
respected in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, as well as in the occupied Syrian Golan,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Turkey, and the State of Palestine (on behalf of the
States that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5
of 16 October 2018).
598
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
599
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
597

683

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling also the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,600 and recalling further its resolutions
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and ES-10/17 of 15 December 2006,
Recalling further its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Taking note of the accession by Palestine to several human rights treaties and the core humanitarian law treaties,
as well as to other international treaties,
Expressing its concern about the exploitation by Israel, the occupying Power, of the natural resources of the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
Expressing its grave concern about the extensive destruction by Israel, the occupying Power, of agricultural land
and orchards in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including the uprooting of a vast number of fruit-bearing trees and
the destruction of farms and greenhouses, and the grave environmental and economic impact in this regard,
Expressing its grave concern also about the widespread destruction caused by Israel, the occupying Power, to
vital infrastructure, including water pipelines, sewage networks and electricity networks, in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, in particular in the Gaza Strip during the military operations of July and August 2014, which, inter alia, has
polluted the environment and which negatively affects the functioning of water and sanitation systems and the water
supply and other natural resources of the Palestinian people, and stressing the urgency of the reconstruction and
development of water and other vital civilian infrastructure, including the project for the desalination facility for the
Gaza Strip,
Expressing its grave concern further about the negative impact on the environment and on reconstruction and
development efforts of unexploded ordnance that remains in the Gaza Strip as a result of the conflict in July and
August 2014, and commending the efforts of the Mine Action Service of the United Nations for the safe removal of
such ordnance,
Expressing its grave concern about the chronic energy shortage in the Gaza Strip and its detrimental impact on
the operation of water and sanitation facilities, which threaten to further erode groundwater resources, of which only
5 per cent remains potable,
Recalling the 2009 report by the United Nations Environment Programme regarding the grave environmental
situation in the Gaza Strip, and relevant reports by the United Nations country team, including “Gaza in 2020: a
liveable place?”, “Gaza: two years after” and “Gaza ten years later”, and stressing the need for follow-up to the
recommendations contained therein,
Deploring the detrimental impact of the Israeli settlements on Palestinian and other Arab natural resources,
especially as a result of the confiscation of land and the forced diversion of water resources, including the destruction
of orchards and crops and the seizure of water wells by Israeli settlers, and of the dire socioeconomic consequences
in this regard,
Recalling the report of the independent international fact-finding mission to investigate the implications of the
Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people throughout the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,601
Aware of the detrimental impact on Palestinian natural resources being caused by the unlawful construction of
the wall by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem,
and of its grave effect as well on the economic and social conditions of the Palestinian people,
Stressing the urgency of achieving without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace settlement on all tracks, on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978, 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002 and 2334 (2016), the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative602 and the Quartet performance-based road map to a permanent

_______________
See A/ES-10/273 and A/ES-10/273/Corr.1.
A/HRC/22/63.
602
A/56/1026-S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
600
601

684

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,603 as endorsed by the Council in its resolution 1515 (2003) of
19 November 2003 and supported by the Council in its resolution 1850 (2008) of 16 December 2008,
Stressing also, in this regard, the need for respect for the obligation upon Israel under the road map to freeze
settlement activity, including so-called “natural growth”, and to dismantle all settlement outposts erected since
March 2001,
Stressing further the need for respect and preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
Recalling that the Security Council, in its resolution 2334 (2016), underlined that it would not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through
negotiations,
Recalling also the need to end all acts of violence, including acts of terror, provocation, incitement and
destruction,
Taking note of the report prepared by the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on the economic
and social repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan, as
transmitted by the Secretary-General,604
1. Reaffirms the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and of the population of the occupied Syrian
Golan over their natural resources, including land, water and energy resources;
2. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, cease the exploitation, damage, cause of loss or depletion and
endangerment of the natural resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the
occupied Syrian Golan;
3. Recognizes the right of the Palestinian people to claim restitution as a result of any exploitation, damage,
loss or depletion or endangerment of their natural resources resulting from illegal measures taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, and Israeli settlers in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and expresses
the hope that this issue will be dealt with within the framework of the final status negotiations between the Palestinian
and Israeli sides;
4. Stresses that the wall and settlements being constructed by Israel in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, are contrary to international law and are seriously depriving the Palestinian
people of their natural resources, and calls in this regard for full compliance with the legal obligations affirmed in the
9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice600 and in relevant United Nations resolutions,
including General Assembly resolution ES‑10/15;
5. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply strictly with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law, and to cease immediately and completely all policies and measures aimed
at the alteration of the character and status of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
6. Also calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to bring a halt to all actions, including those perpetrated by
Israeli settlers, harming the environment, including the dumping of all kinds of waste materials, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan, which gravely threaten their natural
resources, namely water and land resources, and which pose an environmental, sanitation and health threat to the
civilian populations;
7. Further calls upon Israel to cease its destruction of vital infrastructure, including water pipelines, sewage
networks and electricity networks, and to cease its demolition and confiscation of Palestinian homes and civilian
infrastructure, agricultural lands and water wells, which, inter alia, have a negative impact on the natural resources of
the Palestinian people, stresses the urgent need to advance reconstruction and development projects in this regard,

_______________
603
604

S/2003/529, annex.
A/74/88-E/2019/72.

685

IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

including in the Gaza Strip, and calls for support for the necessary efforts in this regard, in line with the commitments
made at, inter alia, the Cairo International Conference on Palestine: Reconstructing Gaza, held on 12 October 2014;
8. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to remove all obstacles to the implementation of critical
environmental projects, including sewage treatment plants in the Gaza Strip and the reconstruction and development
of water infrastructure, including the project for the desalination facility for the Gaza Strip;
9.
reserves;

Also calls upon Israel not to impede Palestinian development and export of discovered oil and natural gas

10. Calls for the immediate and safe removal of all unexploded ordnance in the Gaza Strip and for support
for the efforts of the Mine Action Service of the United Nations in this regard, and welcomes the extensive efforts
exerted by the Mine Action Service to date;
11. Encourages all States and international organizations to continue to actively pursue policies to ensure
respect for their obligations under international law with regard to all illegal Israeli practices and measures in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly Israeli settlement activities and the exploitation
of natural resources;
12. Underscores, in this regard, the call by the Security Council, in its resolution 2334 (2016), upon all States
to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, including with regard to the cumulative impact of the exploitation, damage
and depletion by Israel of natural resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the
occupied Syrian Golan, and with regard to the impact of such practices on the promotion of the Sustainable
Development Goals,605 and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled
“Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and
of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources”.

_______________
605

686

See resolution 70/1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/119.

Cooperatives in social development ........................................................................................................................690

74/120.

Promoting social integration through social inclusion ...............................................................................................692

74/121.

Policies and programmes involving youth ...............................................................................................................697

74/122.

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special
session of the General Assembly .............................................................................................................................704

74/123.

Persons with albinism ............................................................................................................................................716

74/124.

Follow-up to the twentieth anniversary of the International Year of the Family and beyond ........................................719

74/125.

Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing...............................................................................................722

74/126.

Improvement of the situation of women and girls in rural areas.................................................................................729

74/127.

Violence against women migrant workers ...............................................................................................................737

74/128.

Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly ........................747

74/129.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees ..........................................................................................................................................................754

74/130.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ................................................................................755

74/131.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa..............................................................................762

74/132.

Report of the Human Rights Council ......................................................................................................................769

74/133.

Rights of the child..................................................................................................................................................770

74/134.

The girl child .........................................................................................................................................................782

74/135.

Rights of indigenous peoples ..................................................................................................................................790

74/136.

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance ................................................................797

74/137.

A global call for concrete action for the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action ...............................................................................................................................................................806

74/138.

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination ..............................................................................................................................................811

74/139.

The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination...........................................................................................815

74/140.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination .............................................................................816

74/141.

The human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation ............................................................................................818

74/142.

International Equal Pay Day ...................................................................................................................................823

74/143.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment ....................................................................825

74/144.

Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol
thereto: accessibility...............................................................................................................................................832

74/145.

Freedom of religion or belief ..................................................................................................................................839
687

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/146.

Implementing the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society
to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms through providing
a safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders and ensuring their protection .........................................843

74/147.

Terrorism and human rights ....................................................................................................................................848

74/148.

Protection of migrants ............................................................................................................................................854

74/149.

The right to food ....................................................................................................................................................862

74/150.

Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order .....................................................................................871

74/151.

Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity ..........................................................876

74/152.

The right to development .......................................................................................................................................878

74/153.

Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights ......................................................................886

74/154.

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures........................................................................................................889

74/155.

Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights treaty bodies .......................894

74/156.

National human rights institutions...........................................................................................................................896

74/157.

The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity ...................................................................................................901

74/158.

Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and genuine elections and the promotion
of democratization .................................................................................................................................................906

74/159.

Human rights and cultural diversity.........................................................................................................................911

74/160.

Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons ......................................................................................915

74/161.

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance ..........................................925

74/162.

Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa ...................................................................927

74/163.

United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region............929

74/164.

Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and
violence against persons, based on religion or belief.................................................................................................931

74/165.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious
and Linguistic Minorities .......................................................................................................................................935

74/166.

Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea...................................................................939

74/167.

Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran..........................................................................................948

74/168.

Situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine........................952

74/169.

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic .............................................................................................958

74/170.

Integrating sport into youth crime prevention and criminal justice strategies ..............................................................969

74/171.

Follow-up to the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and
preparations for the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice ..........................973

74/172.

Education for Justice and the rule of law in the context of sustainable development ...................................................976

74/173.

Promoting technical assistance and capacity-building to strengthen national measures and international
cooperation to combat cybercrime, including information-sharing ............................................................................978

74/174.

Countering child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online ...................................................................................980

688

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/175.

Technical assistance provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime related to counter-terrorism .............984

74/176.

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons...........................................................................990

74/177.

Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity ..............................................................................................................................................997

74/178.

International cooperation to address and counter the world drug problem ................................................................1013

74/246.

Situation of human rights of Rohingya Muslims and other minorities in Myanmar ..................................................1030

74/247.

Countering the use of information and communications technologies for criminal purposes .....................................1037

689

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/119
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/391, para. 49)1

74/119. Cooperatives in social development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/90 of 16 December 1992, 49/155 of 23 December 1994, 51/58 of 12 December
1996, 54/123 of 17 December 1999, 56/114 of 19 December 2001, 58/131 of 22 December 2003, 60/132 of
16 December 2005, 62/128 of 18 December 2007, 64/136 of 18 December 2009, 65/184 of 21 December 2010,
66/123 of 19 December 2011, 68/133 of 18 December 2013, 70/128 of 17 December 2015 and 72/143 of
19 December 2017 concerning cooperatives in social development,
Recognizing that cooperatives, in their various forms, promote the fullest possible participation in the economic
and social development of local communities and all people, including women, youth, older persons, persons with
disabilities and indigenous peoples, whose inclusion strengthens economic and social development, and contribute to
the eradication of poverty and hunger,
Recognizing also that, as cooperative enterprises often serve the socially excluded and vulnerable sectors of the
population that traditional profit-driven businesses may not be best placed to address, they are therefore important for
the support of socially inclusive policies that drive inclusive development, particularly in developing countries,
Recognizing further that cooperatives and other social organizations can be instrumental in promoting a just
transition while working on climate change adaptation and mitigation,
Reaffirming the adoption of the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,2
and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,3 and noting
the acknowledgement therein of the role of cooperatives in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and in relation to
financing for development,
Recognizing the important contribution and potential of all forms of cooperatives to the follow-up to the World
Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women, including their five-year reviews, the
United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), the World Food Summit,
the Second World Assembly on Ageing, the International Conference on Financing for Development, the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda,
Noting with appreciation the potential role of cooperative development in the improvement of the social and
economic conditions of indigenous peoples and rural communities,
Welcoming the efforts of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to showcase the role of
agricultural cooperatives, including in improving food security and nutrition, particularly in rural areas, promoting
sustainable agricultural practices, improving the agricultural productivity of farmers and facilitating access to markets,
savings, credit, insurance and technology,

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
2
Resolution 70/1.
3
Resolution 69/313, annex.

690

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;4

2.

Notes with appreciation the celebration of the International Year of Cooperatives, in 2012;

3. Encourages all Member States, as well as the United Nations and all other relevant stakeholders, to share
best practices identified through activities implemented during the International Year of Cooperatives and to continue
those activities, as appropriate;
4. Recalls the draft plan of action on cooperatives for 2012 and beyond, based on the outcome document of
the expert group meeting held in Ulaanbaatar in 2011 for the promotion of cooperatives for sustainable socioeconomic
development, to promote focused and effective follow-up to the activities of the International Year of Cooperatives,
within existing resources;
5. Draws the attention of Governments to the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral to focus support on cooperatives as sustainable and successful business enterprises that contribute directly to
decent employment generation, poverty and hunger eradication, education, social protection, including universal
health coverage, financial inclusion and the creation of affordable housing options across a variety of economic sectors
in urban and rural areas and to review existing legislation and regulations to make the national legal and regulatory
environment more conducive to the creation and growth of cooperatives by improving existing laws and regulations
and/or by establishing new ones, especially in the areas of access to capital, autonomy, competitiveness and fair
taxation;
6. Invites Governments and international organizations, in partnership with cooperatives and cooperative
organizations, to strengthen and build the capacity of all forms of cooperatives, especially those run by the poor, young
people, women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups, so that they can empower people to transform
their lives and communities positively and build inclusive societies, and to increase the meaningful participation of
women and young people in cooperatives, in particular in their decision-making processes;
7. Invites Governments to strengthen efforts to enhance food security, nutrition and sustainable production
and consumption and to focus efforts on smallholders and women farmers, as well as on agricultural and food
cooperatives and farmers’ networks, supported by measures to improve access to markets and financial capital, create
enabling domestic and international environments and strengthen collaboration across the many initiatives in this area,
including regional initiatives;
8. Encourages Governments to promote access to information and communications technologies as a vital
channel for collaboration and the expansion of cooperatives, especially in rural areas, working towards closing digital
gender divides;
9. Also encourages Governments to intensify and expand the availability, accessibility and dissemination of
evidence-based research on the operations and contribution of cooperatives, to develop a statistical framework for the
systematic collection of comprehensive and disaggregated data on and the best practices of cooperative enterprises,
taking into consideration available methodologies, such as the guidelines concerning statistics of cooperatives, in
collaboration with all stakeholders, and to raise public awareness of the linkages between cooperatives and sustainable
development, especially in the areas of social inclusion, decent employment creation, poverty eradication in all its
forms and dimensions, inequality reduction, gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, and
peacebuilding;
10. Invites Governments, relevant international organizations, the specialized agencies and local, national and
international cooperative organizations to continue to observe the International Day of Cooperatives annually, on the
first Saturday of July, as proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 47/90;
11. Invites Governments, in collaboration with the cooperative movement, to develop programmes aimed at
enhancing the capacity-building of cooperatives, including by strengthening the organizational, management and
financial skills of their members, while respecting the principles of gender equality and the empowerment of women
and girls, and to introduce and support programmes to improve the access of cooperatives to new technologies;

_______________
4

A/74/206.

691

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Encourages Governments to take appropriate measures to adopt or develop legislation and policies that
provide women with equal access to land and support women’s cooperatives and agricultural programmes and enable
women’s cooperatives to benefit from public and private sector procurement processes and increase trade;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the relevant United Nations and other international
organizations and national, regional and international cooperative organizations, to continue to render support to
Member States, as appropriate, in their efforts to create a supportive environment for the development of cooperatives,
integrating cooperative values, principles and business models into educational programming, including school
curricula, as appropriate, providing assistance for human resources development, technical advice and training and
promoting an exchange of experience and best practices through, inter alia, conferences, workshops and seminars at
the national and regional levels, within existing resources;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/120
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/391, para. 49)5

74/120. Promoting social integration through social inclusion
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March 1995, and the
twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly, entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond:
achieving social development for all in a globalizing world”, held in Geneva from 26 June to 1 July 2000, and noting
the role of the Commission for Social Development,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2010/12 of 22 July 2010 on promoting social integration
and General Assembly resolution 72/142 of 19 December 2017 and its previous resolutions on promoting social
integration through social inclusion,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, and its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social
and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling its resolution 74/4 of 15 October 2019, in which it endorsed the political declaration in the annex
thereto entitled “Gearing up for a decade of action and delivery for sustainable development: political declaration of
the Sustainable Development Goals Summit”,
Welcoming the fact that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development reflects the cross-cutting nature and
importance of social inclusion, through the relevant Sustainable Development Goals and associated targets, and
acknowledging that its promotion is required to achieve sustainable development in all its dimensions,

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Zimbabwe.
5

692

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reiterating the pledge that no one will be left behind, reaffirming the recognition that the dignity of the human
person is fundamental, and the wish to see the Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments
of society, and recommitting to focusing our effort where the challenges are greatest, including by ensuring the
inclusion and participation of those who are furthest behind,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development includes, among the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals, which are integrated and indivisible, a goal to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming also that empowerment, participation and social protection are essential for social development, as
well as for social inclusion, and that sustainable development requires the meaningful, full and equal participation
of all,
Recognizing the great importance of promoting comprehensive systems of social protection that provide
universal access to essential social services, consistent with national priorities and circumstances, in order to help to
meet the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Taking note with appreciation of the commitment of several United Nations entities to mainstream social
inclusion into their work, and encouraging others to do the same,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for everyone, as necessary, to eradicate poverty
in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, which should be complemented, as appropriate, by
effective social protection policies, including social inclusion policies,
Reaffirming also the importance of reducing inequalities within and among countries through the empowerment
of all and the promotion of social, economic and political inclusion, especially for those in vulnerable or marginalized
groups or situations,
Recognizing that the gains of economic growth should also benefit those in vulnerable or marginalized groups
or situations,
Affirming its strong support for fair globalization and the need to translate growth into the reduction of
inequalities, eradication of poverty and strategies and policies that promote full, freely chosen and productive
employment and decent work for all and that these strategies and policies should constitute fundamental components
of relevant national and international policies and national development strategies, including inequality and poverty
reduction strategies, and reaffirming that employment creation and decent work for all should be incorporated into
macroeconomic policies, taking fully into account the impact and social dimension of globalization, the benefits and
costs of which are often unevenly shared and distributed,
Recognizing that the three core themes of social development, namely, poverty eradication, full and productive
employment and decent work for all and social integration, are interrelated and mutually reinforcing, and that an
enabling environment therefore needs to be created so that all three objectives can be pursued simultaneously,
Reaffirming its resolution 73/342 of 16 September 2019 on the International Labour Organization Centenary
Declaration for the Future of Work, in which it reaffirmed that full and productive employment and decent work for
all are key elements of sustainable development,
Recognizing that social inclusion and equality are intrinsically linked and that focusing on and investing in the
most disadvantaged and excluded populations, which may include children, women, youth, persons with disabilities,
older persons, migrants and indigenous peoples, is critically important for the effective achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals,

693

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that social inclusion policies and systems play a critical role in promoting an inclusive society
and are also crucial for fostering stable, safe, harmonious, peaceful and just societies and for improving social cohesion
and inclusion so as to create an environment for development and progress,
Reaffirming the important role of corporate social responsibility and accountability in contributing to an
enabling environment to promote inclusive economic growth and social integration,
Recognizing that social inclusion policies also strengthen the democratic process and play a critical role in
progressively realizing economic, social and cultural rights for all,
Stressing that social inclusion policies should promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls and equal access to opportunities and social protection for all, in particular for those in vulnerable or marginalized
groups or situations, including women and girls who experience multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and
violence, considering that the empowerment of women and girls will make a crucial contribution to progress across
all the Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring the social integration of older persons and the promotion and protection
of their rights, as an integral part of development policies at all levels, and recognizing that older persons can make a
significant contribution to sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and environmental,
Recognizing persons with disabilities as both agents and beneficiaries of development, stressing the need to
promote the rights of persons with disabilities and their participation, including through their representative
organizations, in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in that regard noting with
appreciation the 2018 Disability and Development Report: Realizing the Sustainable Development Goals by, for and
with Persons with Disabilities,6 the first progress report on disability inclusion in the context of the 2030 Agenda,
which is aimed at advancing efforts to remove barriers and empower persons with disabilities,
Reaffirming that youth participation is important for development, and encouraging Member States to explore
and promote the participation of young people in relevant decision-making processes and monitoring, including in
designing and implementing policies and programmes involving them, while implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,
Recognizing the important role played by civil society, including non‑governmental organizations, in promoting
social integration, inter alia, through social programmes and support for the development of socially inclusive policies,
Acknowledging that the participation of persons in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations is crucial to
formulating and implementing social inclusion policies that effectively achieve social integration, as appropriate,
Reaffirming the important role of cooperatives, especially in developing countries, in reducing inequality within
and among countries and ensuring social inclusion while promoting more inclusive and equitable growth in order to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals with the aim of leaving no one behind,
Recognizing that each country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development, and
reaffirming the essential role of national policies and strategies in promoting sustainable development in all its forms,
particularly the promotion of social inclusion,
Recognizing also the importance of an enabling international environment, and stressing the importance of
enhanced international cooperation to support national efforts towards promoting social integration through social
inclusion in every country, including the fulfilment of all commitments on official development assistance, debt relief,
market access, financial and technical support and capacity-building,
Expressing concern that, in times of economic and financial crisis and ongoing concern about energy and food
insecurity, social exclusion can be exacerbated, and stressing in this regard that sustainable and reliable social inclusion
policies and programmes can play a positive role,
Recalling its resolution 72/206 of 20 December 2017 on financial inclusion for sustainable development, in
which it recognized the importance of financial inclusion for achieving sustainable development,

_______________
6

694

United Nations publication, Sales No. 19.IV.4.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Considering that bridging the digital divide is essential for all to gain access to, among other things, new jobs
requiring relevant digital skills, in order to build an inclusive digital economy and knowledge society, and that
information and communications technology is a tool through which all can substantively contribute to participate in
and leverage their social and economic development and inclusion,
Recalling its resolution 73/218 of 20 December 2018 on information and communications technologies for
sustainable development,
Recognizing that, in order to leave no one behind and bring everyone forward, actions are needed for the
promotion of equality of opportunity so that no person is denied basic economic and social opportunities, and
recognizing also that the promotion of equality of opportunity contributes significantly to the enjoyment of all human
rights,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;7

2. Stresses that Member States, which bear the main responsibility for social integration and social inclusion,
should prioritize the creation of a “society for all” based on respect for all human rights and the principles of equality
among individuals, non-discrimination, access to basic social services and promotion of the active participation of
every member of society, in particular those in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations, in all aspects of life,
including civic, social, economic, cultural and political activities, as well as participation in decision-making
processes;
3. Reaffirms that social integration policies should seek to reduce inequalities and that equity and social
inclusion are important for achieving sustainable development, ensuring that individuals can participate without
discrimination and contribute to its social, economic and environmental dimensions;
4. Acknowledges that investment in human capital and social protection has been proven to be effective in
reducing poverty and inequality, and invites Member States to mobilize additional innovative sources of financing, as
appropriate, including through public-private partnerships, to secure adequate levels of social expenditure necessary
for expanding coverage towards universal access to health, education, innovation, new technologies and basic social
protection, and to address the issues of illicit financial flows and corruption;
5. Stresses the importance of promoting inclusive and equitable quality education that is age-, disability- and
gender-sensitive, as well as lifelong learning opportunities for all, especially for children, women, youth, persons with
disabilities, older persons, migrants, indigenous peoples and persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, and of skills development and quality training as essential means for inclusive participation and
integration in society;
6. Calls upon Member States to promote a more equitable participation in and access to economic growth
gains, through, inter alia, policies that ensure inclusive labour markets and by implementing socially responsive
macroeconomic policies, in which employment has a key role, and social inclusion strategies that promote social
integration, implementing nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including floors,
particularly for those who are in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations, as defined by each country in
accordance with its individual circumstances, including on a demand-driven basis, and the promotion and protection
of their social and economic rights;
7. Encourages Member States to consider, when appropriate, the creation or the strengthening of national
institutions or agencies for promoting, implementing and evaluating social inclusion programmes and mechanisms,
at the national and local levels, in order to help to ensure that no one is left behind;
8. Also encourages Member States to consider promoting the increased civil, political and economic
participation of women, young people, older persons, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, including through promoting their involvement
in political processes and their access to social protection, credit, vocational training and employment support
services;

_______________
7

A/74/133.

695

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Further encourages Member States to ensure inclusive participatory and representative decision-making
processes, at all levels, and to review existing legal frameworks, as appropriate, with a view to removing
discriminatory provisions so as to reduce inequalities;
10. Encourages Member States to promote social inclusion as a matter of social justice in order to build the
resilience of vulnerable populations and to help them to adapt to the negative impact of economic crises, humanitarian
emergencies, natural disasters and climate change, and in this regard invites relevant United Nations entities and
international institutions to support such efforts;
11. Invites Member States, and encourages regional organizations, to support national efforts to achieve
inclusive societies, in particular in developing countries, upon their request, by providing, inter alia, financial and
technical cooperation for the design and implementation of sound social inclusion policies;
12. Encourages Member States to mainstream social integration objectives into social inclusion policies,
promoting the participation of persons in vulnerable or marginalized groups or situations in planning, implementing
and monitoring processes, in collaboration, as appropriate, with relevant organizations of the United Nations
development system, regional organizations, international and regional financial institutions, development and social
partners, the private sector and civil society organizations;
13. Also encourages Member States, recognizing that all legal, social and economic barriers to the
empowerment of all women and girls have to be removed, to promote the systematic mainstreaming and inclusion of
a gender perspective in all social inclusion strategies or initiatives, while giving special consideration to the promotion
of a gender-responsive policy environment in the workplace for the empowerment of women in the workplace;
14. Further encourages Member States to consider adopting and pursuing national financial inclusion
strategies or initiatives that take into account a gender perspective and comprise, inter alia, measures for promoting
full and equal access to formal financial services and financial literacy, as a way to increase the capacity of young
people, women, persons with disabilities, older persons and indigenous peoples to leverage various types of
opportunities for their full participation in society, such as entrepreneurs;
15. Recognizes that information and communications technologies have the potential to provide new solutions
to development challenges, particularly in the context of globalization, and can foster sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth and sustainable development, competitiveness, access to information and knowledge,
trade and development, poverty eradication and social inclusion, accordingly reaffirms its commitment to bridging
the digital divide, and calls upon Member States to implement policies and to accelerate their efforts to close the digital
divide, as a measure to attain the social inclusion of all, with a focus on children, youth, women, persons with
disabilities and older persons, without any discrimination;
16. Reaffirms the commitment of the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on
Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,8 to embracing
diversity in cities and human settlements, to strengthening social cohesion, intercultural dialogue and understanding,
tolerance, mutual respect, gender equality, innovation, entrepreneurship, inclusion, identity and safety, and the dignity
of all people, as well as to fostering liveability and a vibrant urban economy and to taking steps to ensure that local
institutions promote pluralism and peaceful coexistence within increasingly heterogeneous and multicultural
societies;
17. Invites Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, regional organizations,
international and regional financial institutions, development and social partners, the private sector and civil society
organizations to continue to share their experience in respect of practical initiatives to promote economic, civil and
political participation and non-discrimination measures and other measures for advancing social integration;
18. Invites Member States to consider a systematic exchange of good practices in social integration at the
regional and international levels so that policymakers and other stakeholders can apply them to their national
circumstances and step up progress towards achieving a “society for all”;

_______________
8

696

Resolution 71/256, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. Encourages Member States to improve the collection and use of high-quality, timely, reliable,
disaggregated data and statistics for the formulation of policies and programmes aimed at achieving social inclusion,
and stresses the importance of international cooperation in this regard;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report, taking into account the information provided by
Member States and relevant actors of the United Nations system, on the implementation of the present resolution to
the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
21. Decides to consider the question further at its seventy-sixth session under the item entitled “Social
development”.
RESOLUTION 74/121
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/391, para. 49)9

74/121. Policies and programmes involving youth
The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Programme of Action for Youth, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolutions 50/81
of 14 December 1995 and 62/126 of 18 December 2007,
Recalling also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights10 and relevant international human rights
instruments, in particular the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,11 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights11 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,12
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world:
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which, for the first time, the Assembly recognized children and
youth as agents of change, and recognizing that the Sustainable Development Goals are integrated, indivisible and
global in nature, and therefore that all of them apply to youth,
Recalling that youth development is not only critical to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, but that it is also recognized in other development frameworks, including the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,13 the Istanbul Declaration14 and the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011−2020,15 the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,16 the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,17 the outcome of

_______________
9

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia and Zimbabwe.
10
Resolution 217 A (III).
11
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
12
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
13
Resolution 69/313, annex.
14
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chap. I.
15
Ibid., chap. II.
16
Resolution 69/15, annex.
17
Resolution 71/1.

697

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III),18 the outcome of the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons19 and all relevant international instruments or commitments related to migrants and refugees,
Reaffirming that fulfilling the human rights, needs and well-being of youth, including adolescents and young
women, is critical to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as other United
Nations conferences and summits, including the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,20 the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and Development21 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action,22 and their review conferences,
Welcoming the effective participation of youth representatives in national delegations at the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions and relevant United Nations conferences,
Recognizing the importance of the participation of youth in the commemorations of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, in 2020, under the theme “The future we want, the United Nations we need:
reaffirming our collective commitment to multilateralism”,23 the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, in 2019,24 and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women, in 2020,25
Taking note that the Year of Youth was designated by Kazakhstan and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries in 2019,
Taking note also of the convening of the forty-fifth WorldSkills competition, held in Kazan, Russian Federation,
in 2019, which contributes to advanced systems of vocational training and provides broad opportunities for young
people to engage in technical creativity,
Acknowledging the important contributions made by the Economic and Social Council youth forum to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and that it serves as an important platform for
substantive contributions of young people to share their vision with decision makers and representatives of
Governments and civil society,
Taking note of the convening of the Youth Climate Summit by the Secretary-General, held during the seventyfourth session of the General Assembly, which gathered young people committed to climate action, together with
Governments, the United Nations and the private sector, to discuss youth perspectives, as well as highlight youth-led
solutions to address climate challenges, and in this regard further noting the launch of the Kwon-Gesh Youth Pledge,
Acknowledging that the current generation of youth is the largest one ever, and in this context reaffirming the
importance of involving youth, and youth-led and youth-focused organizations, in the work of the United Nations at
the national, regional and international levels in all matters of concern to them, including in the implementation of the
World Programme of Action for Youth and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recognizing that many countries are making progress towards achieving universal health coverage by 2030 and
that the good health and well-being of young people are closely intertwined with their capacity to complete their
education and seize employment opportunities,
Recognizing also that young women between the ages of 15 and 24 are most vulnerable to HIV, experiencing
infection rates two or three times as high as those of young men, depending on the region, as well as many healthrelated threats and challenges,

_______________
18

Resolution 71/256, annex.
Resolution 72/1.
20
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
21
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
22
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
23
See resolution 73/299.
24
See resolution 73/301.
25
See resolution 73/340.
19

698

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing further that a youthful population creates significant opportunities for development, and
underlining in this regard the importance of the creation by Member States of appropriate policy environments, in
collaboration with the United Nations system, in order to realize a demographic dividend driven by large proportions
of young people moving into the labour force, while adopting an inclusive results-based approach to development
planning and implementation in accordance with national priorities and legislation, and stressing in this regard the
decision of the African Union to proclaim 2017 the Year of Harnessing the Demographic Dividend through
Investment in Youth,
Reaffirming that generating decent work and quality employment for youth is one of the biggest challenges that
needs to be tackled, and emphasizing the priority areas of the World Programme of Action for Youth linked to the
employability of youth, including quality education and health, and access to information and technology, and bearing
in mind that over 59 million young people are unemployed and 138 million working youth are in poverty, including
extreme poverty,
Emphasizing the need to empower youth, including young women and girls, in order to achieve sustainable
development, and stressing in this regard the commitment in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
eradicate poverty and substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education or training and to
develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment, and in this regard takes note of the call for action
of the International Labour Organization on the youth employment crisis and the Global Initiative on Decent Jobs for
Youth,
Emphasizing also the need to substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills,
including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship, and to ensure, by 2030,
that all youth and a substantial proportion of adults, both men and women, achieve literacy and numeracy,
Recalling that Member States have an important role in promoting and protecting the rights and in meeting the
needs and aspirations of youth, including young people in vulnerable situations, and recognizing that the ways in
which young people are able to fulfil their potential as agents of change will influence social and economic conditions
and the well-being and livelihood of future generations,
Recognizing the important and positive contribution of young people in efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security,
Recalling the Lisbon Declaration on Youth Policies and Programmes, adopted at the World Conference of
Ministers Responsible for Youth, in 1998, and in this context welcoming the World Conference of Ministers
Responsible for Youth 2019 and Youth Forum Lisboa+21, held on 22 and 23 June 2019, and noting the Declaration
on Youth Policies and Programmes,26
Welcoming the role of the Envoy of the Secretary-General on Youth and her work in addressing the needs of
youth, as well as, inter alia, as a harmonizer with different United Nations entities, Governments, civil society, youth
organizations, academia and media towards enhancing, empowering and strengthening the position of young people
within and outside the United Nations system,
Noting the launch by the Secretary-General, in September 2018, of Youth 2030: The United Nations Youth
Strategy, to address the needs of youth and to fulfil their potential as agents of change, as well as of the Generation
Unlimited global partnership, which is aimed at ensuring that, by 2030, every young person has the opportunity to be
in education, learning, training or employment,
Noting also the development of guiding principles and tools, for consideration by States, on the human rights
obligations of States to provide public education,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;27

_______________
26
27

A/73/949, annex.
A/74/175.

699

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Reaffirms the World Programme of Action for Youth,28 and emphasizes that all 15 priority areas of the
Programme of Action are interrelated and mutually reinforcing and the role that the Commission for Social
Development plays in implementing it;
3. Also reaffirms the commitment of Heads of State and Government in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development29 to leave no one behind, including youth, and the importance of implementing, following up on and
reviewing strategies that adequately address youth issues and give young people everywhere real opportunities for
full, effective, constructive and sustainable participation in society;
4. Reiterates that the primary responsibility for implementing the World Programme of Action for Youth lies
with Member States, and urges Governments, in consultation with youth, youth-led and youth-focused organizations
and other relevant stakeholders, to develop integrated, holistic, inclusive and effective youth policies and programmes,
as well as coherent cross-sectoral efforts, based on the Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and to evaluate them regularly as part of the follow-up action on and implementation of the Programme
of Action at all levels;
5. Urges Member States to protect, promote and fulfil the realization and full enjoyment by all young people
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights10 and
relevant international human rights instruments, in the implementation of the World Programme of Action for Youth,
while ensuring that youth policies and programmes and their planning, design, implementation, monitoring and
review include the views, perspectives and priorities of youth and are adequately resourced, transparent and
accountable;
6. Calls upon Member States to consider, on a voluntary basis, the indicators proposed in the report of the
Secretary-General30 for their selection and adaptation in monitoring and assessing the implementation of the World
Programme of Action for Youth, giving particular attention to young women, marginalized groups and young people
belonging to vulnerable groups or in vulnerable situations, especially those living in areas of armed conflict, taking
into account the national social and economic circumstances in each country;
7. Stresses the need to strengthen and support the capacity of national statistical offices to design, collect and
analyse data disaggregated by sex and age so as to contribute effectively to follow-up, reporting and accountability
for the achievement of the youth dimensions of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
8. Urges Member States to promote equal opportunities for all, to eliminate all forms of discrimination
against young people, including that based on race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national
or social origin, property, birth or other status, and to foster social integration for social groups such as young persons
with disabilities, young migrants and indigenous youth on an equal basis with others;
9. Reiterates that the eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition, in particular as they affect children and
youth, is crucial for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, recalls the commitment to
eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development
and global prosperity for all, including the strengthening of international cooperation through the fulfilment of all
official development assistance commitments and the transfer of appropriate technology and capacity-building with
regard to youth, and the need for urgent action on all sides, including more ambitious national development strategies,
efforts and investment in youth, backed by increased international support and, inter alia, by providing youth with a
nurturing environment for the full realization of their human rights and capabilities, in order to realize the opportunity
of the demographic dividend offered by the largest number of young people ever in the history of humankind, and
calls for the increased participation of youth, youth-led and youth-focused organizations and other relevant civil
society organizations in the development of such national development strategies;
10. Emphasizes the role of quality health education and literacy in improving health outcomes over a lifetime,
and in this regard encourages its promotion by Member States among young people, including through evidencebased education and information strategies and programmes, both in and out of school, and through public campaigns,

_______________
28

Resolution 50/81, annex, and resolution 62/126, annex.
Resolution 70/1.
30
E/CN.5/2013/8.
29

700

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and to increase the access of youth to affordable, safe, effective, sustainable and appropriate youth-friendly healthcare services and social services, safe drinking water and adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene, by paying
special attention to and raising awareness regarding sports and physical activity, nutrition, including eating disorders,
obesity, mental health and well-being, the prevention, control and effects of communicable and non-communicable
diseases, the prevention of adolescent pregnancies, and sexual and reproductive health care, and recognizes the need
to develop safe, affordable and youth-friendly counselling and substance abuse prevention programmes;
11. Also emphasizes the need to implement measures to promote and improve the mental health and wellbeing of young people, including by scaling up comprehensive and integrated services for the prevention of mental
disorders and other mental health conditions, including suicide prevention, as well as treatment for young people with
mental disorders and other mental health conditions as well as neurological disorders, providing psychosocial support,
including resilience training, while raising awareness of mental health issues and tackling stigma and social pressure,
promoting well-being, strengthening the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, addressing social determinants
of health and fully respecting their human rights;
12. Calls upon Member States to accelerate efforts to scale up scientifically accurate age-appropriate
comprehensive education, relevant to cultural contexts, that provides adolescent girls and boys and young women and
men, in and out of school, consistent with their evolving capacities, with information on sexual and reproductive
health, gender equality and the empowerment of women, human rights, physical, psychological and pubertal
development, and power in relationships between women and men, to enable them to build self-esteem and informed
decision-making, communication and risk reduction skills and to develop respectful relationships, in full partnership
with young persons, parents, legal guardians, caregivers, educators and health-care providers;
13. Emphasizes that addressing the specific needs of young people in the response to HIV and AIDS is a key
element in efforts to achieve an AIDS-free generation, and urges Member States to develop accessible, available and
affordable primary health-care services of high quality, including sexual and reproductive health care, as well as
education programmes, including those related to sexually transmitted infections, including HIV and AIDS, and to
strengthen efforts in this regard, including by ensuring the active involvement of young people living with or affected
by HIV in the response;
14. Also emphasizes the right to education, recognizes that investment in universal, quality and inclusive
education and training is the most important policy investment that States can make to ensure the immediate and longterm development of youth, and reiterates that access to inclusive, equitable and quality formal and non‑formal
education, at all levels, including, as appropriate, catch-up and literacy education, including in information and
communications technologies for those who did not receive formal education, information and communications
technologies and volunteerism are important factors that enable young people to acquire the relevant skills and to
build their capacities, including for employability and entrepreneurial development, and to gain decent and productive
work, and calls upon Member States to take the actions necessary to ensure that young people, including pregnant
adolescents and young mothers, have access to such services and opportunities, which will allow them to be drivers
of sustainable development;
15. Recognizes the importance of a deep connection between youth and their respective cultural heritage and
background as a tool for the establishment of positive relations based on the respect for cultural diversity, leading to
peaceful integration also through artistic, cultural and sports initiatives;
16. Calls upon Member States to accelerate their efforts to close the digital divide and promote innovation
among youth by ensuring that information and communications technologies are fully and appropriately integrated
into education and training at all levels, including in the development of curricula, teacher training and institutional
administration and management, and in support of the concept of lifelong learning;
17. Urges Member States to intensify efforts to address the high rates of youth unemployment,
underemployment, vulnerable employment, informal employment and young people not in employment, education
or training by developing and implementing targeted and integrated local and national youth employment policies for
inclusive, sustainable and innovative job creation, improved employability, skills development and vocational training
to facilitate the transition from school to work, and improving synergies between the education and employment
sectors to increase the prospects for integrating youth into the sustainable labour market, and through increased
innovation and entrepreneurship, including the development of networks of young entrepreneurs at the local, national,
regional and global levels that foster knowledge among young people about their rights and responsibilities in society,
701

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and encourages Member States to invest in quality education, support lifelong learning and provide social protection
for all youth and to request donors, specialized United Nations entities and the private sector to continue to provide
assistance to Member States, including technical and funding support, as appropriate;
18. Also urges Member States to address the challenges faced by girls and young women, as well as gender
stereotypes that perpetuate all forms of discrimination and violence against girls and young women, including harmful
practices, and the stereotypical roles of men and women that hinder social and personal development, by
implementing the commitments to the empowerment of women and gender equality and the human rights of all
women and girls, and to engage, educate, encourage and support men and boys to take responsibility for their
behaviour in this regard, including their sexual and reproductive behaviour;
19. Further urges Member States to condemn violence against girls and young women, including sexual
harassment, and reaffirms that they should not invoke any custom, tradition or religious consideration to avoid their
obligations with respect to its elimination and should pursue, by all appropriate means and without delay, a policy of
eliminating violence against women, as set out in the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women;31
20. Urges Member States to mainstream a gender perspective into all development efforts, recognizing that
the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls is critical for achieving sustainable
development and for efforts to combat hunger, poverty and disease, and to strengthen policies and programmes that
seek to improve, ensure and broaden the full, effective and structured participation of young women in all spheres of
political, economic, social and cultural life as equal partners, and to improve their access to all resources needed for
the full exercise of all of their human rights and fundamental freedoms by removing persistent barriers, including by
providing access to quality education at all levels, ensuring equal access to full and productive employment and decent
work and strengthening their economic independence;
21. Encourages Member States to take measures that minimize the negative effects of globalization and
maximize its benefits, and emphasizes the importance of a fair globalization in offering relevant education and training
for young people in order that they may reach their full personal development and that enable their access to decent
jobs and better employment opportunities in order to meet the needs of changing labour markets and enable young
migrants to enjoy their human rights;
22. Recognizes that the international community faces increasing challenges posed by climate change and the
loss of biodiversity, which have increased vulnerabilities and inequalities with direct and indirect implications for the
well-being of youth and which could make youth, particularly in developing countries and small island developing
States, vulnerable to their adverse impacts, including through suffering disproportionately in labour markets in times
of crisis created by climate change, calls for the enhanced cooperation of and concerted action by Member States with
youth in order to address those challenges, taking into account the positive role that the education of youth can play
in that respect, and encourages Member States to further promote youth participation in climate action and to consider
youth perspectives in decision-making processes on climate change;
23. Also recognizes that the sharing of family responsibilities creates an enabling family environment for the
empowerment of youth, which contributes to development, that youth make a significant contribution to the welfare
of their families and that particular attention must be paid to solutions to youth unemployment in order to generate the
human and social capital that is essential for social and economic development;
24. Further recognizes the importance of strengthening intergenerational partnerships and solidarity among
generations, and in this regard recognizes the importance of opportunities for voluntary, constructive and regular
interaction between young people and older generations in the family, the workplace and society at large;
25. Recognizes all recent efforts to promote the youth and peace and security agenda, and calls upon Member
States and relevant United Nations organs and entities to consider ways to increase the meaningful and inclusive
participation of youth in conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding, post-conflict processes and humanitarian
action, as well as to take concrete measures to further assist youth in armed conflict situations, in accordance with the
World Programme of Action for Youth, and to encourage the involvement of youth, where appropriate, in activities

_______________
31

702

Resolution 48/104.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

concerning the protection of children and youth affected by armed conflict situations, and recognizes the importance
of protecting schools and universities from military use in contravention of international humanitarian law;
26. Urges Member States to take concerted action, in conformity with international law, to remove obstacles
to the full realization of the rights of young people living under foreign occupation, colonial rule and in other areas of
conflict or post-conflict situations in order to promote the achievement of the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
27. Also urges Member States to take effective measures, in conformity with international law, to protect
young people, including youth in marginalized groups affected or exploited by terrorism;
28. Further urges Member States to address legal, administrative, social, economic, digital and cultural
barriers that limit young people’s participation and representation, while enabling the capacities, resources,
information, technology, support, space and skills needed to empower the free, active, independent, full and effective
participation of youth, including youth in vulnerable situations;
29. Calls upon Member States to develop or maintain, in this regard, preventive measures and remedies for
violations and abuses regarding the right to privacy in the digital age that may affect all individuals, including young
people, promote digital literacy and technical skills to effectively protect their privacy and take measures to prevent
cyberstalking and cyberbullying;
30. Recognizes that the contributions of young people are important for the full and successful implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and urges Member States and United Nations entities, in
consultation with youth and youth-led and youth-focused organizations, to explore and promote concrete new avenues
for the full, effective, structured and sustainable participation of young people and youth-led organizations in relevant
decision-making processes and monitoring, in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life, including in
designing and implementing policies, programmes and initiatives, in particular, while implementing the 2030 Agenda;
31. Encourages Member States to include youth delegates in their delegations at all relevant discussions in
the General Assembly and its subsidiary organs, the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions
and relevant United Nations conferences, as appropriate, bearing in mind the principles of gender balance and
non-discrimination, and emphasizes that such youth representatives should be selected through a transparent process
that ensures that they have a suitable mandate to represent young people in their countries;
32. Calls upon the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat Programme on Youth to
continue to act as the focal point within the United Nations system for promoting further collaboration and
coordination on youth-related matters including, inter alia, with Governments on the United Nations Youth Delegate
Programme;
33. Calls upon donors, including Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
to actively contribute to the United Nations Youth Fund in order to facilitate the participation of youth representatives
from developing countries in the activities of the United Nations, taking into account the need for greater geographical
balance in terms of youth representation, as well as to accelerate the implementation of the World Programme of
Action for Youth and to support the production of the World Youth Report, and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to take appropriate action to encourage contributions to the Fund;
34. Acknowledges the increased collaboration through the Inter-Agency Network on Youth Development in
developing the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Youth, requests United Nations entities, within existing
resources, to continue their coordination towards a more coherent, comprehensive and integrated approach to youth
development, calls upon United Nations entities and relevant partners to support national, regional and international
efforts in addressing challenges hindering youth development, and in this regard encourages close collaboration with
Member States as well as other relevant stakeholders, including civil society;
35. Recognizes the role of the Envoy of the Secretary-General on Youth and her task of bringing the voices of
young people to the United Nations system in the areas of participation, advocacy, partnerships and harmonization
identified in her workplan, and encourages the Envoy to continue to work closely with Governments, United Nations
entities, civil society, youth organizations, academia and the media by empowering and strengthening the position of
young people within and outside the United Nations system, including by conducting country visits, at the request of
703

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the Member States concerned, and calls upon Member States and United Nations entities to support, as appropriate,
the Envoy in her efforts to advance the situation of youth globally;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session on
the implementation of the present resolution, including on progress that has been achieved and challenges that still
remain, to be prepared in consultation with Member States as well as the relevant specialized agencies, funds,
programmes and regional commissions, taking into account the work done by the United Nations system, and
encourages the Secretariat to consult, as appropriate, with youth-led and youth-focused organizations.
RESOLUTION 74/122
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 186 to 2, with no abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/391, para. 49)32
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: None

74/122. Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming all previous resolutions on the implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly, including resolution 73/141 of
17 December 2018,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March 1995, and the
twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly, entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond:
achieving social development for all in a globalizing world”, held in Geneva from 26 June to 1 July 2000,
Reaffirming that the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of Action of the
World Summit for Social Development33 and the further initiatives for social development adopted by the General

_______________
32

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Kazakhstan, and the State of Palestine (on behalf of
the States that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).
33
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

704

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Assembly at its twenty-fourth special session,34 as well as a continued global dialogue on social development issues,
constitute the basic framework for the promotion of social development for all at the national and international levels,
Welcoming the progress made towards the full implementation of the Copenhagen Declaration and the
Programme of Action through concerted action at the national, regional and global levels, and expressing its deep
concern that, more than 20 years after the convening of the World Summit for Social Development, progress has been
slow and uneven, and major gaps remain,
Welcoming also the adoption, in its entirety, of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,35 in which it is
recognized that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global
challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development,
Welcoming further the convening in New York on 24 and 25 September 2019 of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development under the auspices of the General Assembly, and its political declaration,36 aiming to
follow up and comprehensively review progress in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the 17 Sustainable Development Goals,
Welcoming the adoption of the political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, held
in New York on 23 September 2019, entitled “Universal health coverage: moving together to build a healthier
world”,37
Reaffirming the need to achieve sustainable development by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all, reducing inequalities within and among countries, raising
basic standards of living and fostering equitable and inclusive social development and the sustainable management of
natural resources,
Recognizing that the three core themes of social development, namely, poverty eradication, full and productive
employment and decent work for all and social integration, are interrelated and mutually reinforcing, and that an
enabling environment therefore needs to be created so that all three objectives can be pursued simultaneously,
Emphasizing the need to enhance the role of the Commission for Social Development in the follow-up to and
review of the World Summit for Social Development and the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly,
and welcoming the decision of the Economic and Social Council that the Commission, given its mandates and
experience in promoting people-centred inclusive development, will report on social aspects related to the agreed
main theme of the Council in order to contribute to its work,38 including by offering inputs regarding the effective
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in a holistic and inclusive manner,
Welcoming the decision of the Economic and Social Council that the Commission for Social Development will
consider one priority theme at each session on the basis of the follow-up to and review of the World Summit for Social
Development and its linkages to the social dimensions of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, proposing
an action-oriented resolution with recommendations to the Council in order to contribute to its work, and that the
priority theme for the 2020 session, which shall allow the Commission to contribute to the work of the Council, will
be “Affordable housing and social protection systems for all to address homelessness”,39
Recalling the ministerial declaration adopted at the high-level segment of the 2018 session of the Economic and
Social Council on the annual theme “From global to local: supporting sustainable and resilient societies in urban and
rural communities” and the ministerial declaration of the 2018 high-level political forum on sustainable development,
convened under the auspices of the Council, on the theme “Transformation towards sustainable and resilient
societies”,40

_______________
34

Resolution S-24/2, annex.
Resolution 70/1.
36
Resolution 74/4, annex.
37
Resolution 74/2.
38
Economic and Social Council resolution 2016/6, para. 3.
39
Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/4, paras. 4 and 7.
40
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/73/3), chap. VI, sect. F.
35

705

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming that the Declaration on the Right to Development41 also informs the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, along with other relevant instruments, such as the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development,42 Agenda 2063 adopted by the African Union and the
International Labour Organization Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization,43 and reaffirming also the
strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels
for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Affirming its strong support for fair globalization and the need to translate growth into the reduction of
inequalities, eradication of poverty and commitment to strategies and policies that aim to promote full, freely chosen
and productive employment and decent work for all and that these strategies and policies should constitute
fundamental components of relevant national and international policies and national development strategies, including
inequality and poverty reduction strategies, reaffirming that employment creation and decent work for all should be
incorporated into macroeconomic policies, taking fully into account the impact and social dimension of globalization,
the benefits and costs of which are often unevenly shared and distributed, and noting in this regard that the decent
work agenda of the International Labour Organization, with its four strategic objectives, has an important role to play
in achieving the objective of social protection and elimination of inequalities, as reaffirmed in the International Labour
Organization Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization,
Recognizing that social inclusion is a means for achieving social integration and is crucial for fostering stable,
safe, harmonious, peaceful and just societies and for improving social cohesion so as to create an environment for
development and progress and to leave no one behind,
Recognizing also that the remaining effects of the world financial and economic crisis have the potential to
undermine progress towards achieving internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable
Development Goals, and threaten debt sustainability in many countries, especially developing countries,
Deeply concerned that extreme poverty and the feminization of poverty persist in all countries of the world,
regardless of their economic, social and cultural situation, and that the extent and manifestations thereof, such as
hunger and malnutrition, vulnerability to trafficking in persons, forced and child labour, disease, lack of adequate
shelter and illiteracy, are heightened in developing countries and particularly severe in least developed countries, while
acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the world in combating extreme poverty,
Stressing the importance of removing obstacles to the realization of the right of peoples to self-determination,
in particular of peoples living under colonial or other forms of alien domination or foreign occupation, which
adversely affect their social and economic development, including their exclusion from labour markets,
Stressing also the importance of establishing a just and lasting peace all over the world in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, supporting all efforts to uphold the sovereign equality
of all States and respect their territorial integrity and political independence, and refraining in international relations
from the threat or use of force in any manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Recognizing in this regard the recent efforts to establish the Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace and
Development, which was held on 11 and 12 December 2019, under the theme “An agenda for sustainable peace,
security and development in Africa”,
Recognizing also that terrorism, trafficking in arms, organized crime, trafficking in persons, money-laundering,
ethnic and religious conflict, civil war, politically motivated killing and genocide pose increasing challenges to States
and societies in the attainment of conditions conducive to social development, including reduction of inequalities, and
that they further present urgent and compelling reasons for action by Governments individually and, as appropriate,
jointly to foster social cohesion while recognizing, protecting and valuing diversity,
Recognizing further that, since the convening of the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen in
1995, advances have been made in addressing and promoting social integration, including through the adoption of the

_______________
41

Resolution 41/128, annex.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
43
A/63/538-E/2009/4, annex.
42

706

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002,44 the World Programme of Action for Youth,45 the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,46 the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples47
and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,48
Welcoming the International Decade for People of African Descent (2015−2024), which urges Member States
to promote the social development of people of African descent, particularly women and girls, by eradicating any
form of discrimination, ensuring access to quality education and eliminating challenges and specific risks with regard
to health,
Reaffirming the commitment to promoting the rights of indigenous peoples in the areas of education,
employment, housing, sanitation, health and social protection and social security, and noting the attention paid to those
areas in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
Reaffirming also the efforts of Governments to achieve all health-related Sustainable Development Goal targets,
in particular Goal 3 of ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being for all throughout the life course, by integrating
those aims into their national plans and policies, as well as the significant progress made in increasing life expectancy,
reducing maternal, newborn and child mortality and combating communicable diseases,
Recognizing that action to achieve universal health coverage by 2030 is inadequate and that the level of progress
and investment to date is insufficient to meet target 3.8 of the Sustainable Development Goals, and that the world has
yet to fulfil its promise of implementing, at all levels, measures to address the health needs of all,
Recalling the outcome of the World Health Assembly held in May 2019, the agreement to accelerate and scale
up action to prevent and treat non-communicable diseases, the agreement on a common approach to antimicrobial
resistance, the adoption of a new global strategy on health, the environment and climate change, and the adoption by
the Assembly of the eleventh revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems, which will go into effect on 1 January 2022,
Reaffirming the commitments made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including to ensure
inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all,
Noting with concern that, despite the progress achieved, at least half of the world’s population lacks access to
essential health services, more than 800 million people bear the burden of catastrophic spending of at least 10 per cent
of their household income on health care and out-of-pocket expenses drive almost 100 million people into poverty
each year,
Reaffirming education for sustainable development as a vital means of implementation for sustainable
development, as outlined in the Aichi-Nagoya Declaration on Education for Sustainable Development,49 and as an
integral element of the Sustainable Development Goal on quality education and a key enabler of all the other Goals,
and welcoming the increased international recognition of education for sustainable development in quality education
and lifelong learning,
Acknowledging the importance for achieving sustainable development of delivering quality education to all girls
and boys, which will require reaching children living in extreme poverty, children with disabilities, migrant and
refugee children and those in conflict and post-conflict situations and providing safe, non-violent, inclusive and
effective learning environments for all, and recognizing the importance of scaling up investments and international
cooperation to allow all children to complete free, equitable, inclusive and quality early childhood, primary and
secondary education, including through scaling up and strengthening initiatives, such as the Global Partnership for
Education, and by upgrading education facilities that are child-, disability- and gender-sensitive and increasing the

_______________
44

Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex II.
45
Resolution 50/81, annex, and resolution 62/126, annex.
46
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
47
Resolution 61/295, annex.
48
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
49
A/70/228, annex.

707

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

percentage of qualified teachers in developing countries, including through international cooperation, especially in
the least developed countries and small island developing States,
Reiterating the contribution of education to eradicating poverty in all forms and dimensions by providing people
with knowledge and skills, which increases productivity and income and helps in reducing inequality within countries,
Acknowledging the importance of adopting science, technology and innovation strategies as integral elements
of national sustainable development strategies to help to strengthen knowledge-sharing and collaboration and the
importance of scaling up investment in science, technology, engineering and mathematics education and enhancing
technical, vocational and tertiary education, distance education and training and of ensuring equal access for all
women and girls and encouraging their participation therein,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;50

2. Welcomes the reaffirmation by Governments of their will and commitment to continue implementing the
Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social
Development,33 in particular to promote equality and social justice, eradicate poverty, promote full and productive
employment and decent work for all and foster social integration to achieve stable, safe and just societies for all, and
recognizes that the implementation of the Copenhagen commitments and the attainment of the internationally agreed
development goals are mutually reinforcing;
3. Reaffirms its commitment to working tirelessly for the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,35 and its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for achieving sustainable
development in its three dimensions – economic, social and environmental – in a balanced, holistic and integrated
manner;
4. Recognizes that poverty is a multidimensional phenomenon, and encourages Member States to develop
comprehensive, integrated and coherent poverty eradication strategies that effectively address the structural causes of
poverty and inequality with an emphasis on job-rich growth; address and meet the basic human needs of people living
in poverty; ensure their access to quality education, nutrition, health, water, sanitation, housing and other public social
services, access to employment and decent work for all, as well as access to productive resources, including credit,
land, training, technology and knowledge; and ensure their participation in decision-making on social and economic
development policies and programmes in this regard;
5. Emphasizes that the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the Millennium Summit,
the International Conference on Financing for Development, in its Monterrey Consensus,51 the 2005 World Summit,
the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus, in its Doha Declaration on Financing for Development,52 the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, the 2013 special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals, the third International Conference on Financing for Development, in its Addis Ababa Action Agenda,42 and
the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, have reinforced the priority and
urgency of the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions within the United Nations development agenda;
6. Recognizes the complex character of the ongoing food insecurity situation, including food price volatility,
as a combination of several major factors, both structural and conjunctural, which is also negatively affected by, inter
alia, environmental degradation, drought and desertification, global climate change, natural disasters, the lack of the
necessary technology and armed conflicts, and also recognizes that a strong commitment from national Governments
and the international community as a whole is required to confront the major threats to food security and to ensure
that policies in the area of agriculture do not distort trade and worsen food insecurity;

_______________
50

A/74/205.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18−22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
52
Resolution 63/239, annex.
51

708

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Reaffirms the importance of supporting the African Union’s development framework, Agenda 2063, as
well as its 10-year plan of action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in
Africa within the next 50 years, which is the African Union long-term strategy emphasizing industrialization, youth
employment, improved natural resource governance and the reduction of inequalities, and its continental programme
embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development53 and
regional initiatives, such as the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme;
8. Stresses that the benefits of economic growth should be inclusive and distributed more equitably and that,
in order to close the gap of inequality and avoid any further deepening of inequality, comprehensive social policies
and programmes, including appropriate social transfer and job creation programmes and social protection systems,
are needed;
9. Reaffirms that social integration policies should seek to reduce inequalities, promote access to basic social
services, quality education for all and health care, eliminate discrimination, increase the participation and integration
of social groups, particularly young people, older persons and persons with disabilities, noting the role of sports in this
regard, and address the challenges posed to social development by globalization and market-driven reforms in order
for all people in all countries to benefit from globalization;
10. Stresses that an enabling environment is a critical precondition for achieving equity and social
development and that, while economic growth is essential, entrenched inequality and marginalization are an obstacle
to the broad-based and sustained growth required for sustainable, inclusive and people-centred development, and
recognizes the need to balance and ensure complementarity between measures to achieve growth and measures to
achieve economic and social equity and inclusion in order for there to be an impact on overall poverty levels;
11. Acknowledges that investment in human capital and social protection has been proven to be effective in
reducing poverty and inequality, and invites Member States to mobilize innovative sources of financing, including
through public-private partnerships, to secure adequate levels of social expenditure necessary for expanding coverage
towards universal access to health education, innovation, new technologies and basic social protection and to address
the issues of illicit financial flows and corruption;
12. Stresses that international trade and stable financial systems can be effective tools to create favourable
conditions for the development of all countries and that trade barriers and some trading practices continue to have
negative effects on employment growth, particularly in developing countries, that good governance and the rule of
law at the national and international levels and the need to promote respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are essential for sustained economic growth, sustainable development, the reduction of inequalities, the
eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition and for addressing the most pressing social needs of people living in
poverty, and in this regard also stresses the importance of economic, social and cultural rights and the importance of
the principles of non‑discrimination, inclusivity and meaningful participation for the implementation of the outcome
of the World Summit for Social Development;
13. Acknowledges that inequalities persist within and among countries, posing significant challenges to social
cohesion, reaffirms that the eradication of poverty, the promotion of prosperity, gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls and the reduction of inequality within and among countries are fundamental to achieving
sustainable development for all, and that this requires collective and transformative efforts to leave no one behind and
put the furthest behind first, and adapt institutions and policies to take into account the multidimensional nature of
inequality and poverty and the inherent interlinkages between different Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
14. Urges Member States to strengthen social policies, as appropriate, paying particular attention to the specific
needs of disadvantaged and marginalized social groups, inter alia, women, children, youth, persons with disabilities,
people living with HIV/AIDS, older persons, indigenous peoples, refugees, internally displaced persons, migrants and
other persons in vulnerable situations, as well as to address all forms of violence in its many manifestations, including
domestic violence, and discrimination, including xenophobia, against them, to ensure that these groups are not left

_______________
53

A/57/304, annex.

709

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

behind, and recognizes that violence increases the challenges faced by States and societies in the achievement of
poverty eradication, full and productive employment and decent work for all, and social integration;
15. Reaffirms the commitment to gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, as well as to
the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into all development efforts, recognizing that they are critical for achieving
sustainable development and for efforts to combat hunger and malnutrition, poverty and disease, to strengthening
policies and programmes that improve, ensure and broaden the full participation of women in all spheres of political,
economic, social and cultural life as equal partners and to improving the access of women to all resources needed for
the full exercise of all their human rights and fundamental freedoms by removing persistent barriers and allocating
adequate resources for the elimination of all forms of violence and discrimination against women, including in the
workplace, inter alia, by addressing wage inequality, ensuring equal access to full and productive employment and
decent work for all, reconciliation of work and private life for both men and women, as well as strengthening their
economic independence;
16. Recognizes that youth participation is important for development, and urges Member States and United
Nations entities, in consultation with youth and youth-led and youth-focused organizations, to explore and promote
new avenues for the full, effective, structured and sustainable participation of young people and youth-led
organizations in relevant decision-making processes and monitoring, in all spheres of political, economic, social and
cultural life, including in designing and implementing policies, programmes and initiatives, in particular while
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
17. Reaffirms the right to food and acknowledges the importance of promoting sustainable farming and
agriculture, and, recognizing the important contribution that family farming and smallholder farming can play in
providing food security, reducing inequality in access to food and nutrition, calls upon Governments to ensure access
by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and
sufficient food all year round;
18. Urges Governments, with the cooperation of relevant entities, to establish nationally appropriate social
protection that supports labour market participation and addresses and reduces inequality and social exclusion, and
social protection systems and floors, including through streamlining fragmented social protection systems/
programmes, ensuring that such programmes are gender-responsive and disability-sensitive, and progressively extend
their coverage to all people throughout their life cycle, including for workers in the informal economy, invites the
International Labour Organization, upon request, to support government efforts to strengthen social protection
strategies and policies on extending social protection and social security coverage, urges Governments, while taking
account of national circumstances, to focus on the needs of those living in, or vulnerable to, poverty and to give
particular consideration to universal access to basic social security systems, including the implementation of social
protection floors, which can provide a systemic base upon which to address poverty and vulnerability, and in this
regard takes note of the International Labour Organization recommendation on social protection floors;
19. Stresses the need to address challenges faced by those working in informal or vulnerable jobs, by investing
in the creation of more decent work opportunities, including providing access to decent jobs in the formal sector in
accordance with International Labour Organization recommendation No. 204 concerning the transition from the
informal to the formal economy, and enhancing the productive capacities of people, and strengthen labour institutions
and employment and labour-market policies, taking into consideration the specific circumstances of each country and
by promoting close partnerships with relevant stakeholders;
20. Urges Member States to strengthen, as appropriate, the authority and capacity of national mechanisms for
promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, at all levels, which should be placed at the
highest possible level of government, with sufficient funding, and to mainstream a gender perspective across all
relevant national and local institutions, including labour, economic and financial government agencies, in order to
ensure that national planning, decision-making, policy formulation and implementation, budgeting processes and
institutional structures contribute to women’s economic empowerment in the changing world of work;
21. Also urges Member States to address the high rates of youth unemployment, underemployment,
vulnerable employment, informal employment and young people not in employment, education or training by
developing and implementing targeted and integrated local and national youth employment policies for inclusive,
sustainable and innovative job creation, improved employability, skills development and vocational training to
facilitate the transition from school to work and to increase the prospects for integrating youth into the sustainable
710

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

labour market, and through increased entrepreneurship, including the development of networks of young
entrepreneurs at the local, national, regional and global levels that foster knowledge among young people about their
rights and responsibilities in society, and encourages Member States to invest in education, support lifelong learning
and provide social protection for all youth and to request donors, specialized United Nations entities and the private
sector to continue to provide assistance to Member States, including technical and funding support, as appropriate;
22. Recognizes that promoting full employment and decent work for all also requires investing in education,
training and skills development for women and men, and girls and boys, strengthening social protection and health
systems and applying international labour standards, and urges States and, as appropriate, the relevant entities of the
United Nations system and international and regional organizations, within their respective mandates, as well as civil
society, the private sector, employer organizations, trade unions, the media and other relevant actors, to continue to
develop and strengthen policies, strategies and programmes to enhance, in particular, the employability of women and
youth and to ensure their access to full and productive employment and decent work for all, including by improving
access to formal and non-formal education, skills development and vocational training, lifelong learning and retraining
and long-distance education, inter alia, in information and communications technology and entrepreneurial skills,
particularly in developing countries, including with a view to supporting the economic empowerment of women in
the different stages of their lives;
23. Reaffirms the New Urban Agenda,54 which envisages cities and human settlements that fulfil their social
function, including the social and ecological function of land, with a view to progressively achieving the full
realization of the right to adequate housing, as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, without
discrimination, universal access to safe and affordable drinking water and sanitation, as well as equal access for all to
public goods and quality services in areas such as food security and nutrition, health, education, infrastructure,
mobility and transportation, energy, air energy, air quality and livelihoods;
24. Recognizes that the negative effects of climate change and environmental disasters have differential
impacts, with people in vulnerable situations, poor and rural communities and low-income countries being
disproportionately exposed to floods, droughts and other natural disasters, and that they have a lower capacity and
assets to recover from such external shocks, and expresses concern that climate change may cause high and volatile
food and commodity prices and hit them hardest;
25. Acknowledges the important nexus between international migration and social development, and stresses
the importance of effectively enforcing labour laws with regard to labour relations and working conditions of migrant
workers, inter alia, those related to their remuneration and conditions of health, safety at work and the right to freedom
of association;
26. Reaffirms that social development requires the active involvement of all actors in the development process,
including civil society organizations, corporations, the public sector and small businesses, and that partnerships among
all relevant actors within countries are increasingly becoming part of national and international cooperation for social
development, also reaffirms that, within countries, partnerships among the Government, civil society and the private
sector can contribute effectively to the achievement of social development goals, and acknowledges the role of the
public and private sectors as employers and enablers for the effective generation of new investments, full and
productive employment and decent work for all, including through partnerships with the United Nations system, civil
society and academia;
27. Stresses the importance of the policy space and leadership of national Governments for implementing
policies for poverty eradication and sustainable development, while remaining consistent with relevant international
rules and commitments, in particular in the areas of human rights, social expenditure and social protection
programmes, and calls upon international financial institutions and donors to support developing countries in
achieving their social development, in line with their national priorities and strategies, by, among other things,
providing debt relief within the context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
28. Underlines the responsibility of the private sector, at both the national and the international levels,
including small and large companies and transnational corporations, regarding not only the economic and financial
implications but also the development, social, gender and environmental implications of their activities, their

_______________
54

Resolution 71/256, annex.

711

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

obligations towards their workers and their contributions to achieving sustainable development, including social
development, emphasizes that transnational corporations and other business enterprises have a responsibility to
respect human rights, applicable laws and international principles and standards, to operate transparently, in a socially
and environmentally responsible manner, and to refrain from affecting the well-being of peoples, and also emphasizes
the need to take further concrete actions on corporate responsibility and accountability, including through the
participation of all relevant stakeholders, inter alia, for the prevention or prosecution of corruption, and to prevent
human rights abuses;
Universal access to health care
29. Reaffirms the necessity of improving availability, affordability and efficiency of health products by
increasing transparency of prices of medicines, vaccines, medical devices, diagnostics, assistive products, cell- and
gene-based therapies and other health technologies across the value chain, including through improved regulations
and building constructive engagement and a stronger partnership with relevant stakeholders, including industries, the
private sector and civil society, in accordance with national and regional legal frameworks and contexts, to address
the global concern about the high prices of some health products, and in this regard encourages the World Health
Organization to continue its efforts to biennially convene the Fair Pricing Forum with Member States and all relevant
stakeholders to discuss the affordability and transparency of prices and costs relating to health products;
30. Recognizes that health is an investment in human capital and social and economic development, towards
the full realization of human potential, and significantly contributes to the promotion and protection of human rights
and dignity as well as the empowerment of all people;
31. Welcomes the renewed commitment in the political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage37 to achieve universal health coverage, which implies that all people have access, without
discrimination, to nationally determined sets of the needed promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative and
palliative essential health services, and essential, safe, affordable, effective and quality medicines and vaccines, while
ensuring that the use of these services does not expose the users to financial hardship, with a special emphasis on those
who are marginalized;
32. Reaffirms that achieving universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality
essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for
all, is essential to eradicate poverty, and reduce inequality and achieve sustainable development for all;
33. Acknowledges that expanding health care is a challenge, as well as the rising cost of medications and
health products is threatening the sustainability of health systems in many countries, and stresses the responsibility of
States to ensure access to all, without discrimination of any kind, of medicines, in particular essential medicines, that
are affordable, safe, effective and of quality;
34. Expresses concern at the global shortfall of 18 million health workers, primarily in low- and middle
income countries, recognizes the need to train, build and retain a skilled health workforce, including nurses, midwives
and community health workers, who are an important element of strong and resilient health systems, and also
recognizes that increased investment in a more effective and socially accountable health workforce can unleash
significant socioeconomic gains and contribute to the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions, the
empowerment of all women and girls and the reduction of inequality;
35. Calls upon States, at the international level, to take steps, individually and/or through international
cooperation, in accordance with applicable international law, including international agreements, to ensure that their
actions as members of international organizations take into due account the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, and that the application of international agreements is
supportive of public health policies that promote broad access to safe, effective and affordable medicines;
36. Encourages all States to apply measures and procedures for enforcing intellectual property rights in such
a manner as to avoid creating barriers to the legitimate trade in medicines, and to provide for safeguards against the
abuse of such measures and procedures;
37. Calls upon Member States to make greater investments and promote decent work in the health and social
sectors, enable safe working environments and conditions, effective retention and equitable and broad distribution of
712

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the health workforce, and strengthen capacities to optimize the existing health workforce, including through
expanding rural and community-based health education and training to contribute to the achievement of universal
health coverage;
38. Encourages Governments to end all forms of malnutrition, including the internationally agreed targets on
stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant
and lactating women and older persons;
Universal and equitable access to education
39. Welcomes the rapid expansion in school enrolment worldwide, with literacy rates rising steadily over the
past 50 years to reach 68 per cent in 2016, and the improvement in the access to early childhood, primary, secondary,
tertiary and distance education and throughout the life course, and calls upon the international community to provide
inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels so that all people may have access to lifelong learning
opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to exploit opportunities to participate fully in
society;
40. Recognizes the limited access to and high rates of dropout from school and secondary education, the
increased rates of exclusion from education with age and the existence of large disparities in school attendance and
learning acquisition by region, wealth, sex, urban or rural residence and other factors such as indigenous identity or
disability, underscoring the challenges ahead, and also recognizes that poverty may affect access to quality education
at the secondary and tertiary levels;
41. Also recognizes that factors such as poverty, residing in a rural area or having a disability all too often
prevent children and adolescents from accessing quality education, especially at the secondary and tertiary levels;
42. Encourages all States to measure progress in the realization of the right to education, such as by
developing national indicators as an important tool for the realization of the right to education and for policy
formulation, impact assessment and transparency;
43. Encourages States to increase investments and international cooperation to allow all girls and boys to
complete free, equitable, inclusive and quality early childhood, primary and secondary education, including by scaling
up and strengthening initiatives, such as the Global Partnership for Education, and to explore additional innovative
mechanisms based on models combining public and private resources, while ensuring that all education providers
give due respect to the right to education;
44. Urges States to support the efforts of developing countries, in particular least developed countries, to
realize progressively the right to education, including the progressive realization of the equal enjoyment of the right
to education by every girl through appropriate resources, including financial and technical resources, in support of
country-led national education plans;
45. Reaffirms the right to education, and calls upon the international community to provide universal access
to inclusive, equal and non-discriminatory quality education at all levels – early childhood, primary, secondary, tertiary
and distance education, including technical and vocational training – as well as to promote the completion of primary
and secondary education so that all people may have access to lifelong learning opportunities that help them to acquire
the knowledge and skills needed to exploit opportunities to participate fully in society and contribute to sustainable
development;
46. Recognizes that substantial and efficiently spent investments are needed to improve the quality of
education and vocational training and in order to enable millions of people to acquire skills for decent work, and takes
note with appreciation of the report of the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity and
the recommendations contained therein, as appropriate;
47. Urges Member States to promote and respect women’s right to education throughout the life course at
all levels, especially for those who have been left furthest behind, and eliminate gender disparities in access to all
areas of secondary and tertiary education, promote financial literacy and inclusion, digital literacy and
entrepreneurship, ensure that women and girls have equal access to career development, training, scholarships and
fellowships and adopt positive action to build women’s and girls’ leadership skills and influence, and adopt

713

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

measures that promote, respect and guarantee the safety of women and girls in the school environment and that
support women and girls with disabilities at all levels of education and training;
International cooperation
48. Reaffirms that international cooperation has an essential role in assisting developing countries, including
the least developed and middle-income countries, in strengthening their human, institutional and technological
capacity;
49. Underlines that South-South cooperation is an important element of international cooperation for
development as a complement to, not a substitute for, North-South cooperation, recognizes its increased importance,
different history and particularities, and stresses that it should be seen as an expression of solidarity among peoples
and countries of the South, based on their shared experiences and objectives, and that it should continue to be guided
by the principles of respect for national sovereignty, national ownership and independence, equality, non-conditionality,
non‑interference in domestic affairs and mutual benefit;
50. Emphasizes that international public finance plays an important role in complementing the efforts of
countries to mobilize public resources domestically, especially in the poorest and the most vulnerable countries with
limited domestic resources, and that an important use of international public finance, including official development
assistance, is to catalyse the mobilization of additional resources from other public and private sources, and notes that
official development assistance providers have reaffirmed their respective commitments, including the commitment
by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development
assistance to developing countries and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance
to the least developed countries;
51. Welcomes the increase in the volume of official development assistance since the adoption of the
Monterrey Consensus, expresses its concern that many countries still fall short of their official development assistance
commitments, reiterates that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments remains crucial,
commends those few countries that have met or surpassed their commitment to 0.7 per cent of gross national income
for official development assistance and the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for official
development assistance to the least developed countries, urges all other countries to step up efforts to increase their
official development assistance and to make additional concrete efforts towards the official development assistance
targets, welcomes the decision by the European Union reaffirming its collective commitment to achieve the target of
0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance within the time frame of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and undertaking to meet collectively the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national
income for official development assistance to the least developed countries in the short term and to reach 0.20 per cent
of gross national income for official development assistance to the least developed countries within the time frame of
the 2030 Agenda, and encourages official development assistance providers to consider setting a target to provide at
least 0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to the least developed countries;
52. Stresses the essential role that official development assistance plays in complementing, leveraging and
sustaining financing for development efforts in developing countries and in facilitating the achievement of
development objectives, including the internationally agreed development goals, in particular the Sustainable
Development Goals, and welcomes steps to improve the effectiveness and quality of aid based on the fundamental
principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization, managing for results and mutual accountability;
53. Welcomes the contribution to the mobilization of resources for social development by the initiatives taken
on a voluntary basis by groups of Member States based on innovative financing mechanisms, including those that
aim to provide further access to drugs at affordable prices to developing countries on a sustainable and predictable
basis, such as the International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID, as well as other initiatives such as the International
Finance Facility for Immunization and the Advance Market Commitment for Vaccines;
54. Encourages Governments to support the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the
communicable and non-communicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, provide access to
affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and
Public Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular,
provide access to medicines for all;

714

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

55. Stresses that the international community shall enhance its efforts to create an enabling environment for
social development and poverty eradication through increasing market access for developing countries, technology
transfer on mutually agreed terms, financial aid and a comprehensive solution to the external debt problem;
56. Reaffirms that each country has the primary responsibility for its own economic and social development
and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized, and underlines the
importance of adopting effective measures, including new financial mechanisms, as appropriate, to support the efforts
of developing countries to achieve sustained economic growth, sustainable development, poverty eradication and the
strengthening of their democratic systems;
57. Stresses that the international community should support national commitments to eradicate poverty in all
its forms and dimensions with the goal to ensure that no one is left behind, and recognizes the need for greater
international cooperation to further reduce inequality between and within countries and increase capacity-building
support to countries with the most constrained resources to ensure that social expenditures meet certain targets;
58. Reconfirms the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and recognizes the need to take steps to significantly increase
investment to close resource gaps, including through the mobilization of financial resources from all sources,
including public, private, domestic and international resource mobilization and allocation;
59. Reaffirms that the Commission for Social Development, as a functional commission of the Economic and
Social Council, in promoting the integrated treatment of social development issues in the United Nations system, shall
review, on a periodic basis, issues related to the follow-up to and implementation of the Copenhagen Declaration and
the Programme of Action, in a manner consistent with the functions and contributions of the relevant organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, and shall advise the Council thereon;
60. Also reaffirms that the Commission for Social Development continues to have the primary responsibility
for the follow-up to and review of the World Summit for Social Development and the outcome of the twenty-fourth
special session of the General Assembly,34 and that it serves as the main United Nations forum for an intensified global
dialogue on social development issues, and calls upon Member States, the relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system and civil society to enhance their support for its work;
61. Further reaffirms the mandate of the Commission for Social Development and that social development is
a cross-cutting element in discussions surrounding the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and calls upon
Member States, the relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, civil society
and relevant stakeholders to enhance their support for the high-level political forum on sustainable development as it
builds upon the work of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council, including the Commission,
while reflecting the integrated nature of the Sustainable Development Goals as well as the interlinkages between them;
62. Requests the United Nations funds, programmes and agencies to continue to support national efforts of
Member States to achieve inclusive social development in a coherent and coordinated manner, to mainstream the goal
of full and productive employment and decent work for all into their policies, programmes and activities, as well as
to support efforts of Member States aimed at achieving this objective, and invites financial institutions to support
efforts in this regard;
63. Stresses the importance of the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen from 6 to
12 March 1995, and invites all Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations development system and
the specialized agencies, regional commissions and other international organizations, as well as civil society and
private sector organizations, to actively promote and undertake activities during 2020 to support an appropriate
celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the World Summit within existing resources;
64. Decides to devote one high-level meeting of the General Assembly, within existing resources, at its
seventy-fifth session, in 2020, to the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the World Summit for Social
Development, in order to celebrate the progress made so far and to further strengthen the role of social development
beyond 2020, and requests the President of the General Assembly to conduct consultations with Member States in
order to determine the modalities for that meeting;
65. Invites the Secretary-General, the Economic and Social Council, the regional commissions, the relevant
specialized agencies, the funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental forums,
within their respective mandates, to continue to integrate into their work programmes and give priority attention to
715

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the Copenhagen commitments and the Declaration on the tenth anniversary of the World Summit for Social
Development,55 to continue to be actively involved in their follow-up and to monitor the achievement of those
commitments and undertakings;
66. Invites the Economic and Social Council and the Commission for Social Development to give appropriate
consideration to the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the World Summit for Social Development by
organizing a meeting during the regular programme of work of the substantive session of the Council and a half-day
meeting during the fifty-eighth session of the Commission, within existing resources;
67. Calls upon the Commission for Social Development to continue to address inequality in all its dimensions,
in the context of the implementation of the Copenhagen Declaration and the Programme of Action, as well as the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and invites the Commission to emphasize the
increased exchange of national, regional and international experiences, the focused and interactive dialogues among
experts and practitioners and the sharing of best practices and lessons learned;
68. Requests the Secretary-General to continue engaging with Member States to sustain and further strengthen
the political momentum on health-related issues, including the realization of universal health coverage and, in close
collaboration with relevant United Nations agencies and other stakeholders, including regional organizations, to
strengthen existing initiatives that are led and coordinated by the World Health Organization to provide assistance to
Member States, upon their request, towards the achievement of universal health coverage and all health-related targets
of the Sustainable Development Goals;
69. Calls upon the international community to provide inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels
throughout the life course – early childhood, primary, secondary, tertiary and distance education, including technical
and vocational training – so that all people, particularly those in vulnerable situations, may have access to lifelong
learning opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to exploit opportunities to participate
fully in society and contribute to sustainable development;
70. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Social
development”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly”, with a particular focus on significant increase
and/or more efficient utilization of the resources allocated to social development in order to achieve the goals of the
World Summit through national action and regional and international cooperation, and requests the Secretary-General
to submit a report on the question to the Assembly at that session.
RESOLUTION 74/123
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/391, para. 49)56

74/123. Persons with albinism
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,57 and recalling relevant international human rights
treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,58 the International Covenant on Economic,

_______________
55

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 6 (E/2005/26), chap. I, sect. A; see also Economic and
Social Council decision 2005/234.
56
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Austria,
Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Morocco, Namibia, Poland, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
57
Resolution 217 A (III).
58
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

716

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Social and Cultural Rights,58 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,59
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,60 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women61 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,62
Reaffirming also the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of Action of the
World Summit for Social Development63 and the further initiatives for social development adopted by the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth special session,64 and the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons,65
Recalling its resolution 72/140 of 19 December 2017 and its previous resolutions on persons with albinism,
Recalling also Human Rights Council resolutions 23/13 of 13 June 2013 on attacks and discrimination against
persons with albinism66 and 24/33 of 27 September 2013 on technical cooperation for the prevention of attacks
against persons with albinism,67 as well as resolutions 28/6 of 26 March 201568 and 37/5 of 22 March 2018 pertaining
to the mandate of the Independent Expert on the enjoyment of human rights by persons with albinism,
Recalling further its resolution 69/170 of 18 December 2014, by which the General Assembly decided to
proclaim 13 June as International Albinism Awareness Day, with effect from 2015,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the social development challenges faced by persons with
albinism69 and the recommendations contained therein,
Recalling the report on persons with albinism submitted by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to the Human Rights Council at its twenty-fourth session,70 and recalling also all the reports of the
Independent Expert on the enjoyment of human rights by persons with albinism to the General Assembly and to the
Human Rights Council,
Recalling also African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights resolutions 263 of 5 November 2013 on the
prevention of attacks and discrimination against persons with albinism and 373 of 22 May 2017 on the Regional
Action Plan on Albinism in Africa (2017–2021), and the Pan-African Parliament resolution on persons with albinism
in Africa of 18 May 2018,
Expressing grave concern at all attacks against persons with albinism, including women and children,
Welcoming the steps taken and the efforts made by the countries concerned, including the initiation of legal
action against perpetrators of attacks against persons with albinism, public condemnation of attacks against persons
with albinism and public campaigns to raise awareness,
Expressing concern that persons with albinism are disproportionately affected by poverty, owing to the
discrimination and marginalization they face, and in this regard recognizing that there is a need for resources to
develop and implement programmes to prevent and combat prejudice, to foster inclusion and to create an environment
conducive to respect for their rights and dignity,

_______________
59

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
61
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
62
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
63
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
64
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
65
A/37/351/Add.1 and A/37/351/Add.1/Corr.1, annex, sect. VIII, recommendation 1 (IV).
66
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. V, sect. A.
67
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
68
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
69
A/74/184.
70
A/HRC/24/57.
60

717

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing concern also that women and girls with albinism may face multiple forms of discrimination, and a
higher risk of sexual abuse, especially in communities where they are falsely perceived to have the power to cure HIV
and AIDS, including being targets of witchcraft-related attacks,
Recognizing that persons with albinism continue to face environmental, structural and attitudinal barriers that
prevent their full participation in economic, social, political and cultural life,
Recognizing also the need to address the root causes of attacks and discrimination against persons with albinism,
particularly the interrelated factors, including the mythologization of albinism and the related lack of understanding
of the scientific bases of the condition, poverty, discrimination and economic and social marginalization, witchcraft
practices and other aggravating factors, which contribute to the ongoing outbreaks of attacks and discrimination
against persons with albinism, particularly on the African continent,
Recognizing further that implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development71 will contribute,
inter alia, to the promotion of social inclusion of persons in vulnerable situations, including persons with albinism,
and reaffirming that Member States, in implementing the 2030 Agenda, should, inter alia, respect, protect and promote
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, including persons with albinism, without discrimination of any kind,
Expressing concern about the continuing lack of information and disaggregated data on the status of persons
with albinism, which are important to inform appropriate policy responses by Member States and the United Nations
system, while acknowledging that some Member States have examples of good practices of collecting disaggregated
data on persons with albinism,
Recognizing that access to full and productive employment and decent work is an important aspect of
participation in social and economic life,
Reaffirming the need for the participation of persons with albinism in development efforts at the local, national,
regional and international levels, and in this regard stressing the need to strengthen the effectiveness of national,
regional and international policy and development programmes related to persons with albinism,
1. Urges Member States to continue to meet their obligations to uphold the human rights of all persons,
including persons with albinism, including the rights to life, liberty, security of person, education, work, an adequate
standard of living and the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health;
2. Encourages Member States to adopt, if necessary, national action plans and legislation, as appropriate, on
the rights of persons with albinism, in conformity with their international human rights obligations and commitments,
notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,58 the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights,58 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities60 and the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;59
3. Also encourages Member States to address the root causes of discrimination and violence against persons
with albinism, including through awareness-raising campaigns, the dissemination of accurate information on albinism
and other measures, such as the integration of albinism into education curricula, and to collaborate with organizations
representing persons with albinism, including civil society organizations, as appropriate, in their efforts to drive public
awareness on albinism;
4. Further encourages Member States to end impunity for violence against persons with albinism, including
sexual and gender-based violence, by amending laws, where applicable, and by bringing perpetrators to justice;
5. Calls upon Member States to work to ensure accountability through the conduct of impartial, speedy and
effective investigations into crimes and attacks against persons with albinism falling within their jurisdiction, to hold
those responsible accountable and to ensure that victims, survivors and family members have access to appropriate
remedies, as well as accessible therapy and psychosocial, socioeconomic, legal and medical support, as appropriate;
6. Encourages Member States to take effective steps to promote regional cooperation for the prevention,
detection, investigation, prosecution and punishment of cross-border crimes affecting persons with albinism, notably
trafficking of persons, children and body parts;

_______________
71

718

Resolution 70/1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Calls upon the international community to provide financial and technical assistance to Member States,
upon their request, in support of measures to prevent and combat discrimination against persons with albinism,
including strengthening the capacity of their health-care systems to provide affordable dermatological and
ophthalmological services;
8. Encourages Member States and relevant United Nations agencies to collect, compile and disseminate
disaggregated data on persons with albinism, where applicable, to identify patterns of discrimination and to assess
progress towards the improvement of their status;
9. Encourages Member States to develop, if necessary, policies and measures to address the social
development challenges faced by persons with albinism, who may require assistance in order to enjoy equal access
to benefits and services, notably in the fields of education, employment and health, and to promote their participation
in political, civil, economic, social and cultural life;
10. Calls upon Member States to support the participation of persons with albinism in social, economic,
political, civil and cultural life, as well as their consultation and active involvement in the design, implementation and
evaluation of laws, policies, campaigns and training programmes, and further urges Member States to implement, if
necessary, national measures to ensure that persons with albinism are not left behind, recognizing that persons with
albinism are often disproportionately affected by poverty, discrimination and lack of decent work and employment,
and to commit to working towards the social integration of persons with albinism;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to present a report to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventysixth session, under the item entitled “Social development”, on the various social development challenges faced by
persons with albinism, taking into consideration the specific needs of women and children, including those related to
social inclusion, health, education and employment, and measures taken, with recommendations for further action to
be taken by Member States and other relevant stakeholders to address identified challenges, and encourages the
Secretary-General to collect information from Member States and all relevant organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system in the preparation of the report;
12. Decides, taking into account the multifaceted nature of the challenges faced by persons with albinism, to
consider the issue of persons with albinism at its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Social development”.
RESOLUTION 74/124
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/391, para. 49)72

74/124. Follow-up to the twentieth anniversary of the International Year of the Family and beyond
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/82 of 8 December 1989, 50/142 of 21 December 1995, 52/81 of 12 December
1997, 54/124 of 17 December 1999, 56/113 of 19 December 2001, 57/164 of 18 December 2002, 58/15 of
3 December 2003, 59/111 of 6 December 2004, 59/147 of 20 December 2004, 60/133 of 16 December 2005, 62/129
of 18 December 2007, 64/133 of 18 December 2009, 66/126 of 19 December 2011, 67/142 of 20 December 2012,
68/136 of 18 December 2013, 69/144 of 18 December 2014, 71/163 of 19 December 2016, 72/145 of 19 December
2017 and 73/144 of 17 December 2018 concerning the proclamation of, preparations for and observance of the
International Year of the Family and its tenth and twentieth anniversaries,
Recognizing that the preparations for and observance of the twentieth anniversary of the International Year in
2014 provided a useful opportunity to continue to raise awareness of the objectives of the International Year for
increasing cooperation on family issues at all levels and for undertaking concerted action to strengthen family-oriented
policies and programmes as part of an integrated comprehensive approach to development,

_______________
72

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation, Turkey,
Uzbekistan, and State of Palestine (on behalf of the States that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018).

719

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that the objectives of the International Year and its follow-up processes, especially those
relating to family-oriented policies in the areas of poverty, work-family balance and intergenerational issues, with
attention given to the rights and responsibilities of all family members, can contribute to ending poverty, ending
hunger, ensuring a healthy life and promoting well-being for all at all ages, promoting lifelong learning opportunities
for all, ensuring better education outcomes for children, including early childhood development and education,
enabling access to employment opportunities and decent work for parents and caregivers, achieving gender equality
and the empowerment of all women and girls and eliminating all forms of violence, in particular against women and
girls, and supporting the overall quality of life of families, including families in vulnerable situations, so that family
members can realize their full potential, as part of an integrated comprehensive approach to development,
Acknowledging that the family-related provisions of the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits and their follow-up processes continue to provide policy guidance on ways to strengthen family-oriented
components of policies and programmes as part of an integrated comprehensive approach to development,
Recognizing the continuing efforts of Governments, the United Nations system, regional organizations and civil
society, including academic institutions, to fulfil the objectives of the twentieth anniversary of the International Year
at the national, regional and international levels,
Acknowledging that the International Year and its follow-up processes have served as catalysts for initiatives at
the national and international levels, including family-oriented policies and programmes to reduce poverty and hunger
and promote the well-being of all at all ages, and can boost development efforts, contribute to better outcomes for
children and help to break the intergenerational transfer of poverty in support of the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development,73
Acknowledging also that strengthening intergenerational relations, through such measures as promoting
intergenerational living arrangements and encouraging extended family members to live in close proximity to each
other, has been found to promote the autonomy, security and well-being of children and older persons and that
initiatives to promote involved and positive parenting and to support the role of grandparents have been found to be
beneficial in advancing social integration and solidarity between generations, as well as in promoting and protecting
the human rights of all family members,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;74

2. Encourages Governments to continue their efforts to implement the objectives of the International Year
of the Family and its follow-up processes and to develop strategies and programmes aimed at strengthening national
capacities to address national priorities relating to family issues and to step up their efforts, in collaboration with
relevant stakeholders, to implement those objectives, in particular in the areas of fighting poverty and hunger and
ensuring the well-being of all at all ages;
3. Invites Member States to invest in a variety of inclusive, family-oriented policies and programmes, which
take into account the different needs and expectations of families, as important tools for, inter alia, fighting poverty,
social exclusion and inequality, promoting work-family balance and gender equality and the empowerment of all
women and girls and advancing social integration and intergenerational solidarity, to support the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;73
4. Encourages Member States to continue to enact inclusive and responsive family-oriented policies for
poverty reduction in line with the main objectives of the twentieth anniversary of the International Year, to confront
family poverty and social exclusion, recognizing the multidimensional aspects of poverty, focusing on inclusive and
quality education and lifelong learning for all, health and well-being for all at all ages, full and productive employment,
decent work, social security, livelihoods and social cohesion, including through gender- and age-sensitive social
protection systems and measures, such as child allowances for parents and pension benefits for older persons, and to
ensure that the rights, capabilities and responsibilities of all family members are respected;
5. Also encourages Member States to promote work-family balance as conducive to the well-being of
children, youth, persons with disabilities and older persons and the achievement of gender equality and the

_______________
73
74

720

Resolution 70/1.
A/74/61-E/2019/4.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

empowerment of all women and girls, inter alia, through the improvement of working conditions for workers with
family responsibilities, expanding flexible working arrangements, including through the use of new information and
communications technologies, and providing and/or expanding leave arrangements, such as maternity leave and
paternity leave, and adequate social security benefits for both women and men, taking appropriate steps to ensure that
they are not discriminated against when availing themselves of such benefits and promoting men’s awareness and use
of such opportunities, for their children’s developmental benefit and as a means of enabling women to increase their
participation in the labour market;
6. Further encourages Member States to take appropriate steps to provide affordable, accessible and goodquality childcare facilities and facilities for children and other dependants and measures promoting the equal sharing
of household responsibilities between women and men, recognizing, reducing and redistributing women’s and girls’
disproportionate share of unpaid care and domestic work and fully engaging men and boys as agents and beneficiaries
of change and as strategic partners and allies in this regard;
7. Encourages Member States to invest in family-oriented policies and programmes that enhance strong
intergenerational interactions, such as intergenerational living arrangements, parenting education, including for family
caregivers, and support for grandparents, including grandparents who are primary caregivers, in an effort to promote
inclusive urbanization, active ageing, intergenerational solidarity and social cohesion;
8. Also encourages Member States to consider providing universal and gender-sensitive social protection
systems, which are key to ensuring poverty reduction, including, as appropriate, targeted cash transfers for families in
vulnerable situations, as can be the case of families headed by a single parent, in particular those headed by women,
and which are most effective in reducing poverty when accompanied by other measures, such as providing access to
basic services, high-quality education and health-care services;
9. Further encourages Member States to provide legal identity, including birth registration, in accordance
with international law, including relevant provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child75 and/or relevant
provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,76 and death registration, as a means of, inter
alia, promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development;
10. Encourages Member States to invest in parenting education as a tool to enhance children’s well-being and
prevent all forms of violence against children, including through promoting non-violent forms of discipline;
11. Also encourages Member States to improve the collection and use of data, disaggregated by age, sex and
other relevant criteria, for the formulation and evaluation of family-oriented policies and programmes to effectively
respond to the challenges faced by families and harness their contribution to development;
12. Encourages Governments to support the United Nations trust fund on family activities;
13. Encourages Member States to strengthen cooperation with all relevant stakeholders, including United
Nations entities, civil society, academic institutions and the private sector, in the development and implementation of
relevant family-oriented policies and programmes;
14. Encourages further collaboration between the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
Secretariat and the United Nations entities, agencies, funds and programmes, as well as other relevant
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations active in the family field, as well as the enhancement of
research efforts and awareness-raising activities relating to the objectives of the International Year and its follow-up
processes;
15. Requests the focal point on the family of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to enhance
collaboration with the regional commissions, funds and programmes, recommends that the roles of focal points within
the United Nations system be reaffirmed, and invites Member States to increase technical cooperation efforts, consider
enhancing the role of the regional commissions on family issues and continue to provide resources for those efforts,
facilitate the coordination of national and international non-governmental organizations on family issues and enhance
cooperation with all relevant stakeholders to promote family issues and develop partnerships in this regard;

_______________
75
76

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

721

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

16. Calls upon Member States and agencies and bodies of the United Nations system, in consultation with
civil society and other relevant stakeholders, to continue to provide information on their activities, including on good
practices at the national, regional and international levels, including the relevant United Nations forums, in support of
the objectives of the International Year and its follow-up processes, to be included in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session,
through the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the objectives of the International Year and its follow-up processes by Member States and by agencies and bodies of
the United Nations system and on the appropriate ways and means to observe the thirtieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family, in 2024;
18. Decides to consider the topic “Implementation of the objectives of the International Year of the Family
and its follow-up processes” at its seventy-fifth session under the sub-item entitled “Social development, including
questions relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, persons with disabilities and the family” of the
item entitled “Social development”.
RESOLUTION 74/125
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/391, para. 49)77

74/125. Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/167 of 18 December 2002, in which it endorsed the Political Declaration78 and the
Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002,79 its resolution 58/134 of 22 December 2003, in which it took
note, inter alia, of the road map for the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and its resolutions 60/135 of
16 December 2005, 61/142 of 19 December 2006, 62/130 of 18 December 2007, 63/151 of 18 December 2008,
64/132 of 18 December 2009, 65/182 of 21 December 2010, 66/127 of 19 December 2011, 67/139 and 67/143 of
20 December 2012, 68/134 of 18 December 2013, 69/146 of 18 December 2014, 70/164 of 17 December 2015,
71/164 of 19 December 2016, 72/144 of 19 December 2017 and 73/143 of 17 December 2018,
Recognizing that, in many parts of the world, awareness of the Madrid Plan of Action remains limited or
non-existent, which limits the scope of implementation efforts,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,80
Recalling the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,81 and stressing the need to ensure that issues of
relevance to older persons are taken into account in its implementation in order to ensure that no one is left behind,
including older persons,
Recalling also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,82 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,83 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,83 the Convention on the Elimination

_______________
77

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Austria, Canada, Croatia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, and State of Palestine (on behalf of the States that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into
account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018).
78
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex I.
79
Ibid., annex II.
80
A/74/170 and A/74/170/Corr.1.
81
Resolution 70/1.
82
Resolution 217 A (III).
83
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

722

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,84 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities85 and the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,86
Noting the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
their Families87 and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,88
Noting also the regional developments on the protection and promotion of the human rights of older persons,
including the Inter-American Convention on Protecting the Human Rights of Older Persons and the Protocol to the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Older Persons in Africa,
Noting further that, between 2019 and 2030, the number of persons aged 60 years or over is projected to grow
by 38 per cent, from 1 billion to 1.4 billion, globally outnumbering youth,89 and that this increase will be the greatest
and the most rapid in the developing world, and recognizing that greater attention needs to be paid to the specific
challenges affecting older persons, including in the field of human rights,
Recalling World Health Assembly resolutions on ageing, specifically resolution 58.16 of 25 May 2005 on
strengthening active and healthy ageing,90 which stressed the important role of public health policies and programmes
in enabling the rapidly growing number of older persons to remain in good health and maintain their many vital
contributions to the well-being of their families, communities and societies, resolution 65.3 of 25 May 2012 on
strengthening non-communicable disease policies to promote active ageing,91 which recognized that population
ageing is among the major factors contributing to the rising incidence and prevalence of non-communicable diseases
and noted the importance of lifelong health-promotion and disease-prevention activities, and resolution 69.3 of
29 May 2016, entitled “Global strategy and action plan on ageing and health 2016–2020: towards a world in which
everyone can live a long and healthy life”,92
Acknowledging that many developing countries and countries with economies in transition are confronting a
double burden of fighting communicable diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, in parallel with the
increasing threat of non‑communicable diseases, and expressing concern about the impact on older persons,
Concerned that many health systems are not sufficiently prepared to respond to the needs of the rapidly ageing
population, including the need for preventive, curative, palliative and specialized care,
Deeply concerned that the situation of older persons in many parts of the world has been negatively affected by
the world financial and economic crisis, and noting with concern the high incidence of poverty among them,
particularly older single women,
Recognizing the essential contribution that older persons can continue to make to the functioning of societies
and towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and recognizing also the
importance of the full and effective enjoyment of their human rights,
Concerned about the multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination that may create additional vulnerabilities
for older persons and affect their enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and recognizing that, in
particular, older women often face multiple forms of discrimination resulting from gender inequality and are at greater
risk of physical and psychological abuse and violence,
Recognizing that the prevalence of disabilities increases with age and that many older persons live with a
disability,

_______________
84

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
86
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
87
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
88
Resolution 61/295, annex.
89
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, World Population Prospects: 2019 Revision.
90
See World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1.
91
See World Health Organization, document WHA65/2012/REC/1.
92
See World Health Organization, document WHA69/2016/REC/1.
85

723

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that the social exclusion of older persons is a complex process involving the lack or denial of
resources, rights, goods and services as people age, and the inability of older persons to participate in societal
relationships and activities, including cultural activities, available to the majority of people across the varied and
multiple domains of society, and that it affects both the quality of life of older persons and the equity and cohesion of
an ageing society as a whole, with considerable implications for the enjoyment by older persons of their human rights,
Acknowledging the importance of exploring ways to increase the visibility of and attention to the specific
challenges faced by older persons in the global development policy framework, including identifying possible gaps
and how best to address them,
Deeply concerned by the increasing number and scale of humanitarian emergencies and their impact on older
persons, particularly older women, reiterating the importance of giving due consideration to their specific needs, as
well as their capacity to respond, and to the contributions of older persons to the planning and implementation of
humanitarian assistance and efforts in disaster risk reduction, and noting with concern that the multiple forms of
discrimination experienced by older women can be exacerbated during humanitarian emergencies and aggravate their
potential vulnerabilities,
Recognizing the successful conclusion of the third review and appraisal of the Madrid Plan of Action and the
results achieved at the international, regional and national levels, and acknowledging in that regard the
recommendations of the Commission for Social Development at its fifty-sixth session, as endorsed by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 2018/6 of 17 April 2018,
1.

Reaffirms the Political Declaration78 and the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002;79

2. Calls upon all States and the international community to cooperate, support and participate in the global
efforts towards an age-inclusive implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development81 and to mobilize
all necessary resources and support in that regard, according to national plans and strategies, including through an
integrated and multifaceted approach to improving the well‑being of older persons, and in this regard encourages
Member States to seize this opportunity to take into account issues of relevance to older persons in their efforts to
promote the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals;
3. Encourages Member States to address the situation of older persons in their voluntary national reviews
presented at the high-level political forum on sustainable development;
4. Recognizes that the major challenges faced by older persons undermine their social, economic and cultural
participation;
5. Emphasizes the need to take effective measures against ageism and to view older persons as active
contributors to society and not as passive receivers of care and assistance and an impending burden on welfare systems
and economies, while promoting and protecting their human rights;
6. Encourages Member States to intensify efforts towards identifying ageing as an opportunity, and
recognizes that older persons make substantial contributions to sustainable development efforts, including through
their active participation in society;
7. Recognizes the challenges related to the enjoyment of all human rights that older persons face in different
areas and that those challenges require in-depth analysis and action to address protection gaps, and calls upon all States
to promote and ensure the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for older persons, including
by progressively taking measures to combat age discrimination, neglect, abuse and violence, as well as social isolation
and loneliness, to provide social protection, access to food and housing, health-care services, employment, legal
capacity and access to justice and to address issues related to social integration and gender inequality through
mainstreaming the rights of older persons into sustainable development strategies, urban policies and poverty
reduction strategies, bearing in mind the crucial importance of intergenerational solidarity for social development;
8. Takes note with appreciation of the work of the Independent Expert on the enjoyment of all human rights
by older persons and the renewal of the mandate at the forty-second session of the Human Rights Council,93 and
stresses the importance of close coordination between the work of the Independent Expert and the Open-ended

_______________
93

724

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III, resolution 42/12.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Working Group on Ageing established by the General Assembly in paragraph 28 of its resolution 65/182, while
avoiding unnecessary duplication of their respective mandates and those of other special procedures and subsidiary
organs of the Council, and relevant United Nations bodies and treaty bodies;
9. Takes note of the report of the Independent Expert issued at the forty-second session of the Human Rights
Council,94 and encourages Member States to be mindful of the recommendations contained therein;
10. Invites Member States to continue to share their national experiences in developing and implementing
policies and programmes aimed at strengthening the promotion and protection of the human rights of older persons,
including within the framework of the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing;
11. Encourages Governments to actively address, through national, regional and international efforts, issues
that affect older persons and to ensure that the social integration of older persons and the promotion and protection of
their rights form an integral part of development policies at all levels;
12. Encourages Member States to adopt and implement non-discriminatory policies, legislation and
regulations, to systematically review and amend these, where appropriate, if they discriminate against older persons,
especially on the basis of age, and to take appropriate measures to prevent discrimination against older persons in,
inter alia, employment, social protection and the provision of social, health-care and long-term care services;
13. Calls upon Member States to promote, in accordance with their national priorities, equitable and
affordable access to sustainable basic physical and social infrastructure for all, without discrimination, including
affordable serviced land, housing, modern and renewable energy, safe drinking water and sanitation, safe, nutritious
and adequate food, waste disposal, sustainable mobility, health-care services and family planning, education, culture
and information and communications technologies, and to ensure that these services are responsive to the rights and
needs of older persons, while recognizing that planning for and providing opportunities for making cities inclusive of
older persons’ economic and social participation is an important dimension of the construction of sustainable cities;
14. Encourages Member States to take into account the multidimensional nature of the vulnerability of older
persons to poverty and economic insecurity, including through the promotion of good health, care and well-being, in
their implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals at the national level;
15. Encourages Governments to pay greater attention to building capacity to eradicate poverty among older
persons, in particular older women and older persons with disabilities, by mainstreaming ageing issues into poverty
eradication measures, women’s empowerment strategies and national development plans, and to include both ageingspecific policies and ageing-mainstreaming efforts in their national strategies;
16. Encourages Member States to consider expanding, in accordance with domestic legislation and policies,
the reach of sustainable pension schemes, including but not limited to strategies such as social pensions, and increasing
their benefits, with a view to ensuring income security in old age;
17. Also encourages Member States to develop and implement long-term care strategies, as well as to conduct
research on good practices of care strategies, recognizing and supporting both paid and unpaid care work for the
benefit of older persons, in accordance with the World Health Organization global strategy and action plan on ageing
and health 2016–2020,92 and to further promote long-term care as a positive social and economic investment and a
source of employment expansion;
18. Further encourages Member States to promote terms and conditions of care work guided by International
Labour Organization standards for all care workers, including but not limited to migrants, and to adopt measures to
tackle the gender and age stereotypes for care work;
19. Encourages Member States to strengthen their efforts to develop national capacities to address their
national implementation priorities identified during the review and appraisal of the Madrid Plan of Action by
considering and devising strategies that take into account the entirety of the human life course and foster
intergenerational solidarity, the strengthening of institutional mechanisms, research, data collection and analysis and
the training of necessary personnel in the field of ageing;

_______________
94

A/HRC/42/43.

725

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

20. Recommends that Member States increase efforts to raise awareness of the Madrid Plan of Action and
identify key priority areas for its implementation, including empowering older persons and promoting their rights,
bearing in mind the crucial importance of intergenerational family interdependence, solidarity and reciprocity for
social development, raising awareness of ageing issues and building national capacities, as well as promoting and
supporting initiatives to advance a positive public image of older persons and their multiple contributions to their
families, communities and societies and working with the regional commissions, as needed, and enlisting the help of
the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat in seeking increased attention for ageing issues;
21. Encourages Governments that have not done so to designate focal points for handling the follow-up of
national plans of action on ageing, and also encourages Governments to strengthen existing networks of national focal
points on ageing;
22. Invites Governments to conduct their ageing-related policies through inclusive and participatory
consultations with relevant stakeholders and social development partners, in the interest of developing effective
policies that create national policy ownership and consensus-building;
23. Recommends that Governments be inclusive in involving older persons and their organizations in the
formulation, implementation and monitoring of policies and programmes that affect them, including through simple
consultative mechanisms to co-research or co-design such policies and programmes with or by older persons and to
take due account of involving those who experience multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and are
particularly vulnerable to high incidences of poverty and social exclusion;
24. Recommends that Member States enhance their capacity to more effectively collect age-disaggregated
data, statistics and qualitative information, disaggregated also, when necessary, by other relevant factors, including
sex and disability, in order to improve assessment of the situation of older persons, recognizes that the data revolution
presents new opportunities and challenges for the use of new data to help with the measurement of progress in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular its aspects of relevance to older
persons, and to ensure that no one is left behind, and in this regard recalls the establishment by the Statistical
Commission of the Titchfield Group on ageing-related statistics and age-disaggregated data and the consideration of
its work;
25. Encourages States parties to existing international human rights instruments, where appropriate, to
address the situation of older persons more explicitly in their reports, and encourages treaty body monitoring
mechanisms and special procedure mandate holders to pay due regard to the situation of older persons in their dialogue
with Member States, particularly in their concluding observations and reports, respectively;
26. Recognizes the importance of strengthening intergenerational partnerships and solidarity, and in this regard
calls upon Member States to promote opportunities for voluntary, constructive and regular interaction between young
people and older generations in the family, the workplace and society at large;
27. Encourages Member States to adopt social policies that promote the development of community services
for older persons, taking into account the psychological and physical aspects of ageing and the special needs of older
women and older persons with disabilities;
28. Also encourages Member States to ensure that older persons have access to information about their rights
so as to enable them to participate fully and justly in their societies and to claim full enjoyment of all human rights;
29. Calls upon Member States to develop their national capacity for monitoring and enforcing the rights of
older persons, in consultation with all sectors of society, including organizations of older persons, through, inter alia,
national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, where applicable;
30. Also calls upon Member States to strengthen and incorporate a gender and disability perspective into all
policy actions on ageing, as well as to address and eliminate discrimination on the basis of age, sex or disability, and
recommends that Member States engage with all sectors of society, in particular with relevant organizations with an
interest in the matter, including organizations of older persons, women and persons with disabilities, in changing
negative stereotypes about older persons, in particular older women and older persons with disabilities, and promote
positive narratives of all older persons;
31. Acknowledges that universal health coverage implies that all people, including older persons, have access,
without discrimination, to every country’s determined sets of needed promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative
726

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

basic health services and essential, safe, affordable, effective and quality medicines, while ensuring that the use of
such services does not expose older persons to financial hardship, with a special emphasis on the poor, vulnerable and
marginalized;
32. Urges Member States to develop, implement and evaluate policies and programmes that promote healthy
and active ageing and the highest attainable standard of health and well-being for older persons and to develop health
care for older persons as part of primary care in the existing health systems;
33. Recognizes the importance of training, education, lifelong learning and capacity-building of the health
workforce, including paid care workers and unpaid caregivers, for home-based care;
34. Encourages Member States to ensure that the principle of non‑discrimination on the basis of age is
incorporated and upheld in health and other policies and programmes and that the implementation of such policies
and programmes is regularly monitored;
35. Urges Member States to strengthen intersectoral policy frameworks and institutional mechanisms, as
appropriate, for the integrated management of the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, including
health promotion, health-care services and social welfare services, in order to address the needs of older persons;
36. Encourages Member States to provide services and support to older persons, including grandparents, who
have assumed responsibility for children who were abandoned or whose parents are deceased, have migrated, have
been displaced, including in the context of humanitarian emergencies, or are otherwise unable to care for their
dependants;
37. Calls upon Member States to address the issue of the well-being of and adequate health-care services for
older persons, as well as any cases of neglect, abuse and violence against older persons, in particular older women,
by designing and implementing more effective prevention strategies and stronger laws and by developing coherent
and comprehensive policy frameworks to address these problems and their underlying factors;
38. Also calls upon Member States to take concrete measures, in accordance with national circumstances and,
as appropriate, international humanitarian law, to further protect and assist older persons in emergency situations, and
invites all States to promote a culture of protection, taking into account the particular needs of older persons, in
accordance with the Madrid Plan of Action and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–203095 by,
inter alia, including older persons in disaster risk reduction and national and local emergency planning and response
frameworks, collecting and using data disaggregated by age, sex and disability for policy design and implementation,
as well as carrying out risk and vulnerabilities analyses of older women in humanitarian emergencies with a view to
minimizing the risk to older women of all forms of violence in such emergencies;
39. Stresses that, in complementing national development efforts, enhanced international cooperation, in
particular North-South cooperation, which is complemented by South-South and triangular regional and international
cooperation, is essential to support developing countries in implementing the Madrid Plan of Action, while
recognizing the importance of such assistance as well as the provision of financial assistance;
40. Encourages Member States to establish or to strengthen strategic approaches and policy options in relation
to the physical and mental health of older persons in the light of new and emerging disease patterns, notably
non-communicable diseases, as well as in relation to increased life expectancy, with particular attention to promoting
good health and addressing health needs across a care continuum, including prevention, detection and diagnosis,
management and rehabilitation, treatment and palliative care, with the aim of achieving comprehensive health-care
coverage for older persons;
41. Encourages the international community, including international and bilateral donors, to enhance
international cooperation to support national efforts to eradicate poverty, in keeping with internationally agreed goals,
in order to achieve sustainable and adequate social and economic support for older persons, while bearing in mind
that countries have the primary responsibility for their own economic and social development;

_______________
95

Resolution 69/283, annex II.

727

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

42. Also encourages the international community to support national efforts to forge stronger partnerships
with civil society, including organizations of older persons, academia, research foundations, faith-based organizations,
community-based organizations, including caregivers, and the private sector, in an effort to help to build capacity on
ageing issues;
43. Encourages the international community and the relevant agencies of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates, to support national efforts to provide funding for research and data-collection initiatives on
ageing, as appropriate, in order to better understand the challenges and opportunities presented by population ageing
and to provide policymakers with more accurate and more specific information with regard to a gender perspective
on ageing, as well as to include indicators that provide an evidence base for the equitable delivery and effective
monitoring of the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, the New Urban Agenda96 and national
policymaking, as well as to gain a better understanding of how to promote ageing in a way that is not adversely
affected by rapid urbanization and gentrification;
44. Recognizes the important role of various international and regional organizations that deal with training,
capacity-building, policy design and monitoring at the national and regional levels in promoting and facilitating the
implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, and acknowledges the work that is undertaken in various parts of the
world, through the regional commissions and regional initiatives, as well as the work of institutes such as the
International Institute on Ageing in Malta and the European Centre for Social Welfare Policy and Research in Vienna;
45. Takes note with appreciation of the work of the Inter-Agency Group on Ageing, an informal network of
interested United Nations entities that exchange information and integrate ageing into their work programmes on the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
46. Requests the focal point on ageing of the United Nations system, the Programme on Ageing of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, to continue to enhance its collaboration with the focal
points of the regional commissions, funds and programmes, and recommends that Member States reaffirm the roles
of focal points within the United Nations system, increase technical cooperation efforts, consider expanding the role
of the regional commissions on ageing issues and continue to provide resources for those efforts, facilitate the
coordination of national and international non-governmental organizations on ageing and enhance cooperation with
all relevant stakeholders, to promote ageing issues and develop partnerships in this regard;
47. Reiterates the need for additional capacity-building at the national level in order to promote and facilitate
further implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, as well as the results of its review and appraisal cycle, and in
this regard encourages Governments to support the United Nations trust fund for ageing so as to enable the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs to provide expanded assistance to countries, upon their request;
48. Requests the United Nations system to strengthen its capacity to support, in an efficient and coordinated
manner, national implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, where appropriate;
49. Requests relevant entities of the United Nations system, including the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN‑Women), to ensure that the situation of older women is mainstreamed
and incorporated across their work and to support, in accordance with their respective mandates, the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular its aspects of relevance to older persons, including
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls through, inter alia, the elimination of all forms of
discrimination and violence against women;
50. Invites relevant entities of the United Nations system, including UN‑Women, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, the International Labour Organization, the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Food Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health Organization, among others, as well as the International
Organization for Migration, to include in reports to their respective governing bodies relevant information on efforts
made by Member States and the international community on issues of relevance to older persons, including their
social inclusion;

_______________
96

728

Resolution 71/256, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

51. Notes with appreciation the work of the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing,97 and recognizes the
positive contributions of Member States, as well as relevant bodies and organizations of the United Nations system,
including relevant human rights mandate holders and treaty bodies and the regional commissions, as well as national
human rights institutions, intergovernmental and relevant non‑governmental organizations with an interest in the
matter and invited panellists, during the first 10 working sessions of the Working Group, and invites Member States,
as well as relevant bodies and organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders, to continue
to make contributions to the work entrusted to the Working Group, as appropriate;
52. Encourages Member States to continue to contribute to the work of the Open-ended Working Group on
Ageing, in particular by presenting measures to enhance the promotion and protection of the human rights and dignity
of older persons, such as best practices, lessons learned and possible content for a multilateral legal instrument, as
appropriate, in order to enable it to fulfil its existing mandate of strengthening the protection of the human rights of
older persons by considering the existing international framework of the human rights of older persons and
identifying possible gaps and how best to address them, including by considering, as appropriate, the feasibility of
further instruments and measures, and by considering adopting at each session intergovernmentally negotiated
recommendations to be presented for consideration by the General Assembly;
53. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary support to the Open-ended Working Group on
Ageing for the organization of its eleventh session, of four days, in April 2020, with the provision of conference
services, including interpretation services, and to include the annual sessions of the Working Group in the
Organization’s calendar of conferences and meetings;
54. Invites the Independent Expert to address and engage in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session under the agenda item entitled “Social development”;
55. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/126
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/392, para. 21)98

74/126. Improvement of the situation of women and girls in rural areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/129 of 19 December 2001, 58/146 of 22 December 2003, 60/138 of 16 December
2005, 62/136 of 18 December 2007, 64/140 of 18 December 2009, 66/129 of 19 December 2011, 68/139 of
18 December 2013, 70/132 of 17 December 2015 and 72/148 of 19 December 2017,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
also that all forms of discrimination, including discrimination against women and girls, are contrary to the Charter of

_______________
97

See A/AC.278/2016/2, A/AC.278/2017/2, A/AC.278/2018/2 and A/AC.278/2019/2.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
98

729

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,99 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,100 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,100 the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,101 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,102 the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities103 and other human rights instruments,
Reaffirming also the commitment made to gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls,
including those in rural areas, contained in the outcome documents of relevant international conferences and summits,
in particular the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women,104
the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”105 and the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting
of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,106 and recalling other instruments,
as appropriate, such as the United Nations Declaration on the Right to Development,107
Reaffirming further the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,108 and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,109
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development addresses the need to achieve gender equality and
the empowerment of all women and girls, in order to ensure that no one is left behind, and that the systematic
mainstreaming of a gender perspective in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda is crucial,
Recognizing that the achievement of full human potential and of sustainable development is not possible if one
half of humanity continues to be denied its full human rights and opportunities,
Taking note of the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment,
Recalling the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women at its sixty-second session110 and
its priority theme “Challenges and opportunities in achieving gender equality and the empowerment of rural women
and girls”,
Looking forward to the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in New York on 23 September 2020,
Recognizing that progress on the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls, in particular in rural areas, has been held back owing to the persistence of historical and structural unequal
power relations between women and men, poverty and inequalities and disadvantages in access to resources
and opportunities that limit women’s and girls’ capabilities, and growing gaps in equality of opportunity,
discriminatory laws, policies, social norms, attitudes, harmful customary and contemporary practices and
gender stereotypes,
Expressing its deep concern that discrimination and violence against women and girls, including those in rural
areas, continue to occur in all parts of the world and that all forms of violence and discrimination, including multiple

_______________
99

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
101
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
102
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
103
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
104
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
105
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
106
Resolution 69/2.
107
Resolution 41/128, annex.
108
Resolution 70/1.
109
Resolution 69/313, annex.
110
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2018, Supplement No. 7 (E/2018/27), chap. I, sect. A.
100

730

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and intersecting forms of discrimination, that women and girls face are impediments to the development of their full
potential as equal partners with men and boys in all aspects of life, as well as obstacles to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals,
Expressing its deep concern also that, while women contribute more than 50 per cent of the food produced
worldwide, they account for 70 per cent of the world’s hungry, and that women and girls are disproportionately
affected by hunger, food insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender inequality and discrimination,
Expressing concern that many rural women continue to be economically and socially disadvantaged because of
their limited access to economic resources and opportunities and their limited access or lack of access to quality
education, health-care services, justice, land, sustainable and time- and labour-saving infrastructure and technology,
water and sanitation and other resources, as well as to credit, extension services and agricultural inputs, and expressing
concern also about their exclusion from planning and decision-making and their disproportionate share of unpaid care
and domestic work,
Emphasizing that rural women’s poverty is directly related to the absence of economic opportunities and
autonomy and the lack of access to economic and productive resources, quality education and support services and of
women’s participation in the decision-making process, and recognizing that rural women’s poverty and lack of
empowerment as well as their exclusion from social and economic policies can place them at increased risk of
violence that can impede their social and economic development, as well as the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals,
Recognizing that, despite gains in providing access to quality education, rural girls are still more likely than rural
boys to remain excluded from education and that among the gender-specific barriers to girls’ equal enjoyment of their
right to education are the feminization of poverty, child labour undertaken by girls, child, early and forced marriage,
female genital mutilation, early and repeat pregnancies, all forms of violence, including gender-based violence, abuse
and harassment on the way to and from and at school, in their technology-mediated environment, the lack of safe and
adequate sanitation facilities, including for menstrual hygiene management, the disproportionate share of unpaid care
and domestic work performed by girls and gender stereotypes and negative social norms that lead families and
communities to place less value on the education of girls than that of boys and may influence the decision of parents
to allow girls to attend school,
Recognizing also the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and
Forests in the Context of National Food Security111 and the Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and
Food Systems,112 endorsed by the Committee on World Food Security, which embrace gender equality as one of the
main guiding principles of implementation in order to help to address the ongoing disparities with regard to access to
and control of land and other natural resources,
Deeply concerned that climate change poses a challenge to poverty eradication and the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals, threatens food security and increases the risks of famine and adversely impacts the
health and well-being of rural women and their families, and that rural women and girls, especially in developing
countries, are disproportionately affected by the impacts of desertification, deforestation, sand and dust storms, natural
disasters, persistent drought, extreme weather events, sea level rise, coastal erosion and ocean acidification and often
have limited capacities to adapt to climate change,
Recognizing that women and girls in rural areas may be particularly vulnerable to violence because of
multidimensional poverty and lack of access to social care and protection services and, as applicable, employment
opportunities, as well as negative social norms,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;113

2. Urges Member States, in collaboration with the organizations of the United Nations system and civil
society, as appropriate, to continue their efforts to implement the outcome of and to ensure an integrated and

_______________
111

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/20, appendix D.
113
A/74/224.
112

731

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

coordinated follow-up to the relevant United Nations conferences and summits, including their reviews, and to attach
greater importance to the improvement of the situation of rural women and girls in their national, regional and global
development strategies by, inter alia:
(a) Creating an enabling environment for improving their situation and ensuring systematic attention to their
needs, priorities and contributions, as well as gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, including
through enhanced cooperation and a gender perspective, and the full and equal participation of all women in the
development, implementation and follow-up of macroeconomic policies, including development policies and
programmes and poverty eradication strategies, including poverty reduction strategy papers, where they exist, aimed
at implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;108
(b) Encouraging Member States to consider adopting and pursuing national financial inclusion strategies and
gender-responsive strategies to end the structural barriers to women’s equal access to economic resources and to
expand peer learning, experience-sharing and capacity-building in rural areas;
(c) Supporting the important role of civil society in promoting the realization and fulfilment of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all women, including rural women;
(d) Taking steps in the design, implementation and pursuit of fiscal policies and gender-responsive budgeting
to promote gender equality and the empowerment of rural women and girls;
(e) Pursuing the political and socioeconomic empowerment of rural women and supporting their full and
equal participation in decision-making at all levels, including through affirmative action, where appropriate, including
by promoting and protecting the right to vote and to be elected and the right to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association, and through support for women’s and farmers’ organizations in which subsistence and
smallholder women farmers are members, labour unions, cooperatives or other associations and civil society groups
promoting rural women’s rights;
(f) Promoting consultation with and the participation of rural women and, as appropriate, girls, including
those who are indigenous, those with disabilities and older women, through their organizations and networks, in the
design, development and implementation of and follow-up to programmes and strategies for gender equality, the
empowerment of women and rural development;
(g) Ensuring that the perspectives of rural women and girls are taken into account and that rural women fully,
meaningfully and equally participate in the design, implementation, follow-up and evaluation of policies and activities
related to conflict prevention, the mitigation of post-conflict situations, peace mediation, the impacts of climate change
and emergencies, including natural disasters, humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction,
and taking appropriate measures to eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against rural women and girls
in this regard;
(h) Integrating a gender perspective into the design, implementation and evaluation of and follow-up to
development policies, plans and programmes, including budget policies, where lacking, ensuring coordination
between line ministries, gender policymakers, gender machineries and other relevant government organizations and
institutions with gender expertise, and paying increased attention to the needs of rural women and girls to ensure that
they benefit from policies and programmes adopted in all spheres and that the disproportionate number of rural
women living in poverty is reduced;
(i) Mainstreaming a gender perspective in decision-making processes and the governance of natural
resources, leveraging the participation and influence of women in managing the sustainable use of natural resources,
and enhancing the capacities of Governments, civil society and development partners to better understand and address
gender issues in the management and governance of natural resources;
(j) Implementing effective, high-impact, quality-assured, people-centred, gender- and disability-responsive
and evidence-based interventions to meet the health needs of rural women and girls, particularly those in vulnerable
situations, throughout their life course;
(k) Strengthening measures, including resource generation, to improve women’s health, including maternal
health, by addressing the specific health, nutrition and basic needs of rural women and taking concrete measures to
enhance and provide access to the highest attainable standards of physical and mental health for women of all ages in
rural areas, as well as quality, affordable and universally accessible primary health care and support services, including
732

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

prenatal and postnatal health care, emergency obstetric care, family planning, information and education, increasing
knowledge, awareness and support for the elimination of harmful practices and the prevention, treatment and care of
sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, and ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive health and
reproductive rights in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development,114 the Beijing Platform for Action115 and the outcome documents of their review conferences;
(l) Strengthening the prevention, treatment and care of infections, such as HIV, in rural areas, by providing
accessible information, social care services and infrastructure;
(m) Taking appropriate measures to ensure that women’s and girls’ disproportionate share of unpaid care and
domestic work, as well as contributions to on-farm and off-farm production, is recognized, including by fully
recognizing and valuing unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services, infrastructure and
social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the household and the family, and to
promote nationally appropriate policies and initiatives supporting the reconciliation of work and family life and the
equal sharing of responsibilities between men and women with a view to reducing and equitably distributing such
unpaid work, including through, inter alia, the provision of infrastructure, technology and public services, such as
water and sanitation, renewable energy, transport and information and communications technology, as well as
addressing the need for accessible, affordable and quality childcare and care facilities in rural areas;
(n) Promoting sustainable, gender-responsive, quality, reliable and resilient infrastructure, including by
scaling up investment in health facilities in rural areas and by improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation,
including through provisions for menstrual hygiene management, and safe cooking and heating practices to improve
the health and nutrition of rural women and girls;
(o) Investing in and strengthening efforts to meet the basic needs of rural women, including needs relating to
their food security and nutrition and that of their families, and to promote adequate standards of living for them, as
well as decent conditions for work and improved access to local, regional and global markets through improved
availability, access to and use of critical rural infrastructure, such as energy and transport, science and technology,
local services, capacity-building and human resources development measures and the provision of a safe and reliable
water supply and sanitation, nutritional programmes, affordable housing programmes, education and literacy
programmes, social support measures and health care, including HIV prevention, treatment, care, including
psychosocial aspects, and support services;
(p) Fully engaging men and boys, including community leaders, as strategic partners and allies in achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, and eliminating all forms of discrimination and violence
against them, including by working to counteract attitudes by which women and girls are regarded as subordinate to
men and boys;
(q) Eliminating all forms of violence against rural women and girls in public and private spaces through
multisectoral and coordinated approaches to prevent and respond to violence against rural women and girls, to
investigate, prosecute and punish the perpetrators of violence against rural women and girls and end impunity and to
provide protection as well as equal access to comprehensive social, health and legal services for all victims and
survivors to support their full recovery and reintegration into society, including by providing access to psychosocial
support and rehabilitation, and bearing in mind the importance of all women and girls living free from violence, such
as gender-related killings, including femicide, and harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and
female genital mutilation, as well as of addressing the structural and underlying causes of violence against women
and girls through enhanced prevention measures, research and strengthened coordination and monitoring and
evaluation, by, inter alia, encouraging awareness-raising activities;
(r) Designing and implementing national policies and legal frameworks that promote and protect the full
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms by rural women and girls, and creating an environment that

_______________
114

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
115
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

733

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

does not tolerate violations or abuses of their rights, including domestic violence, sexual violence, gender-based
violence and discrimination, including multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination;
(s) Promoting safe public spaces for women and girls in rural areas and improving their security and safety,
including in public transportation systems and infrastructure, preventing and eliminating violence and harassment
against women on their journey to and from work, and protecting women and girls from being physically threatened
or assaulted, including from sexual violence, while collecting household water and fuel and when accessing sanitation
facilities outside their homes or practising open defecation;
(t) Ensuring that the rights of older women in rural areas are taken into account with regard to their equal
access to basic social services, appropriate social protection and/or social security measures, equal access to and
control of economic resources and their empowerment through access to financial and infrastructure services, with
special focus on the provision of support to older women, including indigenous women, who often have access to few
resources and are often more vulnerable;
(u) Valuing and supporting the critical role and contribution of rural women, including indigenous women in
rural areas, in the conservation and sustainable use of traditional crops and biodiversity for present and future
generations as an essential contribution to food security and nutrition, recognizing that rural women are
disproportionately affected by biodiversity loss and land degradation and should therefore be meaningfully engaged
in efforts to address such matters;
(v) Promoting the rights of women and girls with disabilities in rural areas, including by ensuring access on
an equal basis to productive employment and decent work, economic and financial resources and disability-sensitive
infrastructure and services, in particular in relation to health and education, as well as by ensuring that their priorities
and needs are fully incorporated into policies and programmes, through, inter alia, their participation in decisionmaking processes;
(w) Developing specific assistance programmes and advisory services to promote economic skills of rural
women in banking, modern trading and financial procedures, including financial literacy and consumer protection,
and providing microcredit and other financial and business services to a greater number of women in rural areas, in
particular female heads of households, for their economic empowerment;
(x) Supporting women entrepreneurs and women smallholder farmers, including those in subsistence
farming, by continuing to provide public investment and to encourage private investment in rural women to close the
gender gap in agriculture, and facilitating their access to extension and financial services, agricultural inputs and land,
water, sanitation and irrigation, markets and innovative technologies;
(y) Mobilizing resources, including at the national level and through official development assistance, for
increasing women’s access to existing savings and credit schemes, as well as targeted programmes that provide
women with capital, knowledge and tools that enhance their economic capacities;
(z) Seeking to ensure and improve equal access for rural women to decent work in agricultural and
non-agricultural sectors, supporting and promoting opportunities in small and medium-sized enterprises, sustainable
social enterprises and cooperatives and improving working conditions;
(aa) Investing in infrastructure and in time- and labour-saving technologies, including sustainable energy, safe
drinking water and sanitation and information and communications technologies, especially in rural areas, benefiting
women and girls by reducing their burden of domestic activities, affording the opportunity for girls to attend school
and for women to engage in self-employment or to participate in the labour market;
(bb) Taking appropriate measures to raise public awareness among rural women and girls about the risks of
trafficking in persons, including the factors that make rural women and girls vulnerable to trafficking, and eliminating
the demand that fosters all forms of exploitation against them, including sexual exploitation and forced labour;
(cc) Supporting remunerative non-agricultural employment for rural women, including in the informal sector,
including measures to improve working conditions, increase access to productive resources, invest in relevant
infrastructure, public services and time- and labour-saving technologies, promote rural women’s paid employment in
the formal economy and address the structural and underlying causes of the difficult conditions faced by rural women;

734

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(dd) Taking steps to build the capacities and skills of rural women and their enterprises and cooperatives and
to design or develop and implement procurement policies and measures to enable rural women and their enterprises
and cooperatives to benefit from public and private sector procurement processes, recognizing that the promotion of
rural women’s enterprises and cooperatives can sustainably contribute to the economic empowerment of rural women;
(ee) Promoting programmes and services to enable rural women and men to reconcile their work and family
responsibilities and to encourage men throughout their life cycle to share, equally with women and girls, household,
childcare and other care responsibilities;
(ff) Developing and adopting strategies to decrease women’s and girls’ vulnerability to environmental factors,
including gender-responsive strategies on mitigation and adaptation to climate change, to support the resilience and
adaptive capacities of women and girls to respond to the adverse effects of climate change, through, inter alia, the
promotion of their health and well-being, as well as access to sustainable livelihoods, and the provision of adequate
resources to ensure women’s full participation in decision-making at all levels on environmental issues, in particular
on strategies and policies related to the impacts of climate change, such as desertification, deforestation, sand and dust
storms and natural disasters, persistent drought, extreme weather events, sea level rise, coastal erosion and ocean
acidification and loss of biodiversity, on the lives of rural women and girls, and ensuring the integration of their
specific needs into humanitarian responses to natural disasters, into the planning, delivery, implementation and
monitoring of disaster risk reduction policies, in particular urban and rural infrastructure and land-use planning and
resettlement and relocation planning during the aftermath of natural disasters, and into sustainable natural resources
management;
(gg) Building the resilience of rural women and girls, in particular women smallholder farmers, to climate
change and environmental degradation (inter alia, deforestation, desertification and the loss of agricultural
biodiversity), including by promoting appropriate use of relevant ancestral, indigenous and modern technological
practices and knowledge and strengthening access to extension services, information and training;
(hh) Considering the adoption, where appropriate, of national legislation to protect the knowledge, innovations
and practices of women in indigenous and local communities relating to traditional medicines, biodiversity and
indigenous technologies;
(ii) Addressing the lack of quality, accessible, timely and reliable data disaggregated by sex and age and
statistical information on disabilities, to help with the measurement of progress and to ensure that no one is left behind,
including by intensifying efforts to include women’s unpaid work in official statistics, and developing a systematic
and comparative research base on rural women that will inform policy and programme decisions;
(jj) Strengthening the capacity of national statistical offices and other relevant government institutions to
collect, analyse and disseminate data, disaggregated by sex and age, and gender statistics on time use, unpaid work,
land tenure, energy, water and sanitation, among other things, to support policies and actions to improve the situation
of rural women and girls and to monitor and track the implementation of such policies and actions;
(kk) Guaranteeing the universal registration of births, including in rural areas, and ensuring the timely
registration of all marriages for individuals living in rural areas, including by removing physical, administrative,
procedural and any other barriers that impede access to registration and by providing, where lacking, mechanisms for
the registration of customary and religious marriages, bearing in mind the vital importance of birth registration for the
realization of the rights of individuals;
(ll) Designing, revising and implementing laws to ensure that rural women are accorded full and equal rights
to own and lease land and other property, including through the equal rights to economic and productive resources,
access to basic services, ownership and control over land and other forms of property, inheritance, natural resources,
appropriate new technology and financial services, including banking and microfinancing, and undertaking
administrative reforms and all necessary measures to give women the same right as men to credit, capital, finance,
appropriate technologies and vocational training, to improve access to markets and information and to ensure their
equal access to justice and legal support;
(mm) Taking appropriate measures to adopt or develop legislation and policies that provide rural women with
access to land and support women’s cooperatives and agricultural programmes, including for subsistence agriculture,
735

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

in order to contribute to school feeding programmes as a pull factor to keep children, in particular girl children, in
school, noting that school meals and take-home rations attract and retain children in schools and recognizing that
school feeding is an incentive to enhance enrolment and reduce absenteeism, especially for girls;
(nn) Supporting a gender-sensitive education system, including through approaches that attract and retain
female students and teachers and that consider the specific needs of rural women and girls in order to eliminate gender
stereotypes and discriminatory tendencies affecting them, including through community-based dialogue involving
women and men and girls and boys;
(oo) Eliminating gender disparities in the realization of the right to education and ensuring full and equal
participation in and completion of inclusive quality education (primary, secondary and tertiary education, including
vocational and technical education), as well as early childhood education, promoting lifelong learning opportunities
for rural women and girls and the elimination of female illiteracy, including through eliminating the discriminatory
policies of excluding pregnant and married girls from schools, quality teacher training, recruitment and retention of
teachers in rural areas, especially women teachers where they are underrepresented, and building gender-sensitive
education facilities that provide a safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective learning environment for all and facilitate
an effective transition from education or unemployment to decent work;
(pp) Promoting education, training and relevant information programmes for rural and farming women
through the use of affordable and appropriate technologies and the mass media, and taking concrete measures to
improve rural women’s skills, productivity and employment opportunities through technical, agricultural and
vocational education and training;
3. Encourages Member States, United Nations entities and all other relevant stakeholders to promote access
to social protection for female-headed rural households;
4. Encourages Member States, appropriate United Nations entities and all other relevant stakeholders to
promote the full and equal participation of rural women, including indigenous women as well as women farmers,
fishers and agricultural workers, in sustainable agricultural and rural development;
5. Requests the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in particular those dealing
with issues of development, to address and support the empowerment of rural women and their specific needs in their
programmes and strategies;
6. Stresses the need to identify the best practices for ensuring that rural women have access to and full and
equal participation in the area of information and communications technology, to address the priorities and needs of
rural women and girls as active users of information and to ensure their participation in developing and implementing
global, regional and national information and communications technology strategies, taking appropriate educational
measures to eliminate gender stereotypes regarding women in the field of technology;
7. Encourages Member States to consider the concluding observations and recommendations of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and of the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights concerning their reports to those Committees when formulating policies and designing programmes
focused on the improvement of the situation of rural women, including those to be developed and implemented in
cooperation with relevant international organizations;
8. Invites Governments to promote the economic empowerment of rural women, including through
entrepreneurship training, and to adopt gender-responsive and climate-sensitive rural development strategies and
agricultural production, including budget frameworks and relevant assessment measures, as well as to ensure that the
needs and priorities of rural women and girls are systematically addressed and that they can effectively contribute to
poverty alleviation, hunger eradication and food security and nutrition;
9. Invites Governments, relevant international organizations, the specialized agencies and civil society
organizations to continue to observe the International Day of Rural Women annually, on 15 October, as proclaimed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/136;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the improvement of the situation of women and girls in rural areas.

736

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/127
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/392, para. 21)116

74/127. Violence against women migrant workers
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on violence against women migrant workers and those adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women, the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice, and also recalling the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women,117
Reaffirming the provisions concerning women migrant workers contained in the outcome documents of the
World Conference on Human Rights,118 the International Conference on Population and Development,119 the Fourth
World Conference on Women120 and the World Summit for Social Development121 and their reviews,
Reaffirming also the provisions concerning women migrants contained in the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,122 and calling upon States to promote and protect effectively the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants regardless of migratory status, especially those of women and
children, and to encourage their active participation, as appropriate, in processes that contribute to decision-making,
planning and implementation of policies and programmes for sustainable development at all levels,
Reaffirming further that the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women123
and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,124 and the Optional Protocols thereto,125 as well as other relevant
conventions and treaties, provide an international legal framework and a comprehensive set of measures for the
elimination and prevention of all forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls and for the promotion
of gender equality and the empowerment of women,
Recalling the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,126 acknowledging that the 2030
Agenda covers the achievement of gender equality and empowerment of all women and girls and the protection of
labour rights and promotion of safe and secure working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in
particular women migrants, and those in informal employment, and also acknowledging the need, inter alia, to end all
violence and discrimination against them,
Reaffirming the recognition in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development127 that gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and women’s full

_______________
116

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kenya,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Sao Tome
and Principe, Senegal, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
117
Resolution 48/104.
118
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
119
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
120
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
121
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
122
Resolution 66/288, annex.
123
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
124
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
125
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378; and vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
126
Resolution 70/1.
127
Resolution 69/313, annex.

737

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and equal participation and leadership in the economy are vital to the achievement of sustainable development and
significantly enhance economic growth and productivity,
Recalling the adoption of the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants at the high-level plenary meeting
of the General Assembly on addressing large movements of refugees and migrants, held on 19 September 2016,128
Recalling also the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, adopted at the Intergovernmental
Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, in Marrakech, Morocco, on
10 and 11 December 2018, and endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution 73/195 of 19 December 2018,
Recalling further that the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration is based on the
following set of cross-cutting and interdependent principles: people-centred, international cooperation, national
sovereignty, rule of law and due process, sustainable development, human rights, gender-responsive, childsensitive, whole-of-government approach and whole-of-society approach,
Acknowledging the role of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), including in supporting national efforts, to increase women’s access to economic opportunities,
including for women migrant workers, and to end violence against them, in the light of the UN-Women strategic
plan, 2018–2021,129
Acknowledging also the need to facilitate opportunities for safe, orderly and regular migration in order to
promote a safe environment for migrant workers in all sectors, including women migrant workers in informal
employment,
Emphasizing that violence against women and girls is a major impediment to the achievement of gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls and that it violates and impairs or nullifies their full enjoyment of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Stressing that laws addressing violence against women and girls, including sexual harassment, are often of
limited scope, that those addressing sexual harassment do not cover many workplaces, such as those of domestic
workers, including migrant domestic workers, and that gaps need to be addressed,
Reaffirming the outcomes of the Fourth World Conference on Women, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action,120 and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”,130 and their reviews,
Taking note of the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women at its sixty-third session,131
expressing concern that many migrant women, particularly those engaged in informal employment and in less skilled
work, are especially vulnerable to abuse and exploitation, underlining in this regard the obligation of States to protect
the human rights of migrants so as to prevent and address abuse and exploitation,
Taking note with appreciation of the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women
at its fifty-seventh session,132 and taking note, in particular, of the commitment, as appropriate, to further adopt and
implement measures to ensure the social and legal inclusion and protection of women migrants, including women
migrant workers in countries of origin, transit and destination, promote and protect the full realization of their human
rights and their protection against violence and exploitation, implement gender-sensitive policies and programmes for
women migrant workers and provide safe and legal channels that recognize their skills and education, provide fair
labour conditions and, as appropriate, facilitate their productive employment and decent work as well as their
integration into the labour force,

_______________
128

Resolution 71/1.
UNW/2017/6/Rev.1.
130
Resolution S‑23/2, annex, and resolution S‑23/3, annex.
131
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2019, Supplement No. 7 (E/2019/27), chap. I, sect. A.
132
Ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 7 (E/2013/27), chap. I, sect. A.
129

738

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Underlining the importance of taking into account the root causes and consequences of migration, and
acknowledging that poverty, in particular the feminization of poverty, underdevelopment, lack of opportunity, poor
governance and environmental factors are among the drivers of migration,
Recalling the establishment of the International Migration Review Forum as an intergovernmental global
platform for Member States to discuss and share progress on the implementation of all aspects of the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration,
Recalling also that the Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development of
2013133 recognized that women and girls account for almost half of all international migrants at the global level and
the need to address the special situation and vulnerability of migrant women and girls by, inter alia, incorporating a
gender perspective into policies and strengthening national laws, institutions and programmes to combat gender-based
violence, including trafficking in persons and discrimination against them, and emphasized in this regard the need to
establish appropriate measures for the protection of women migrant workers in all sectors, including those involved
in care and domestic work,
Taking note of the adoption by the International Labour Conference of the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011
(No. 189),134 the Domestic Workers Recommendation, 2011 (No. 201) and the Violence and Harassment Convention,
2019 (No. 190), encouraging States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women to take note of and consider general recommendation No. 26 (2008) on women migrant workers,
adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in November 2008,135 and
encouraging States parties to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families136 to take note of and consider general comment No. 1 on migrant domestic workers,
adopted by the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in
December 2010,137 acknowledging that they are complementary and mutually reinforcing,
Recognizing the urgency of combating trafficking in persons in all its forms, including for the purposes of forced
or compulsory labour, particularly of women migrant workers, and in this regard taking note of the adoption by the
International Labour Conference on 11 June 2014, at its 103rd session, of the Protocol to the Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and of Recommendation No. 203 on supplementary measures for the effective
suppression of forced labour, of the International Labour Organization,
Recognizing also the increasing participation of women of all skill levels in international migration, driven in
large part by socioeconomic factors, and that this feminization of migration requires greater gender sensitivity in all
policies and efforts related to the subject of international migration,
Recognizing further that the demand for migrant care work appears to be rising, where the failure to resolve care
deficits and secure public provision of care has increased the demand for care work, particularly in the private sphere,
and that some migrant workers engaged in informal care work, particularly women, face serious human rights abuses
owing to the invisible nature of their workplace, while many benefit from the economic opportunities offered by
care work,
Recognizing the roles and responsibilities of and need for cooperation among all stakeholders, in particular
countries of origin, transit and destination, relevant regional and international organizations, workers’ and employers’
organizations, the private sector and civil society, in promoting an environment that prevents and addresses violence
against women migrant workers, including in the context of discrimination, through targeted measures, and in this
regard recognizing the importance of joint and collaborative approaches and strategies at the national, bilateral,
regional and international levels,

_______________
133

Resolution 68/4.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2955, No. 51379.
135
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/64/38), part one, annex I, decision 42/I.
136
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
137
CMW/C/GC/1.
134

739

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that the positive contribution of women migrant workers has the potential to foster inclusive
growth and sustainable development in countries of origin, transit and destination, underlining the value and dignity
of their labour, in all sectors, including in care and domestic work, and encouraging efforts to improve public
perceptions of migrants and migration,
Recognizing further the contribution of women migrant workers to the development of their families, inter alia,
through the delivery of remittances,
Recognizing the particular vulnerability and needs of women and their children at all stages of the migration
process, extending from the moment of deciding to migrate, and including transit, engagement in formal and informal
employment and integration into the host society, as well as during their return to and reintegration in their countries
of origin,
Expressing deep concern at the continuing reports of grave abuses and violence committed against migrant
women and girls, including gender-based violence, sexual violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, domestic violence,
gender-related killing of women and girls, including femicide, racist and xenophobic acts and expressions,
discrimination, abusive labour practices, exploitative conditions of work and trafficking in persons, including forced
labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, while taking into account the particular difficulties in
accessing justice that may be faced by women migrant workers,
Recognizing that one of the key causes of the labour exploitation suffered by migrants, including women migrant
workers, is linked to the unscrupulous practices of some recruitment agencies and informal brokers that charge high
recruitment costs and related fees, and noting with concern the reports of abuse committed by some recruitment
agencies and employers,
Recognizing also that violence against women and girls, in particular migrant women, is rooted in historical and
structural inequality in power relations between women and men, which further reinforces gender stereotypes and
barriers to the full enjoyment by women and girls of their human rights,
Recognizing further that the intersection of, inter alia, age, class, race, disability and gender-based and ethnic
discrimination and stereotypes can compound the discrimination faced by women migrant workers, and that genderbased violence is a form of discrimination,
Reaffirming the commitment to respect, protect and promote the human rights of all women, including, without
discrimination, indigenous women who migrate for work, and in this regard noting the attention paid in the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples138 to the full protection and guarantees against all forms of
violence and discrimination against indigenous women, as appropriate,
Stressing the multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination that may be faced by indigenous migrant women,
who suffer at a disproportionately high rate from domestic violence and sexual abuse, and as victims of trafficking in
persons,
Concerned that many migrant women who are employed in the informal economy and in less skilled work are
especially vulnerable to abuse and exploitation, underlining in this regard the obligation of States to protect the human
rights of migrants so as to prevent and address abuse and exploitation, observing with concern that many women
migrant workers take on jobs for which they may be overqualified and in which, at the same time, they may be more
vulnerable because of poor pay and inadequate social protection, and in this regard taking note of the adoption by the
International Labour Conference on 12 June 2015, at its 104th session, of Recommendation No. 204 concerning the
transition from the informal to the formal economy,
Concerned also that migrant women in informal employment may benefit from only limited legal protection of
their labour rights, increasing the risk of exploitation,

_______________
138

740

Resolution 61/295, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Emphasizing the need for objective, comprehensive and broad-based information, including sex- and
age-disaggregated data and statistics, indicators for research and analysis, and a wide exchange of experience and
lessons learned by individual Member States and civil society in the formulation of targeted policies and concrete
strategies to specifically address violence against women migrant workers, including in the context of
discrimination,
Realizing that the movement of a significant number of women migrant workers may be facilitated and made
possible by means of fraudulent or irregular documentation and sham marriages with the object of migration, that this
may be facilitated through, inter alia, the Internet and that those women migrant workers are more vulnerable to abuse
and exploitation,
Recognizing the importance of exploring the link between migration and trafficking in persons in order to further
efforts towards protecting women migrant workers from violence, discrimination, exploitation and abuse and to
provide appropriate care, assistance and services for trafficking victims, regardless of migratory status,
Recognizing also that the vulnerabilities documented for women migrant workers highlight increasingly
complex migration contexts and channels, where migrant workers may find themselves in life-threatening situations
when entering other countries,
Highlighting measures adopted by some countries of destination to alleviate the plight of women migrant
workers residing in their areas of jurisdiction and to promote access to justice, including through the establishment of
gender-sensitive protection mechanisms for women migrant workers, by facilitating their access to mechanisms for
reporting complaints or providing assistance during legal proceedings and by promoting actions to protect migrant
women who are victims of violence,
Underlining the important role of relevant United Nations treaty bodies in monitoring the implementation of
human rights conventions and of the relevant special procedures, as well as of the supervisory mechanisms of the
International Labour Organization, in monitoring the implementation of international labour standards, within their
respective mandates, in addressing the problem of violence against women migrant workers and in protecting and
promoting their human rights and welfare,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;139

2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the review and appraisal of the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcomes of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly,140 which highlights, inter alia, that overall progress in the implementation of the
Platform for Action has been particularly slow for women and girls who experience multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination and that marginalized groups of women, including migrant women, are at particular risk of
discrimination and violence;
3. Invites Member States to consider ratifying relevant International Labour Organization conventions,
including the Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97),141 the Migrant Workers
(Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143),142 the Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997
(No. 181)143 and the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189),134 and to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families,136 the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,144 the Protocol

_______________
139

A/74/235.
E/CN.6/2015/3.
141
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 120, No. 1616.
142
Ibid., vol. 1120, No. 17426.
143
Ibid., vol. 2115, No. 36794.
144
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
140

741

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime,145 the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons146 and the 1961
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness,147 as well as all other human rights treaties that contribute to the
protection of the rights of women migrant workers, calls upon States parties to comply with their relevant obligations
under international law, and encourages Member States to implement the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons;148
4. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights of
migrants submitted to the Council at its forty-first session, entitled “The impact of migration on migrant women and
girls: a gender perspective”;149
5. Recalls the adoption of the New Urban Agenda at the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,150 in which Member States
committed to recognizing the contribution of the working poor in the informal economy, particularly women migrant
workers, to the urban economies;
6. Encourages all United Nations agencies and special rapporteurs on human rights whose mandates
touch on the issues of violence against women migrant workers to improve the collection of information on and
analysis of those areas within their mandates relating to the current challenges facing women migrant workers,
including in supply chains, and also encourages Governments to cooperate with the agencies and special
rapporteurs in this regard;
7. Calls upon all Governments to incorporate a human rights, gender-responsive and people-centred
perspective in legislation, policies and programmes on international migration and on labour and employment,
consistent with their human rights obligations and commitments under human rights instruments, for the
prevention of and protection of migrant women against violence and discrimination, trafficking in persons,
exploitation and abuse, to take effective measures to ensure that such migration and labour policies do not reinforce
discrimination, and, where necessary, to conduct impact assessment studies of such legislation, policies and
programmes, and to take into account the need for effective and meaningful participation of women migrant
workers and relevant civil society organizations, as appropriate, in the formulation of such policies and
programmes;
8. Calls upon Governments to adopt or strengthen measures to protect the human rights of women migrant
workers, including domestic workers, regardless of their migratory status, including in policies that regulate the
recruitment and deployment of women migrant workers, to consider expanding dialogue among States on devising
innovative methods to promote legal channels of migration in order to deter irregular migration, to consider
incorporating a gender perspective into immigration laws in order to prevent discrimination and violence against
women, including in independent, circular and temporary migration, and to consider permitting, in accordance with
national legislation, women migrant workers who are victims of violence, trafficking in persons or other forms of
exploitation or abuse to apply for residency permits independently of abusive employers or spouses, and to eliminate
abusive sponsorship systems;
9. Encourages Governments to adapt options and pathways for regular migration in a manner that
facilitates labour mobility and decent work reflecting demographic and labour market realities, optimizes
education opportunities, upholds the right to family life and responds to the needs of migrants in a situation of
vulnerability, with a view to expanding and diversifying availability of pathways for safe, orderly and regular
migration;

_______________
145

Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
147
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
148
Resolution 64/293.
149
A/HRC/41/38.
150
Resolution 71/256, annex.
146

742

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Encourages Governments engaged in the International Migration Review Forum to ensure that the
implementation, review and follow-up of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration151 take into
account relevant provisions regarding women migrant workers;
11. Encourages Governments to consider adopting measures to reduce the cost of labour migration and
promote ethical recruitment policies and practices between sending and receiving countries;
12. Urges States to adopt or develop and implement legislation and policies, in accordance with their
commitments and obligations under international law, to prevent and respond to gender-related killing of women and
girls, including femicide, while taking into account the particular difficulties faced by women migrant workers in
accessing justice;
13. Encourages Governments to seek to address the push and pull factors surrounding women’s irregular
migration, including the need to resolve care deficits in labour-importing countries and to regulate, formalize,
professionalize and protect the terms and conditions of employment in care work, in line with national law and
applicable obligations under international law;
14. Urges Governments to enhance bilateral, regional, interregional and international cooperation to address
violence against women migrant workers, fully respecting international law, including international human rights law,
as well as to strengthen efforts to reduce the vulnerability of women migrant workers by promoting decent work, by,
inter alia, adopting minimum wage policies and employment contracts in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations, facilitating effective access to justice and effective action in the areas of law enforcement, prosecution,
prevention, capacity-building and victim protection and support, exchanging information and good practices in
combating violence and discrimination against women migrant workers and fostering sustainable development
alternatives to migration in countries of origin;
15. Also urges Governments to take into account the best interests of the child by adopting or strengthening
measures to respect, promote and protect the human rights of migrant children, especially girls, including
unaccompanied girls, regardless of their migratory status, so as to prevent trafficking in persons, labour and economic
exploitation, discrimination, all forms of sexual exploitation, sexual harassment, violence and sexual abuse of migrant
children, including in online and digital contexts;
16. Further urges Governments to strongly encourage all stakeholders, especially the private sector, including
employment agencies involved in recruiting women migrant workers, to strengthen the focus on and funding support
for the prevention of violence against women migrant workers, in particular by promoting the access of women to
meaningful and gender-sensitive information and education on, inter alia, the costs and benefits of migration, rights
and benefits to which they are entitled in the countries of origin and employment, overall conditions in countries of
employment and procedures for legal migration, as well as to ensure that laws and policies governing recruiters,
employers and intermediaries promote adherence to and respect for the human rights and, where applicable, labour
rights of migrant workers, particularly women;
17. Encourages all States to remove obstacles that may prevent the transparent, safe, unrestricted and
expeditious transfer of remittances of migrants to their countries of origin or to any other countries, including, where
appropriate, by reducing transaction costs and implementing woman-friendly remittance transfer, savings and
investment schemes, including diaspora investment schemes, in conformity with applicable national legislation,
and to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other problems that may impede women migrant workers’ access
to and management of their economic resources;
18. Encourages States to consider designing and implementing financial literacy training programmes for
women migrant workers and, where appropriate, their families, and other programmes that may contribute to the full
development impact of migration;
19. Encourages Governments to consider increasing the labour participation of and employment
opportunities for women migrant workers, including those in domestic work, through the recognition of their skills,

_______________
151

Resolution 73/195, annex.

743

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

qualifications and competences, which will enhance their ability to transition from one job or employer to another,
and, where appropriate, in order to facilitate their entry into the formal sector;
20. Calls upon States to address the structural and underlying causes of violence against women migrant
workers, including through education and dissemination of information and by raising awareness of gender-equality
issues, promoting their economic empowerment and access to decent work and, where relevant, their integration into
the formal economy, in particular in economic decision-making, and promoting their participation in public life, as
appropriate;
21. Calls upon Governments to promote access to adequate, quality and affordable health-care services and
quality education for women migrant workers and their accompanying children;
22. Also calls upon Governments to recognize the right of women migrant workers and their accompanying
children, regardless of their migratory status, to have access without discrimination to emergency health care,
including in times of humanitarian crises, natural disasters and other emergency situations, and in this regard to ensure
that women migrant workers are not discriminated against on the grounds of pregnancy and childbirth and, in
accordance with national legislation, to address the vulnerabilities to HIV experienced by migrant populations and
support their access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support;
23. Encourages Governments to ensure the appropriate use of voluntary and confidential HIV testing and
pregnancy testing to prevent unwarranted barriers prior to and during migration;
24. Encourages States to protect women migrant workers, including domestic workers, from becoming
victims of trafficking in persons, through the implementation of programmes and policies that prevent victimization
and through the provision of protection and access to justice, as well as medical and psychological assistance, where
appropriate;
25. Urges States to recognize the significant contributions and leadership of women in migrant communities
and to take appropriate steps to promote their full, equal and meaningful participation in the development of local
solutions and opportunities, and to recognize the importance of protecting labour rights and a safe environment for
women migrant workers in all sectors, including those in informal employment, including through fair and ethical
recruitment and the prevention of exploitation, and to ensure safe, orderly and regular migration, as well as labour
mobility;
26. Urges States that have not yet done so to adopt and implement legislation and policies that protect all
women migrant workers, including those in domestic work, to include therein, and improve where necessary, relevant
monitoring and inspection measures, in line with applicable International Labour Organization conventions and other
instruments to ensure compliance with international obligations and to grant women migrant workers in domestic
service access to gender-sensitive, transparent mechanisms for bringing complaints against recruitment agencies and
employers, including terminating their contracts in the event of labour and economic exploitation, discrimination,
sexual harassment, violence and sexual abuse in the workplace, while stressing that such instruments should not
punish women migrant workers, and calls upon States to promptly investigate and punish all violations of their rights;
27. Encourages States to consider ensuring that all women migrant workers, regardless of their migration
status, can exercise their human rights through safe access to basic services, notwithstanding that nationals and regular
migrants may be entitled to more comprehensive service provision, while ensuring that any differential treatment must
be based on law, be proportionate and pursue a legitimate aim, in accordance with international human rights law;
28. Urges Governments to support enhanced reception and reintegration assistance for those who return, with
particular attention to the needs of victims of trafficking in persons and of migrants in vulnerable situations, inter alia,
children, older women and women with disabilities;
29. Urges States to adopt national gender-responsive migration policies and legislation, in line with relevant
obligations under international law, to protect the human rights of all migrant women and girls, regardless of migration
status; recognize the skills and education of women migrant workers to promote their economic empowerment in all
sectors and, as appropriate, facilitate their productive employment, decent work and integration into the labour force,
including in the fields of education and science and technology; recognize the importance of protecting labour rights
and a safe environment for women migrant workers and those in precarious employment, including preventing and
744

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

addressing abuse and exploitation, protecting women migrant workers in all sectors and promoting labour mobility;
provide newly arrived migrant women with targeted, gender-responsive, child-sensitive, accessible and
comprehensive information and legal guidance on their rights and obligations, including on compliance with national
and local laws, obtaining work and resident permits, status adjustments, registration with authorities, access to justice
to file complaints about rights violations, as well as access to basic services; encourage cooperation among various
stakeholders, including countries of origin, transit and destination, in ensuring that migrant women and girls have
adequate identification and the provision of relevant documents to facilitate access to social protection mechanisms;
and facilitate the sustainable reintegration of returning migrant women and girls by providing them with equal access
to social protection and services;
30. Encourages States to review existing recruitment mechanisms to guarantee that they are fair and ethical,
to enhance the abilities of labour inspectors and other authorities to better monitor recruiters, employers and service
providers in all sectors and to protect all migrant workers against all forms of exploitation and abuse in order to
guarantee decent work and maximize the socioeconomic contributions of migrants in both their countries of origin
and destination;
31. Calls upon Governments, in cooperation with international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and other stakeholders, to provide women migrant workers who are victims of
violence, irrespective of their migratory status, in line with domestic legislation, access to the full range of emergency
assistance and protection and, to the extent possible, with gender-sensitive services that are culturally and linguistically
appropriate, which includes the provision of information on the rights of women migrant workers, hotlines, dispute
resolution mechanisms, legal aid, victim advocacy, services for children, safety planning, psychological support and
trauma counselling, social services, women-only spaces and access to women’s shelters, where these exist, in
accordance with relevant international human rights instruments and applicable conventions;
32. Encourages States, as appropriate, to address practical barriers, including language barriers, that women
migrant workers may encounter in countries of destination, and provide them with adequate information about their
rights, including to consular assistance, prior to their departure from their countries of origin;
33. Calls upon Governments to ensure that legislative provisions and judicial processes are in place to provide
women migrant workers access to justice, to enhance, develop or maintain legal frameworks and specific genderresponsive policies to explicitly meet their needs and rights and, where necessary, to take appropriate steps to reform
existing legislation and policies to capture their needs and protect their rights;
34. Also calls upon Governments, in particular those of the countries of origin and destination, to put in place
penal and criminal sanctions, in order to punish perpetrators of violence against women migrant workers and
intermediaries, and gender-sensitive redress and justice mechanisms that victims can access effectively and that allow
their views and concerns to be presented and considered at appropriate stages of proceedings, including other
measures that will allow victims to be present during the judicial process, when possible, and to protect women
migrant workers who are victims of violence from revictimization, including by authorities;
35. Urges all States to adopt and implement effective measures to put an end to the arbitrary arrest and
detention of women migrant workers and to take action to prevent and punish any form of illegal deprivation of the
liberty of women migrant workers by individuals or groups;
36. Encourages Governments to formulate, implement and refine training programmes for their law
enforcement officials, immigration officers and border officials, diplomatic and consular officials, judiciary,
prosecutors, public sector medical staff and other service providers, with a view to sensitizing those public sector
workers to the issue of violence against women migrant workers and imparting to them the necessary skills and
attitude to ensure the delivery of proper, professional and gender-sensitive interventions, including for those in
detention facilities;
37. Also encourages Governments to promote coherence between migration, labour and anti-trafficking
policies and programmes concerning women migrant workers, based on a human rights, gender-responsive and
people-centred perspective, to ensure that the human rights of women migrant workers are protected throughout the
migration process and to enhance efforts and increase action to prevent violence against women migrant workers,
prosecute perpetrators and protect and support victims and their families;

745

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

38. Calls upon States, in accordance with the provisions of article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations,152 to ensure that, if a woman migrant worker is arrested or committed to prison or custody pending trial, or
is detained in any other manner, the competent authorities respect her freedom to communicate with and have access
to the consular officials of the country of her nationality and, in this regard, to inform without delay, if that woman
migrant worker so requests, the consular post of her State of nationality;
39. Invites the United Nations system and other concerned intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to cooperate with Governments, within existing resources, towards a better understanding of the issues
concerning women and international migration, and to improve the collection, dissemination and analysis of sex- and
age-disaggregated data and information in order to assist in the formulation of migration and labour policies that are,
inter alia, gender-responsive and that protect human rights, as well as to aid in policy assessment and to continue to
support national efforts to address violence against women migrant workers in a coordinated way that ensures
effective implementation, enhances their impact and strengthens positive outcomes for women migrant workers;
40. Encourages Governments, in accordance with their applicable legal obligations, to formulate national
policies concerning women migrant workers that are based on up-to-date, relevant sex-disaggregated data and
analysis, in close consultation with women migrant workers and relevant stakeholders throughout the policy process,
and also encourages Governments to ensure that this process is adequately resourced and that the resulting policies
have measurable targets and indicators, timetables and monitoring and accountability measures, in particular for
employment agencies, employers and public officials, and provide for impact assessments and ensure multi-sector
coordination within and between countries of origin, transit and destination through appropriate mechanisms;
41. Encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of countries of origin, transit and destination, to
avail themselves of the expertise of the United Nations, including the Statistics Division of the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the International Labour Organization and the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), to develop and enhance appropriate
sex-disaggregated national data collection, analysis and dissemination methodologies that will generate comparable
data, and tracking and reporting systems on violence against women migrant workers and, wherever possible, on
violations of their rights at all stages of the migration process, and:
(a) To further study the costs of violence against women, including migrant workers, to the women
themselves, their families and their communities;
(b)

To analyse the opportunities available to women migrant workers and their impact on development;

(c) To further assess and measure recruitment costs and fees through the provision of appropriate
sex-disaggregated data and analysis, where available;
(d) To support the improvement of macrodata on migration costs and on remittances, for appropriate policy
formulation and implementation;
42. Encourages the United Nations system and related entities to continue and step up their efforts and
promote partnerships with all stakeholders, including civil society organizations, and to coordinate their work in
support, as appropriate, of effective implementation of relevant international and regional instruments in order to
enhance their impact through concrete positive outcomes for the advancement of the rights of women migrant
workers;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a comprehensive, analytical and thematic report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-sixth session on the problem of violence against women migrant workers, especially domestic
workers, and on the implementation of the present resolution, taking into account updated information from Member
States, the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the International Labour Organization, the
International Organization for Migration, the United Nations Development Programme, UN-Women and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well as the reports of special rapporteurs that refer to the situation of women
migrant workers and other relevant sources, including non‑governmental organizations.

_______________
152

746

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/128
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/392, para. 21)153

74/128. Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question, including resolution 72/147 of 19 December 2017, and
recalling also the section of resolution 64/289 of 2 July 2010 entitled “Strengthening the institutional arrangements
for support of gender equality and the empowerment of women”,
Deeply convinced that the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action154 and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”,155 are important contributions to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of
women and must be translated into effective action by all States, the United Nations system and other organizations
concerned,
Reaffirming the commitments to gender equality and the advancement of women made at the Millennium
Summit,156 the 2005 World Summit,157 the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium
Development Goals,158 the special event of the General Assembly to follow up efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals,159 the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development
agenda160 and other major United Nations summits, conferences and special sessions, and reaffirming also that their
full, effective and accelerated implementation is integral to achieving the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Reaffirming also the commitments in regard to gender equality and the empowerment of women in the Doha
Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus161 and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,162
Recalling its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system, in which it called upon all entities of the United
Nations development system to continue to promote women’s empowerment and gender equality by enhancing
gender mainstreaming through the full implementation of the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, developed under the leadership of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),

_______________
153

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee.
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
155
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
156
See resolution 55/2.
157
See resolution 60/1.
158
See resolution 65/1.
159
See resolution 68/6.
160
See resolution 70/1.
161
Resolution 63/239, annex.
162
Resolution 69/313, annex.
154

747

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS163 and the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS:
On the Fast Track to Accelerating the Fight against HIV and to Ending the AIDS Epidemic by 2030, adopted at the
high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, held in New York from 8 to 10 June 2016,164
which, inter alia, addressed the pursuit of transformative AIDS responses to contribute to gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls, and reaffirming also the political declaration on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted at the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly held in New York on 27 and 28 September 2017,165
Welcoming progress made towards achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women, but stressing
that challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session,
Noting with appreciation that 2020 will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on
Women and the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, noting with appreciation also, in this
regard, the review activities already undertaken by Governments, and noting the contributions of all other relevant
stakeholders to these review activities,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008,
1888 (2009) of 30 September 2009, 1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009, 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010, 2106
(2013) of 24 June 2013, 2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013, 2242 (2015) of 13 October 2015, 2467 (2019) of
23 April 2019 and 2493 (2019) of 29 October 2019 on women and peace and security and resolutions 1882 (2009)
of 4 August 2009, 2225 (2015) of 18 June 2015 and 2427 (2018) of 9 July 2018 on children and armed conflict,
Reaffirming the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
stressing the need for their participation therein, including at decision-making levels, and noting in this regard that
2020 will mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security,
Recalling the Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: A Commitment to
Action, held in New York on 27 September 2015, and the pledges and commitments to gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls made by Governments at that meeting,
Taking note of the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment,
Recognizing that the responsibility for the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session rests primarily at the national level and that strengthened efforts
are necessary in this respect, and reiterating that enhanced international cooperation is essential for full, effective and
accelerated implementation,
Recognizing also the primary role of the Commission on the Status of Women in the follow-up to the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action, in which the work of the Commission is grounded, and stressing that it is critical
to address and integrate gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls throughout national, regional and
global reviews of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development160 and to ensure synergies
between the follow-up to the Beijing Platform for Action and the gender-responsive follow-up to the 2030 Agenda,
Welcoming the work of the Commission on the Status of Women in reviewing the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, taking note with appreciation of all its agreed conclusions, and acknowledging
the need for their implementation,
Recalling its resolutions 73/294 of 22 May 2019 and 73/340 of 12 September 2019, in which it decided to
convene a one-day high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, on 23 September 2020,

_______________
163

Resolution S-26/2, annex.
Resolution 70/266, annex.
165
Resolution 72/1.
164

748

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the strengthening of the capacity of UN-Women and its experience in achieving its mandate,
Commending UN-Women for the continued support provided to intergovernmental processes, including on the
linkages between sustainable development, financing for development, migration, climate change and the
achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls,
Recalling its resolution 64/289, in which it decided that the resources required to service the normative
intergovernmental processes should be funded from the regular budget,
Taking note of the ongoing work of the fund for gender equality and the United Nations trust fund in support of
actions to eliminate violence against women,
Recognizing that the participation and contribution of civil society, in particular women’s groups and
organizations and other non-governmental organizations, are important to the successful implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, as well as to the
gender-responsive implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Reaffirming that gender mainstreaming is a globally accepted strategy for promoting the empowerment of
women and achieving gender equality by transforming structures of inequality, which is relevant to all issues
considered by its Main Committees and subsidiary bodies, including in resolutions dealing with issues beyond social,
humanitarian, cultural, economic and financial matters,
Reaffirming also the commitment to actively promote the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into the
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programmes in all political, economic and
social spheres, as well as the commitment to strengthen the capabilities of the United Nations system in the area
of gender equality,
Bearing in mind the challenges and obstacles to changing discriminatory attitudes and gender stereotypes, which
perpetuate discrimination against women and girls and stereotypical roles of girls and boys and women and men, and
stressing that challenges and obstacles remain in the implementation of international standards and norms to address
inequality between women and men,
Recognizing the importance of fully engaging men and boys, as agents and beneficiaries of change, in the
achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and as allies in the elimination of all
forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls, as well as in the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the gender-responsive implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Expressing serious concern that the urgent goal of 50/50 gender balance in the United Nations system, especially
at higher professional grade levels and in non‑headquarters locations, with full respect for the principle of equitable
geographical distribution, in conformity with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, remains
unmet, that the representation of women decreases progressively at higher professional grade levels and that the gap
in representation is greatest and the rate of change slowest at non-headquarters locations, including in peacekeeping
missions, as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General on improvement in the status of women in the United
Nations system,166
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the measures taken and progress
achieved in follow-up to and implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of
the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly167 and of the report of the Secretary-General on
improvement in the status of women in the United Nations system;166
2. Reaffirms the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted at the Fourth World Conference on
Women154 and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,155 also reaffirms the political

_______________
166
167

A/74/220.
A/74/222.

749

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

declaration on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-ninth session,168 and affirms its commitment to their full, effective
and accelerated implementation;
3. Also reaffirms the primary and essential role of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as the catalytic role of the Commission on the Status of Women, in promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women, based on the full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, and in promoting and monitoring gender mainstreaming within
the United Nations system, and encourages the Commission to contribute to the follow-up to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development160 in order to accelerate the realization of gender equality and the empowerment of women
and girls;
4. Calls upon Governments and all other stakeholders to systematically mainstream a gender perspective
into the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in order to, inter alia, contribute to the full,
effective and accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and stresses in this regard
the importance of ensuring synergies between the follow-up to the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the gender-responsive follow-up to the 2030 Agenda;
5. Reiterates that the full, effective and accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session is essential to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals;
6. Recognizes that the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the fulfilment
of the obligations of States parties under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women169 are mutually reinforcing in respect of achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women, and
welcomes in this regard the contributions of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to
promoting the implementation of the Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
7. Calls upon States parties to comply fully with their obligations under the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Optional Protocol thereto170 and to take into consideration the
concluding observations as well as the general recommendations of the Committee, urges States parties to consider
limiting the extent of any reservations that they lodge to the Convention, to formulate any reservations as precisely
and narrowly as possible and to regularly review such reservations with a view to withdrawing them so as to ensure
that no reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention, urges all Member States that have
not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention to consider doing so, and calls upon those Member States that have not
yet done so to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol;
8. Reaffirms that States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent and combat all forms of
violence against women and girls, provide protection to the victims and investigate, prosecute and punish the
perpetrators of violence against women and girls, and that failure to do so violates and impairs or nullifies the
enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, calls upon Governments to elaborate and implement
laws and strategies to eliminate violence against women and girls, encourages and supports men and boys to take an
active part in the prevention and elimination of all forms of violence, encourages increased understanding among men
and boys of how violence harms girls, boys, women and men and undermines gender equality, encourages all actors
to speak out against any form of violence against women, and in this regard encourages Member States to continue
to support the Secretary-General’s ongoing campaign, “UNiTE to End Violence against Women”, its social
mobilization and advocacy platform, “Orange the World: End Violence against Women”, and the “HeforShe”
campaign of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN‑Women), as well
as to support the Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse;

_______________
168

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2015, Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I, sect. C, resolution 59/1, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
170
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
169

750

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Reiterates the importance and value of the mandate of UN-Women, and welcomes the Entity’s leadership
in providing a strong voice for women and girls at all levels and its efforts to support intergovernmental processes so
that they fully contribute to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls and the
realization of their human rights;
10. Notes with concern that UN-Women continues to draw on voluntary contributions in order to enable it to
carry out its mandate of servicing normative intergovernmental processes, and emphasizes the need for the full
implementation of resolution 64/289 in this regard;
11. Reaffirms the important role of UN-Women in leading, coordinating and promoting accountability of the
United Nations system in its work on gender equality and the empowerment of women;
12. Notes with appreciation the important and extensive work of UN-Women for more effective and coherent
gender mainstreaming across the United Nations system, and calls upon UN-Women to continue to support gender
mainstreaming across the United Nations system as an integral part of its work and of its efforts to accelerate action
across the United Nations system;
13. Welcomes the commitment of UN-Women to support Member States in their efforts to develop and
strengthen norms, policies and standards on gender equality and the empowerment of women, as well as to integrate
gender perspectives into sectoral policy and normative frameworks, in line with its mandate, encourages the Entity to
continue to promote the need to mainstream and strengthen a gender perspective in the work of intergovernmental
bodies and processes, to raise awareness of the opportunities therein and to provide policy analysis and information
in support of intergovernmental deliberations in order to provide technical assistance, at the request of Member States,
in strengthening a gender perspective in resolutions and other outcomes, and in this regard recognizes the need to
continue to strengthen the capacity of UN-Women to carry out its normative support function;
14. Recognizes the important role of UN-Women in promoting gender equality and the empowerment of
women and the central role that it plays in supporting Member States, in coordinating the United Nations system and
in mobilizing civil society, the private sector and other relevant stakeholders, at all levels, in support of the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and calls upon UN-Women and the United
Nations system, within their respective mandates, to continue to support the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action at the international, regional, national and local
levels, including through systematic gender mainstreaming, the mobilization of resources to deliver results and the
monitoring of progress with data and robust accountability systems;
15. Urges Member States to increase funding for the budget of UN-Women by providing, when
legislative and budgetary provisions allow, core, multi-year, predictable, stable and sustainable voluntary
contributions, recognizing the importance of adequate funding in enabling UN-Women to implement its
strategic plan promptly and effectively, and that the mobilization of financial resources for achieving its goals
still remains a challenge;
16. Also urges Member States to take further concrete action to ensure the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly, including through strengthened implementation of laws, policies, strategies and programme
activities for all women and girls; strengthened and increased support for institutional mechanisms for gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls at all levels; the transformation of discriminatory norms and gender
stereotypes and the promotion of social norms and practices that recognize the positive role and contribution of
women and eliminate discrimination against women and girls; significantly increased investment to close resource
gaps, including through the mobilization of financial resources from all sources, including domestic resource
mobilization and allocation and increased priority on gender equality and the empowerment of women in official
development assistance to build on progress achieved and ensure that official development assistance is used
effectively to contribute to the implementation of the Platform for Action; strengthened accountability for the
implementation of existing commitments; and enhanced capacity-building, data collection, monitoring and
evaluation, and access to and use of information and communications technologies;
17. Calls upon Governments and the organs, relevant funds and programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system, within their respective mandates, other international and regional organizations, including
751

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

financial institutions, and all relevant actors of civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to intensify
and accelerate action to achieve the full and effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and of the outcome of the twenty-third special session, including by contributing to the celebrations of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as appropriate;
18. Looks forward to the sixty-fourth session of the Commission on the Status of Women, in 2020, when the
Commission will undertake a review and appraisal of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, and also to the Generation
Equality Forum, to be convened by UN-Women and co-chaired by France and Mexico, in partnership with civil
society;
19. Encourages all actors, including Governments, the United Nations system, other international
organizations and civil society, to continue to support the work of the Commission on the Status of Women in fulfilling
its central role in the follow-up to and review of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session and, as applicable, to carry out the recommendations of the
Commission, welcomes in this regard the Commission’s continued sharing of experiences, lessons learned and good
practices in overcoming challenges to the full implementation at the national and international levels and the
evaluation of progress in the implementation of priority themes, and encourages the intergovernmental bodies of the
United Nations system, as appropriate, to incorporate the outcomes of the Commission into their work;
20. Requests the entities of the United Nations system to systematically and strategically incorporate the
outcomes of the Commission on the Status of Women into their work, within their mandates, and, inter alia, to ensure
effective support for the efforts of Member States towards the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment
of women and girls, and in this regard encourages UN-Women to continue to use concrete results-based reporting
mechanisms and to ensure coherence, consistency and coordination between the normative and operational aspects
of its work;
21. Encourages States and all stakeholders to strengthen the mainstreaming of a gender perspective into all
sectors and in all areas of development;
22. Reiterates its call upon the United Nations system, including the main organs, their main committees and
subsidiary bodies, through forums such as the high-level political forum on sustainable development and functions
such as the annual ministerial review and the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council
and the funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, to increase efforts to fully mainstream a gender
perspective into all issues under their consideration and within their mandates, as well as into all United Nations
summits, conferences and special sessions and their follow-up processes;
23. Calls upon States to ensure that intergovernmental processes consistently address gender perspectives in
their preparatory processes and outcomes;
24. Encourages its Main Committees and subsidiary bodies, as well as the Economic and Social Council and
its functional commissions, particularly in the light of the analysis contained in the report of the Secretary-General166
and of the cross-cutting nature of gender equality and the empowerment of women, to intensify their efforts to make
further progress in the integration of a gender perspective into their work, including, as appropriate, into their
resolutions within the respective mandates of the General Assembly and each of its Main Committees and subsidiary
bodies and the Economic and Social Council and each of its functional commissions, and invites the Bureaux, as
appropriate, to encourage such efforts;
25. Strongly encourages Governments to continue to support the role and contribution of civil society, in
particular non-governmental organizations and women’s organizations, in the full, effective and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session
and in the gender-responsive implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
26. Calls upon Governments and the United Nations system to encourage women’s groups and other
non-governmental organizations specializing in gender equality and the empowerment of women to participate in
intergovernmental processes, including through increased outreach, funding and capacity-building;

752

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

27. Calls upon the intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations system to systematically request the
inclusion of a gender perspective in reports of the Secretary-General and other inputs to intergovernmental processes;
28. Requests that reports of the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council and their subsidiary bodies continue to systematically address gender perspectives through
gender-sensitive analysis, the provision of data disaggregated by sex and age and the reflection of the impact of
proposed policies and programmes on gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, and that
conclusions and recommendations for further action address the different situations and needs of women and men
and girls and boys in order to facilitate gender-responsive policy development, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to convey the importance of reflecting a gender perspective to all stakeholders who provide
input to his reports;
29. Encourages Member States, with the support of, as appropriate, United Nations entities, including
UN-Women, international and regional organizations and other relevant actors, to prioritize the strengthening of
national data collection and monitoring capacities with regard to statistics disaggregated by sex and age, as well as
national tracking indicators for gender equality and the empowerment of women, through multisectoral efforts and
partnerships;
30. Calls upon all parts of the United Nations system to continue to play an active role in ensuring the full,
effective and accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session through, inter alia, the maintenance of gender specialists in all entities of the United
Nations system, as well as by ensuring that all personnel, especially those in the field, receive training and appropriate
follow-up, including tools, guidance and support, for accelerated gender mainstreaming, and reaffirms the need to
strengthen the capabilities of the United Nations system in the area of gender;
31. Commends the Secretary-General for his leadership and efforts towards creating an enabling environment
for and accelerating progress towards the goal of 50/50 gender balance at all levels throughout the United Nations
system, including the goal of reaching parity at the highest levels by 2021 and at all levels throughout the United
Nations system by 2028, as set out in his system-wide strategy on gender parity launched in September 2017, and in
this regard commends the Secretary-General for the recent achievements towards this goal among resident
coordinators, Under-Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to further accelerate his efforts to achieve the goal of 50/50 gender balance
at all levels throughout the United Nations system, including in the field and in peacekeeping missions, with full
respect for the principle of equitable geographical distribution, in conformity with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the
Charter of the United Nations, considering, in particular, women from the developing and the least developed
countries, countries with economies in transition and unrepresented or largely underrepresented Member States, and
to ensure the implementation of measures with clear targets and timelines, including temporary special measures, as
well as the strengthening of the implementation of policies and measures related to creating an enabling environment,
including for work-life balance, and to prevent and address discrimination, harassment, including sexual harassment,
and abuse of authority in the workplace, so as to accelerate progress, and managerial and departmental accountability
with respect to attaining gender parity within the shortest feasible period;
33. Calls upon the entities of the United Nations system to significantly increase their efforts towards
achieving the goal of 50/50 gender balance through a comprehensive range of actions, inter alia as outlined in the
Secretary-General’s system-wide strategy on gender parity and supplementary guidance in support of the systemwide strategy, as well as the recommendations contained in the Enabling Environment Guidelines for the United
Nations System, to continue to collaborate with UN-Women and with the active support of gender focal points and
focal points for women and to annually provide up-to-date statistics, including on the number and percentage of
women and their functions and nationalities throughout the United Nations system, as well as information on the
responsibility and accountability of the offices of human resources management and the secretariat of the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for promoting gender balance;
34. Strongly encourages Member States to identify and regularly submit more women candidates for
appointment to positions in the United Nations system, especially at more senior, decision-making and policymaking
levels, including in peacekeeping operations;

753

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

35. Encourages increased efforts by Governments and the United Nations system to enhance accountability
for the implementation of commitments to gender equality and the empowerment of women at the international,
regional, national and local levels, including through improved monitoring and reporting on progress in relation to
policies, strategies, resource allocations and programmes and by achieving gender balance;
36. Reaffirms that Governments bear the primary responsibility for the achievement of gender equality and
the empowerment of women and that international cooperation has an essential role in assisting developing countries
in progressing towards the full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action;
37. Encourages the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the United Nations system the findings of
his reports in order to strengthen follow-up on these findings and to accelerate the implementation of the present
resolution;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to provide an oral report to the Commission on the Status of Women at its
sixty-fourth and sixty-fifth sessions and to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session on the
improvement in the status of women in the United Nations system and on progress made and obstacles encountered
in achieving gender balance, under the item entitled “Advancement of women”;
39. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, under
the item entitled “Advancement of women”, on the follow-up to and progress made in the implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session.
RESOLUTION 74/129
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/393, para. 19)171

74/129. Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decisions 2019/248 of 23 July 2019 and 2020/204 of 15 October
2019 concerning the enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees,
Taking note also of the requests regarding the enlargement of the Executive Committee contained in the note
verbale dated 3 June 2019 from the Permanent Mission of Burkina Faso to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General,172 the note verbale dated 13 May 2019 from the Permanent Mission of Iceland to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,173 the note verbale dated 26 July 2019 from the Permanent Mission of
Mali to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,174 and the note verbale dated 8 November 2018 from
the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,175
1. Decides to increase the number of members of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees from 102 States to 106 States;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to elect the additional members at a meeting of its management
segment in 2020.

_______________
171

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Burkina Faso, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Iceland, Lesotho, Mali, Malta, Morocco and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
172
E/2019/82.
173
E/2019/77.
174
E/2020/3.
175
E/2019/5.

754

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/130
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 179 to 2, with 5 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/393, para. 19)176
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining: Eritrea, Hungary, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libya, Poland

74/130. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office177 and the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the work of its seventieth session178 and the decisions contained therein,
Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees since its establishment by the General Assembly,
Expressing deep concern that the number of people who are forcibly displaced owing to, inter alia, conflict,
persecution and violence, including terrorism, has reached the highest level since the Second World War,
Noting with grave concern that, despite the tremendous generosity of host countries and donors, including
unprecedented levels of humanitarian funding, the gap between needs and humanitarian funding continues to grow,
Recognizing that forced displacement has, inter alia, humanitarian and development implications,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High Commissioner, and commending the staff of
his Office and its partners for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which they discharge their
responsibilities,
Underlining its strong condemnation of all forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel are increasingly
exposed,

_______________
176

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Canada, Central African Republic, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Zambia.
177
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/74/12).
178
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/74/12/Add.1).

755

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the need for consistency with international law and relevant General Assembly resolutions, and
taking into account national policies, priorities and realities,
Recalling its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations and all subsequent General Assembly resolutions on the subject,
including resolution 73/139 of 14 December 2018,
1. Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and its Executive Committee in the course of the year, which is aimed at strengthening the international
protection regime and assisting Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities, and underlines the
importance of durable solutions, the securing of which is one of the principal goals of international protection, and the
significance of the Office’s efforts to promote addressing root causes, within its mandate;
2. Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its seventieth session;178
3. Recognizes the relevance of the Executive Committee’s practice of adopting conclusions, and encourages
the Executive Committee to continue this process;
4. Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees179 and the 1967 Protocol thereto180 as
the foundation of the international refugee protection regime, recognizes the importance of their full and effective
application by States parties and the values they embody, notes with satisfaction that 149 States are now parties to one
or both instruments, encourages States not parties to consider acceding to those instruments and States parties with
reservations to give consideration to withdrawing them, underlines, in particular, the importance of full respect for the
principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that a number of States not parties to the international refugee
instruments have shown a generous approach to hosting refugees;
5. Urges States that are parties to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967
Protocol thereto to respect their obligations in letter and spirit;
6. Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the responsibility of States, whose full and
effective cooperation, action and political resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil
its mandated functions, and strongly emphasizes the importance of active international solidarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing;
7. Welcomes recent accessions to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons181 and the
1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness,182 notes that 94 States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
and 74 States are parties to the 1961 Convention, encourages States that have not done so to give consideration to
acceding to those instruments, notes the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with regard to
identifying stateless persons, preventing and reducing statelessness and protecting stateless persons, and urges the
Office of the High Commissioner to continue to work in this area in accordance with relevant General Assembly
resolutions and Executive Committee conclusions;
8. Re-emphasizes that prevention and reduction of statelessness are primarily the responsibility of States, in
appropriate cooperation with the international community, in this regard welcomes the results achieved in the first
five years of the global campaign to end statelessness within a decade, and notes the high-level segment that took
place at the start of the seventieth plenary session of the Executive Committee, which discussed the issue of
statelessness, encourages all States to consider actions they may take to further the prevention and reduction of
statelessness, and welcomes efforts that have been made by States in this regard;

_______________
179

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
181
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
182
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
180

756

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Also re-emphasizes that protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons are primarily the
responsibility of States, in appropriate cooperation with the international community, aimed at, inter alia, facilitating
voluntary, safe and dignified return, integration or relocation in their own country;
10. Notes the current activities of the Office of the High Commissioner related to protection of and assistance
to internally displaced persons, including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field, emphasizes that
such activities should be carried out with the full consent of the affected States, consistent with relevant General
Assembly resolutions, and should not undermine the refugee mandate of the Office and the institution of asylum, and
encourages the High Commissioner to continue his dialogue with States on the role of his Office in this regard;
11. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to respond adequately to emergencies, in
accordance with its mandate and in cooperation with States, notes the ongoing measures to strengthen its capacity to
respond to emergencies, and encourages the Office to pursue efforts to further strengthen its emergency response
capacity to ensure a more predictable, effective and timely response;
12. Also encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to work in partnership and full cooperation with
relevant national authorities, United Nations offices and agencies, international and intergovernmental organizations,
regional organizations, the private sector and non-governmental organizations to continue to contribute to the
development of humanitarian response capacities at all levels;
13. Welcomes the efforts by the Office of the High Commissioner to ensure a more inclusive, transparent,
predictable and well-coordinated response to refugees as well as internally displaced persons and other persons of
concern, consistent with its mandate, and in this regard takes note of the implementation of the refugee coordination
model;
14. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to work with the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat to enhance the coordination, effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian
response and to contribute, in consultation with States, as appropriate, to making further progress towards common
humanitarian needs assessments, as stated, among other important issues, in General Assembly resolution 73/139 on
the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, and recalls the role
of the Office of the High Commissioner as the leading entity of the clusters for protection, camp coordination and
management and emergency shelter in complex emergencies;
15. Underlines the centrality of international cooperation to the refugee protection regime, recognizes the
burden that large movements of refugees place on major and long-standing refugee-hosting countries and
communities, as well as their national resources, especially in the case of developing countries, and calls for a more
equitable sharing of the burden and responsibility for hosting and supporting the world’s refugees, addressing the
needs of refugees and hosting States, while taking account of existing contributions and the differing capacities and
resources among States;
16. Notes the significant global and regional initiatives, conferences and summits undertaken in 2019 to
strengthen international solidarity with and cooperation for refugees and other persons of concern, and encourages
those who participated to implement their commitments made therein;
17. Recalls the adoption of the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants183 at the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on addressing large movements of refugees and migrants, on 19 September 2016,
and encourages States to implement relevant commitments made therein;
18. Recalls the global compact on refugees as set out in the High Commissioner’s annual report (part II) of
2018,184 affirmed on 17 December 2018,185 and calls upon the international community as a whole, including States
and other relevant stakeholders, to implement the compact in order to achieve its four objectives on an equal footing
based on the principle of burden- and responsibility-sharing, and in accordance with the guiding principles and

_______________
183

Resolution 71/1.
See A/73/12 (part II).
185
See resolution 73/151.
184

757

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

paragraph 4 of the global compact on refugees, through concrete actions, pledges and contributions, including at the
first Global Refugee Forum in December 2019, and requests the High Commissioner to report regularly on the
progress being made;
19. Emphasizes the need for robust, well-functioning, concrete arrangements and potential, complementary
mechanisms for ensuring predictable, equitable, efficient and effective burden- and responsibility-sharing in the
context of the global compact on refugees;
20. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the increased number of countries applying the
comprehensive refugee response framework that is part of the global compact on refugees, including through regional
approaches, where applicable, such as the comprehensive regional protection and solutions framework (MIRPS) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development regional approach;
21. Renews its call upon all States and other relevant stakeholders to provide the necessary support for the
implementation of the global compact on refugees and its comprehensive refugee response framework with a view to
sharing the burden and responsibilities for hosting and supporting refugees, while recognizing contributions already
made, and underscores the critical importance of additional development support over and above regular development
assistance for host countries and countries of origin;
22. Invites the High Commissioner to continue coordinating the effort to measure the impact arising from
hosting, protecting and assisting refugees, with a view to assessing gaps in international cooperation and promoting
burden- and responsibility-sharing that is more equitable, predictable and sustainable, and to report on the results to
Member States in 2020;
23. Calls upon States and other stakeholders that have not yet contributed to burden- and responsibilitysharing to do so, with a view to broadening the support base, in a spirit of international solidarity and cooperation;
24. Welcomes the active engagement of the Office of the High Commissioner in the United Nations
development system reform, including as part of broader efforts towards generating system-wide efficiencies;
25. Notes the transformation process that the High Commissioner has started to establish clearer authorities
and lines of accountability, including through regionalization and decentralization, in order to enable a more timely,
relevant and efficient response to the needs of persons of concern and to ensure the effective and transparent use of
the Office’s resources;
26. Recognizes the value of a geographically diverse and representative workforce, with a view to reflecting
the international character of the Office of the High Commissioner, and calls upon the Office to take effective
measures to ensure balanced geographical representation and gender parity across the regions, in particular from
underrepresented States, among its workforce both at headquarters and in the field, particularly at the senior level,
which will also promote a better understanding of the working environment;
27. Welcomes the commitment and efforts of the Office of the High Commissioner to prevent, mitigate and
respond to sexual exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment, fraud, corruption and other forms of misconduct, and
encourages the Office to sustain action with a view to strengthening and enforcing the zero-tolerance approach within
the Office;
28. Expresses deep concern about the increasing threats to the safety and security of humanitarian aid workers
and convoys and, in particular, the loss of life of humanitarian personnel working in the most difficult and challenging
conditions in order to assist those in need;
29. Emphasizes the need for States to ensure that perpetrators of attacks committed on their territory against
humanitarian personnel and United Nations and associated personnel do not operate with impunity and that the
perpetrators of such acts are promptly brought to justice as provided for by national laws and obligations under
international law;
30. Strongly condemns attacks on refugees, asylum seekers, stateless persons and internally displaced persons
and acts that pose a threat to their personal security and well-being, calls upon all States concerned and, where
applicable, parties involved in an armed conflict to take all measures necessary to respect and ensure respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law, and urges all States to fight racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia,
related intolerance and hate speech;
758

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

31. Deplores the refoulement and unlawful expulsion of refugees and asylum seekers, and calls upon all States
concerned to respect the relevant principles of refugee protection and human rights;
32. Urges States to uphold the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps and settlements, inter
alia, through effective measures to prevent the infiltration of armed elements, to identify and separate any such armed
elements from refugee populations, to settle refugees in secure locations and to afford to the Office of the High
Commissioner and, where appropriate, other humanitarian organizations prompt, unhindered and safe access to
asylum seekers, refugees and other persons of concern;
33. Notes with increasing concern that asylum seekers, refugees and stateless persons are subject to arbitrary
detention in numerous situations and encourages working towards the ending of this practice, welcomes the increasing
use of alternatives to detention, especially in the case of children, and emphasizes the need for States to limit detention
of asylum seekers, refugees and stateless persons to that which is necessary, giving full consideration to possible
alternatives;
34. Notes with grave concern the significant risks to which many refugees and asylum seekers are exposed as
they attempt to reach safety, and encourages international cooperation to ensure adequate response mechanisms,
including life-saving measures, reception, registration and assistance, as well as to ensure that safe and regular access
to asylum for persons in need of international protection remains open and accessible;
35. Expresses grave concern at the large number of asylum seekers who have lost their lives at sea trying to
reach safety, encourages international cooperation to further strengthen search and rescue mechanisms in accordance
with international law, and commends the great life-saving efforts and actions taken by a number of States in this
regard;
36. Emphasizes that the international protection of refugees is a dynamic and action-oriented function that is
at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High Commissioner and that it includes, in cooperation with States and
other partners, the promotion and facilitation of the admission, reception and treatment of refugees in accordance with
internationally agreed standards and the ensuring of durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind the
particular needs of vulnerable groups and paying special attention to those with specific needs, and notes in this context
that the delivery of international protection is a staff-intensive service that requires adequate staff with the appropriate
expertise, especially at the field level;
37. Expresses grave concern about the long-term impact of continued cuts in food rations on the health and
well-being of refugees globally, particularly in Africa and the Middle East, and especially its impact on children,
owing to insufficient funding and increased costs, and calls upon States to ensure sustained support for the Office of
the High Commissioner and the World Food Programme, while looking to provide refugees with alternatives to food
assistance, pending a durable solution;
38. Welcomes the positive steps taken by individual States to open their labour markets to refugees;
39. Affirms the importance of age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in analysing protection needs and
ensuring the participation of refugees and other persons of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner, as
appropriate, in the planning and implementation of programmes of the Office and of State policies, also affirms the
importance of according priority to addressing discrimination, gender inequality and the problem of sexual and
gender-based violence, recognizing the importance of addressing the protection needs of women, children and persons
with disabilities in particular, and underlines the importance of continuing to work on those issues;
40. Encourages States to put in place, if they have not yet done so, appropriate systems and procedures to
ensure that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration with regard to all actions concerning refugee
children;
41. Notes with concern that a large proportion of the world’s out-of-school population lives in conflict-affected
areas, and calls upon States, in their implementation of the global compact on refugees, to lend support to host
countries in providing quality primary and secondary education in safe learning environments for all refugee children,
and to do so within a few months of the initial displacement, as well as the commitments in the Incheon Declaration:
Education 2030 – towards inclusive and equitable quality education and lifelong learning for all to develop more
inclusive, responsive and resilient education systems to meet the needs of children, youth and adults in these contexts,
including internally displaced persons and refugees;

759

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

42. Notes the efforts by the Office of the High Commissioner to improve its humanitarian assistance response,
and stresses the importance of tailored, innovative approaches, including cash-based interventions;
43. Also notes that the lack of civil registration and related documentation makes persons vulnerable to
statelessness and associated protection risks, recognizes that birth registration provides an official record of a child’s
legal identity and is crucial to preventing and reducing statelessness, and welcomes efforts by States to ensure the
birth registration of children;
44. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely humanitarian and non-political character of
the function of the Office of the High Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
durable solutions to refugee situations, and recalls that those solutions include voluntary repatriation and, where
appropriate and feasible, local integration and resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary
repatriation, supported, as necessary, by rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate sustainable
reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
45. Expresses concern about the particular difficulties faced by the millions of refugees in protracted
situations, recognizes with deep concern that the average length of stay has continued to grow, and emphasizes the
need to redouble international efforts and cooperation to find practical and comprehensive approaches to resolving
their plight and to realize durable solutions for them, consistent with international law and relevant General Assembly
resolutions;
46. Recognizes the importance of achieving durable solutions to refugee situations and, in particular, the need
to address in this process the root causes of refugee movements;
47. Encourages further efforts by the Office of the High Commissioner, in cooperation with countries hosting
refugees and countries of origin, including their respective local communities, relevant United Nations agencies,
international and intergovernmental organizations, regional organizations, as appropriate, non‑governmental
organizations and development actors, to actively promote durable solutions, particularly in protracted refugee
situations, with a focus on sustainable, timely, voluntary, safe and dignified return, which encompasses repatriation,
reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities, and encourages States and other relevant actors to continue
to support these efforts through, inter alia, the allocation of funds;
48. Recalls the purely humanitarian and non-political character of the Office of the High Commissioner, calls
upon the international community and the Office to exert further efforts to promote and facilitate, whenever the
prevailing circumstances are deemed appropriate, the safe, dignified and voluntary repatriation of refugees, through
their free and informed choice, in a sustainable manner, to their countries of origin, and encourages the Office and,
where appropriate, other United Nations agencies, to mobilize further resources in this regard;
49. Expresses concern about the current low level of voluntary repatriation, encourages the solution-oriented
approach pursued by the Office of the High Commissioner to support the sustainability of voluntary repatriation and
reintegration, including from the onset of displacement, and in this regard urges the Office to further strengthen
partnerships with national Governments and development actors, as well as international financial institutions;
50. Recognizes, in the context of voluntary repatriation, the importance of resolute efforts in the country of
origin, including rehabilitation and development assistance, to foster the voluntary, safe and dignified return and
sustainable reintegration of refugees and to ensure the restoration of national protection;
51. Acknowledges with appreciation voluntary action taken by several host countries to enable permanent
residence and naturalization for refugees and former refugees;
52. Calls upon States, with the assistance of relevant stakeholders, to create expanded opportunities for
resettlement as a durable solution, broaden the base of countries and actors engaged, and expand the scope and size
and maximize the protection and quality of resettlement as an invaluable tool for burden- and responsibility-sharing,
and acknowledges with appreciation the many countries that continue to offer enhanced resettlement opportunities
and recognizes the need to improve the integration of resettled refugees, calls upon States to ensure inclusive and
non-discriminatory policies in their resettlement programmes, and notes that resettlement is a strategic protection tool
and solution for refugees, recalling in this regard the annual resettlement needs identified by the Office of the High
Commissioner;
760

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

53. Also calls upon States to consider creating, expanding or facilitating access to complementary and
sustainable pathways to protection and solutions for refugees, in cooperation with relevant partners, including the
private sector, where appropriate, including through humanitarian admission or transfer, family reunification, skilled
migration, labour mobility schemes, scholarships and education mobility schemes;
54. Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken by States to strengthen the regional initiatives that
facilitate cooperative policies and approaches on refugees, and encourages States to continue their efforts to address,
in a comprehensive manner, the needs of the people who require international protection in their respective regions,
including the support provided for host communities that receive large numbers of persons who require international
protection;
55. Notes the importance of States and the Office of the High Commissioner discussing and clarifying the role
of the Office in mixed movements in order to better address protection needs of people in the context of mixed
movements, bearing in mind the particular needs of vulnerable groups, especially women, children and persons with
disabilities, including by safeguarding access to asylum for those in need of international protection, and also notes
the readiness of the High Commissioner, consistent with his mandate, to assist States in fulfilling their protection
responsibilities in this regard;
56. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their nationals, calls upon States to facilitate
the return of their nationals who have been determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the
need for the return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full respect for their human
rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons concerned;
57. Calls upon States to process asylum applications by duly identifying those in need of international
protection, in accordance with their applicable international and regional obligations, so as to strengthen the refugee
protection regime;
58. Expresses concern about the challenges associated with climate change and environmental degradation to
the operations of the Office of the High Commissioner and the assistance it provides to vulnerable populations of
concern across the globe, particularly in the least developed countries, and urges the Office to continue to address
such challenges in its work, within its mandate, and in consultation with national authorities and in cooperation with
competent agencies in its operations;
59. Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations, in conjunction with the Office of
the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and
to mobilize resources, including through financial and in-kind assistance, as well as direct aid to host countries, refugee
populations and the communities hosting them, with a view to enhancing their capacity and reducing the heavy burden
borne by countries and communities hosting refugees, in particular those that have received large numbers of refugees
and asylum seekers, and whose generosity is appreciated;
60. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to play its catalytic role in mobilizing
assistance from the international community to address the root causes as well as the economic, environmental,
development, security and social impact of large-scale refugee populations in developing countries, in particular the
least developed countries, and countries with economies in transition, and notes with appreciation those host countries,
donor States, organizations and individuals that contribute to improving the condition of refugees through building
the resilience of refugees and their host communities, while working towards a durable solution;
61. Acknowledges with appreciation the cooperation of the Office of the High Commissioner with
development partners, noting the advantages of complementarity of funding sources to support refugees and host
communities as requested by host Governments, and the importance of doing so in a manner that does not negatively
impact or reduce support for broader development objectives in host countries and, where appropriate, countries of
origin;
62. Expresses concern that the needs required to protect and assist persons of concern to the Office of the High
Commissioner continue to increase and that the gap between global needs and available resources continues to grow,
appreciates the continued and increasing hospitality of host countries and generosity of donors, and therefore calls
upon the Office to continue and enhance efforts to broaden its donor base so as to achieve greater burden- and
responsibility-sharing by reinforcing cooperation with governmental donors, non-governmental donors and the
private sector;

761

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

63. Recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office of the High Commissioner to
continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it through its statute186 and by subsequent General Assembly resolutions
on refugees and other persons of concern, recalls its resolution 58/153 of 22 December 2003 and subsequent
resolutions on the Office of the High Commissioner concerning, inter alia, the implementation of paragraph 20 of the
statute of the Office, and urges Governments and other donors to respond promptly to annual and supplementary
appeals issued by the Office for requirements under its programmes;
64. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his annual activities to the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/131
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/393, para. 19)187

74/131. Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Organization of African Unity Convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in
Africa of 1969188 and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights,189
Reaffirming that the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,190 together with the 1967 Protocol
thereto,191 as complemented by the Organization of African Unity Convention of 1969, remains the foundation of the
international refugee protection regime in Africa,
Welcoming the entry into force on 6 December 2012 and the ongoing process of ratification of the African Union
Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, which marks a significant
step towards strengthening the national and regional normative frameworks for the protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons,
Welcoming the decision of the African Union to declare 2019 as the African Year of Refugees, Returnees and
Internally Displaced Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to Forced Displacement in Africa,
Recognizing the particular vulnerability of women and children, as well as older persons and persons with
disabilities, among refugees and displaced persons, including exposure to discrimination, sexual exploitation and
abuse, physical abuse, violence and exploitation and the recruitment and use of children by parties to armed conflict
in violation of applicable international law, and in this regard acknowledging the importance of preventing, responding
to and addressing sexual and gender-based violence as well as violations and abuses committed against refugee,
returnee and displaced children,
Gravely concerned about the continued rising number of refugees and displaced persons in various parts of the
continent,
Acknowledging the efforts of Member States, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
stakeholders in improving the situation of refugees and their host communities,
Expressing grave concern about funding gaps in the budgets of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the World Food Programme, which are among the most underfunded, in responding

_______________
186

Resolution 428 (V), annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Canada, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African
States), Malta, Norway, Palau, Portugal, Spain, United States of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
188
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1001, No. 14691.
189
Ibid., vol. 1520, No. 26363.
190
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
191
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
187

762

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to various refugee situations in different parts of Africa, which are a major factor leading to the deterioration in living
conditions in many refugee camps in Africa,
Emphasizing the need to develop a holistic approach in addressing large movements of population that takes
into account the underlying causes of displacement,
Recognizing that refugees, internally displaced persons and, in particular, women and children are at an
increased risk of exposure to HIV and AIDS, malaria and other diseases,
Recalling the high-level segment on the theme “Enhancing international cooperation, solidarity, local capacities
and humanitarian action for refugees in Africa” of the sixty-fifth session of the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, held in Geneva from 29 September to
3 October 2014, and the statement adopted on 30 September 2014 by States members of the Executive Committee,192
and expressing deep concern that this particular event has not mobilized the necessary support for refugees and their
hosting countries and communities,
Welcoming progress made in the implementation of the Nairobi Declaration on Durable Solutions for Somali
Refugees and the Reintegration of Returnees in Somalia, welcoming also the nomination of the Special Envoy of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for the Horn of Africa, the adoption of the Djibouti declaration on
refugee education in December 2017 and the Kampala Declaration on Jobs, Livelihoods and Self-Reliance for
Refugees, Returnees and Host Communities in the Intergovernmental Authority on Development Region, adopted on
28 March 2019, and welcoming further the reaffirmation by Member States of the commitment to promote inclusive
policies towards refugees, as noted in the communiqué of the second interministerial stocktaking meeting on the
Nairobi Declaration and Action Plan,
Recalling the Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region, adopted by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in 2006, and its instruments, in particular two of the protocols to
the Pact that are relevant to the protection of displaced persons, namely, the Protocol on the Protection of and
Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons and the Protocol on the Property Rights of Returning Persons,
Acknowledging with appreciation the generosity, hospitality and spirit of solidarity of African States, including
host communities, that, despite their limited resources, continue to host a large number of refugees, owing to
humanitarian crises and protracted refugee situations, and in this regard expressing particular appreciation for the
commitment and efforts of neighbouring countries in the recent humanitarian crises on the continent,
Welcoming efforts by African States that endeavour to facilitate the voluntary repatriation, local integration,
resettlement and rehabilitation of refugees and to promote conditions conducive to the voluntary return and sustainable
reintegration of refugees in their country of origin, acknowledging with appreciation the coordination of humanitarian
assistance by the United Nations as well as the continuing efforts of donors, the United Nations system, including the
Office of the High Commissioner, regional organizations, international agencies, non-governmental organizations and
other partners,
Welcoming also efforts made with regard to durable solutions for addressing the plight of refugees during
emergencies, and recalling that those solutions include voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible,
local integration and resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation, supported, as
necessary, by rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred
solution,
Recognizing that host States have the primary responsibility for the protection of and assistance to refugees on
their territory, recognizing also the need to redouble efforts to develop and implement comprehensive durable solution
strategies, in appropriate cooperation with the international community and with regard to burden- and responsibilitysharing, and recognizing further the efforts of all States in this regard,
Emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility to provide protection and assistance to internally
displaced persons within their jurisdiction, as well as to address the root causes of the displacement problem, in
appropriate cooperation with the international community,

_______________
192

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/69/12/Add.1), annex I.

763

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing concern regarding the decreasing trend in resettlement opportunities, and recognizing the need to
expand resettlement opportunities,
Recognizing the need to encourage increased efforts to facilitate and assist voluntary return and local integration,
Welcoming the ongoing implementation of pledges made by States at the intergovernmental ministerial event
held in 2011 to mark the sixtieth anniversary of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the fiftieth
anniversary of the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness,193
Acknowledging the efforts made by States and regional groups since the launch of the #IBelong campaign to
eradicate statelessness and to afford protection to stateless people, as well as the commitment high-level segment on
statelessness convened by the Office of the High Commissioner, as well as the outcomes of the fifth Conference of
African Ministers Responsible for Civil Registration, both held in October 2019,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,194 supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenges of financing
and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and
solidarity,
Taking note of the World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May 2016, while
recognizing that it did not have an intergovernmentally agreed outcome, and welcoming the commitment of the
African Heads of State and Government, adopted by the African Union, on the theme “One Africa, One Voice, One
Message at the World Humanitarian Summit”,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General195 and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;196
2. Calls upon African States that have not yet signed or ratified the African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa to consider doing so as early as possible in order
to ensure its wider implementation;
3. Notes the need for African States, with the support and collaboration of the international community, to
resolutely address the root causes of all forms of forced displacement in Africa and to foster peace, stability and
prosperity throughout the African continent;
4. Recalls the global compact on refugees as set out in the High Commissioner’s annual report (part II) of
2018,197 affirmed on 17 December 2018,198 and calls upon the international community as a whole, including States
and other relevant stakeholders, to implement the compact in order to achieve its four objectives on an equal footing
based on the principle of burden- and responsibility-sharing, and in accordance with the guiding principles and
paragraph 4 of the global compact on refugees, through concrete actions, pledges and contributions, including at the
first Global Refugee Forum in December 2019, and requests the High Commissioner to report regularly on the
progress being made;
5. Welcomes the important outcomes of the six continental consultative meetings that were organized under
the 2019 theme of the African Union, “Year of refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons: towards durable
solutions to forced displacement in Africa”, with regard to global responsibility-sharing, the role of parliamentarians
in preventing and resolving forced displacement, statelessness, the mixed movements of refugees and migrants, and
the ratification and implementation of the Organization of African Unity Convention governing the specific aspects

_______________
193

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 989, No. 14458.
Resolution 70/1.
195
A/74/322.
196
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/74/12).
197
See A/73/12 (Part II).
198
See resolution 73/151.
194

764

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of refugee problems in Africa of 1969188 and the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention) of 2009;
6. Reaffirms the central role played by the Heads of State and Government of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development towards the successful negotiations in Khartoum and the eventual signing of the final
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan between the Government and the opposition
movements during the thirty-third extraordinary summit, held in Addis Ababa on 12 September 2018, and encourages
ongoing efforts to fully implement this agreement in order to achieve a sustainable and lasting peace;
7. Commends the continued efforts and commitment by the regional Governments towards resolving
conflicts in the region, including the ongoing mediation by the Sudan between the parties to the conflict in the Central
African Republic under the umbrella of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic;
8. Welcomes the outcome of the second regional protection dialogue on the Lake Chad basin, held in Nigeria
in January 2019, as well as the signing of the Abuja Action Statement by the Governments of Cameroon, Chad, the
Niger and Nigeria, with a view to enhancing the response to the urgent needs of refugees, internally displaced persons,
returnees and host communities;
9. Also welcomes the regional dialogue on protection and solutions related to the situation of forced
displacement in the Sahel, held in Bamako on 11 and 12 September 2019, hosted by the Government of Mali, with
the participation of government officials from Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritania and the Niger, and further welcomes
the outcome of the dialogue, namely, the Bamako conclusions and ministerial declaration adopted in Geneva on
9 October 2019;
10. Notes with great concern that, despite all the efforts made so far by the United Nations, the African Union
and others, the situation of refugees and displaced persons in Africa remains precarious and the number of refugees
and internally displaced persons has dramatically increased, and calls upon States and other parties to armed conflict
to observe scrupulously the letter and spirit of, and respect and ensure respect for, international humanitarian law,
bearing in mind that armed conflict is one of the principal causes of forced displacement in Africa;
11. Welcomes decision Assembly/AU/Decl. 8 (XXXII), adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union at its thirty-second ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 10 and 11 February
2019, in which the 2019 theme of the African Union was declared to be the “Year of refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons: towards durable solutions to forced displacement in Africa”;
12. Expresses its appreciation for the leadership shown by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and commends the Office for its ongoing efforts, with the support of the international
community, to assist African States hosting large numbers of refugees, including by providing support to vulnerable
local host communities, and to respond to the protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa;
13. Notes with appreciation the ongoing initiatives taken by the African Union, the Subcommittee on
Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons of its Permanent Representatives Committee and the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, in particular the role of its Special Rapporteur on Refugees, Asylum
Seekers, Migrants and Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, to ensure the protection of and assistance to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons in Africa;
14. Underlines the need to provide an efficient humanitarian response to internally displaced persons, and
recognizes in this regard the importance of the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa;
15. Acknowledges the important contribution of age, gender and diversity mainstreaming in identifying,
through the full participation of women, children, older persons and persons with disabilities, the protection risks faced
by the different members of the refugee communities, in particular the non-discriminatory treatment and protection
of women, children, older persons and persons with disabilities;

765

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

16. Affirms that children, because of their age, social status and physical and mental development, are often
more vulnerable than adults in situations of forced displacement, recognizes that forced displacement, return to postconflict situations, integration into new societies, protracted situations of displacement and statelessness can increase
child protection risks, taking into account the particular vulnerability of displaced children to forcible exposure to the
risks of physical and psychological injury, exploitation and death in connection with armed conflict, as well as the
recruitment and use of children by parties to armed conflict in violation of applicable international law, and
acknowledges that wider environmental factors and individual risk factors, particularly when combined, may generate
different protection needs;
17. Recognizes that no solution to forced displacement can be durable unless it is sustainable, and therefore
encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to support the sustainability of durable solutions, and recalls that
those solutions include voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and resettlement
in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation, supported, as necessary, by rehabilitation and
development assistance to facilitate sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
18. Reaffirms the conclusion on civil registration adopted by the Executive Committee of the Programme of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at its sixty-fourth session, held in Geneva from 30 September
to 4 October 2013,199 and recognizes the importance of early registration and effective registration systems and
censuses as a tool of protection and as a means to the quantification and assessment of needs for the provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance and to implement appropriate durable solutions;
19. Also reaffirms the conclusion on registration of refugees and asylum seekers adopted by the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner at its fifty-second session,200 notes the many forms of
harassment faced by refugees and asylum seekers who remain without any form of documentation attesting to their
status, recalls the responsibility of States to register refugees on their territories and, as appropriate, the responsibility
of the Office of the High Commissioner or mandated international bodies to do so, reiterates in this context the central
role that early and effective registration and documentation can play, guided by protection considerations, in
enhancing protection and supporting efforts to find durable solutions, and calls upon the Office, as appropriate, to help
States to conduct this procedure should they be unable to register refugees on their territory;
20. Appreciates the ongoing efforts undertaken by Member States to implement the conclusion on machinereadable travel documents for refugees and stateless persons adopted by the Executive Committee at its sixty-eighth
session;201
21. Calls upon the international community, including States and the Office of the High Commissioner and
other relevant United Nations organizations, within their respective mandates, to take concrete action to meet the
protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons and to contribute generously to projects
and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight, facilitating durable solutions and supporting vulnerable local host
communities;
22. Acknowledges the efforts made by the African countries applying the comprehensive refugee response
framework, and underscores the importance for the international community of ensuring adequate, timely and
predictable support;
23. Reaffirms the importance of timely and adequate assistance and protection for refugees, returnees and
displaced persons, also reaffirms that assistance and protection are mutually reinforcing and that inadequate material
assistance and food shortages undermine protection, notes the importance of a rights- and community-based approach
in engaging constructively with individual refugees, returnees and displaced persons and their communities so as to
achieve fair and equitable access to food and other forms of material assistance, and expresses concern with regard to
situations in which minimum standards of assistance are not met, including those in which adequate needs
assessments have yet to be undertaken;

_______________
199

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/68/12/Add.1), chap. III, sect. A.
Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/56/12/Add.1), chap. III, sect. B.
201
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/72/12/Add.1), chap. III, sect. A.
200

766

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

24. Also reaffirms that respect by States for their protection responsibilities towards refugees is strengthened
by international solidarity involving all members of the international community and that the refugee protection
regime is enhanced through committed international cooperation in a spirit of solidarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing among all States;
25. Further reaffirms that host States have the primary responsibility to ensure the civilian and humanitarian
character of asylum, calls upon States, in cooperation with international organizations, within their mandates, to take
all measures necessary to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection and, in particular, to ensure that the
civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps is not compromised by the presence or the activities of armed
elements or used for purposes that are incompatible with their civilian character, and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue efforts, in consultation with States and other relevant actors, to ensure the civilian and
humanitarian character of camps;
26. Condemns all acts that pose a threat to the personal security and well-being of refugees and asylum
seekers, such as refoulement, unlawful expulsion and physical attacks, calls upon States of refuge, in cooperation with
international organizations, where appropriate, to take all measures necessary to ensure respect for the principles of
refugee protection, including the humane treatment of asylum seekers, notes with interest that the High Commissioner
has continued to take steps to encourage the development of measures to better ensure the civilian and humanitarian
character of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner to continue those efforts, in consultation with States and
other relevant actors;
27. Deplores the continuing violence and insecurity, which constitute an ongoing threat to the safety and
security of staff members of the Office of the High Commissioner and other humanitarian organizations and an
obstacle to the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Office and the ability of its implementing partners and other
humanitarian personnel to discharge their respective humanitarian functions, urges States, parties to conflict and all
other relevant actors to take all measures necessary to protect activities related to humanitarian assistance, prevent
attacks on and kidnapping of national and international humanitarian workers and ensure the safety and security of
the personnel and property of the Office and that of all humanitarian organizations discharging functions mandated
by the Office, and calls upon States to investigate fully any crime committed against humanitarian personnel and bring
to justice the persons responsible for such crimes;
28. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the African Union, subregional organizations and all
African States, in conjunction with agencies of the United Nations system, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and the international community, to strengthen and revitalize existing partnerships and forge new ones
in support of the protection system for refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons, and encourages
African States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying and enforcing the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel;202
29. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the international community, donors and other entities
concerned to continue and, where appropriate, to intensify their support to African Governments through appropriate
capacity-building activities, including training of relevant officers, disseminating information about refugee
instruments and principles, providing financial, technical, legal and advisory services to accelerate the enactment or
amendment and implementation of legislation relating to refugees, strengthening emergency response and enhancing
capacities for the coordination of humanitarian activities, in particular to those Governments that have received large
numbers of refugees and asylum seekers;
30. Reaffirms the right of return, in accordance with international law, and the principle of voluntary
repatriation, appeals to countries of origin and countries of asylum to create conditions that are conducive to
voluntary repatriation, and recognizes that, while voluntary repatriation remains the pre-eminent solution, local
integration and third-country resettlement, where appropriate and feasible, are also viable options for dealing with
the situation of African refugees who, owing to prevailing circumstances in their respective countries of origin, are
unable to return home;

_______________
202

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

767

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

31. Also reaffirms that voluntary repatriation should not necessarily be conditioned on the accomplishment of
political solutions in the country of origin in order not to impede the exercise of the refugees’ right to return, recognizes
that the voluntary repatriation and reintegration process is normally guided by the conditions in the country of origin,
in particular that voluntary repatriation can be accomplished in conditions of safety and dignity, urges the High
Commissioner to promote sustainable return through the development of durable and lasting solutions, particularly in
protracted refugee situations, and encourages States and other relevant actors to continue to support these efforts
through, inter alia, the allocation of funds;
32. Calls upon the international donor community to provide financial and material assistance which allows
for the implementation of community-based development programmes that benefit both refugees and host
communities, as appropriate, in agreement with host countries and consistent with humanitarian objectives;
33. Recognizes the increase in the number and scale of disasters, including those related to the adverse effects
of climate change, which in certain circumstances may contribute to displacement and additional pressure on host
communities, encourages the United Nations and all relevant actors to strengthen the efforts aimed at addressing the
needs of persons displaced within the context of such disasters, and notes in this regard the importance of sharing best
practices to prevent and prepare for such displacements;
34. Appeals to the international community to respond positively, in the spirit of solidarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing, to the third-country resettlement needs of African refugees, notes in this regard the importance
of using resettlement strategically, as part of situation-specific comprehensive responses to refugee situations, and to
this end encourages States, the Office of the High Commissioner and other relevant partners to make full use of the
Multilateral Framework of Understandings on Resettlement, where appropriate and feasible;
35. Expresses serious concern about the chronic underfunding for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons in Africa;
36. Calls upon the international donor community to provide assistance for material, financial and technical
support intended for the rehabilitation of the environment and infrastructure affected by refugees in countries of
asylum as well as internally displaced persons, where appropriate, and notes with concern the environmental
degradation in these areas;
37. Urges the international community, in line with the principles of international solidarity and burdensharing, to continue to fund generously the refugee programmes of the Office of the High Commissioner and other
relevant humanitarian organizations and, taking into account the substantially increased needs of programmes in
Africa, inter alia, as a result of repatriation possibilities, to ensure that Africa receives a fair and equitable share of the
resources designated for refugees, and recognizes the importance of increased, flexible, predictable and multi-year
funding;
38. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner and interested States to identify protracted refugee
situations which might lend themselves to resolution through the development of specific, multilateral, comprehensive
and practical approaches to resolving such refugee situations, including the improvement of international burden- and
responsibility-sharing and the realization of durable solutions, within a multilateral context, and recalls that those
solutions include voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and resettlement in a
third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation, supported, as necessary, by rehabilitation and development
assistance to facilitate sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
39. Recalls the need to reflect on effective strategies to ensure adequate protection and assistance for internally
displaced persons and to prevent and reduce such displacement, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General
to work with Member States and the United Nations system to explore ways to better address the long-term needs of
internally displaced persons, support communities that host them and improve the lives of the many millions of
internally displaced persons;
40. Expresses grave concern about the plight of internally displaced persons in Africa, welcomes the efforts
of African States in strengthening the regional mechanisms for the protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons, calls upon States to take concrete action to pre-empt internal displacement and to meet the protection and
assistance needs of internally displaced persons, recalls in that regard the Guiding Principles on Internal
768

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Displacement,203 notes the current activities of the Office of the High Commissioner related to the protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons, including in the context of inter-agency arrangements in this field,
emphasizes that such activities should be consistent with relevant General Assembly resolutions and should not
undermine the refugee mandate of the Office and the institution of asylum, and encourages the High Commissioner
to continue his dialogue with States on the role of his Office in this regard;
41. Welcomes the efforts by the High Commissioner to improve coordination with Member States and other
United Nations agencies;
42. Also welcomes the efforts by the High Commissioner towards regionalization and decentralization,
including to ensure that decision-making is closer to the point of delivery, and towards efficiency gains as efforts
continue to advance refugee protection and solutions;
43. Encourages African States, together with development and humanitarian actors, to work closely on multiyear strategies for refugees and internally displaced persons, factoring in the subregional dimension of many forced
displacement crises;
44. Invites the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights of internally displaced
persons to continue the ongoing dialogue with Member States and the intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations concerned, in accordance with the Council’s mandate, and to include information thereon in all reports
to the Council and the General Assembly;
45. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on assistance to refugees, returnees and
displaced persons in Africa to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, taking fully into account, inter alia,
the situation of their host communities, refugee camps and the efforts expended by countries of asylum and those
aimed at bridging funding gaps, under the item entitled “Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions”.
RESOLUTION 74/132
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 120 to 4, with 59 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/394, para. 12)204
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Israel, Myanmar
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan

_______________
203

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Ecuador, Lebanon, Lesotho (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Russian Federation and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of).
204

769

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

74/132. Report of the Human Rights Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/251 of 15 March 2006, by which it established the Human Rights Council, and
65/281 of 17 June 2011 on the review of the Council,
Recalling also its resolutions 62/219 of 22 December 2007, 63/160 of 18 December 2008, 64/143 of
18 December 2009, 65/195 of 21 December 2010, 66/136 of 19 December 2011, 67/151 of 20 December 2012,
68/144 of 18 December 2013, 69/155 of 18 December 2014, 70/136 of 17 December 2015, 71/174 of 19 December
2016, 72/153 of 19 December 2017 and 73/152 of 17 December 2018,
Having considered the recommendations contained in the report of the Human Rights Council,205,206
Takes note of the report of the Human Rights Council,205 including the addendum thereto,206 and its
recommendations.
RESOLUTION 74/133
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/395, para. 31)207

74/133. Rights of the child
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of its resolution 44/25 of 20 November 1989, by which it adopted the Convention
on the Rights of the Child,208 which constitutes the standard in the promotion and protection of the rights of the child,
and welcoming the celebration of the thirtieth anniversary in 2019 of its adoption,
Reaffirming also that States parties to the Convention shall undertake all appropriate measures for the
implementation of the rights recognized therein, while bearing in mind the importance of the Optional Protocols to
the Convention209 and calling for their universal ratification and effective implementation, as well as that of other
human rights instruments,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the rights of the child, the most recent of which was resolution 73/155
of 17 December 2018, and recalling also all other relevant resolutions on this matter, including resolution 73/154 of
17 December 2018 on protecting children from bullying and resolution 73/327 of 25 July 2019, by which it declared
2021 the International Year for the Elimination of Child Labour,

_______________
205

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53).
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1).
207
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
208
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
209
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
206

770

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,210 which proclaims that all human beings are born free
and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without
distinction of any kind,
Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,211 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,211 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,212 the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,213 the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees214 and the 1967 Protocol thereto,215 the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime216 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,217 the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women218 and the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,219 as well as both the Minimum Age Convention,
1973 (No. 138),220 and the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182),221 of the International Labour
Organization,
Reaffirming that the general principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the best interests
of the child, non-discrimination, participation and survival and development, provide the framework for actions
concerning children,
Reaffirming also the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,222 the United Nations Millennium
Declaration223 and the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly on
children, entitled “A world fit for children”,224 recalling the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,225 the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development226 and the outcome
documents of their review conferences, the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and the Programme of
Action of the World Summit for Social Development,227 the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples228 and the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,229 the Declaration on the Right to Development,230 the declaration of the
commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of the special session on

_______________
210

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
212
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
213
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
214
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
215
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
216
Ibid., vol. 2225, No. 39574.
217
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
218
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
219
Ibid., vol. 1465, No. 24841.
220
Ibid., vol. 1015, No. 14862.
221
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
222
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
223
Resolution 55/2.
224
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
225
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
226
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
227
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
228
Resolution 61/295, annex.
229
Resolution 69/2.
230
Resolution 41/128, annex.
211

771

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

children, held in New York from 11 to 13 December 2007,231 the outcome document of the fourth Global Conference
on the Sustained Eradication of Child Labour, held in Buenos Aires from 14 to 16 November 2017, and the outcome
documents of previous Global Conferences,
Underscoring the importance of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development232 in
ensuring the enjoyment of the rights of the child and their well-being,
Taking note of all relevant international instruments on the rights of migrants and refugees, and recalling the
importance of protecting the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all refugee and migrant children, including
those unaccompanied or separated from their caregivers, with the best interests of the child as a primary consideration,
Taking note also of the reports of the Secretary-General on progress made towards achieving the commitments
set out in the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly233 and on the status
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the issues addressed in resolution 73/155,234 as well as the report of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children,235 the report of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,236 the report of the Special Rapporteur of
the Human Rights Council on the sale and sexual exploitation of children, including child prostitution, child
pornography and other child sexual abuse material,237 and the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Council on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,238 whose recommendations should be carefully studied, taking
fully into account the views of Member States,
Acknowledging the submission of the report of the Independent Expert for the United Nations global study on
children deprived of liberty,239
Reaffirming that States have the primary responsibility to respect, promote and protect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the rights of the child, and acknowledging the important role played by national
governmental and local structures for children, including, where they exist, ministries and institutions in charge of
child, family and youth issues and independent ombudspersons for children or other national institutions, including
national human rights institutions, where they exist, for the promotion and protection of the rights of the child,
Recognizing that the family has the primary responsibility for the nurturing and protection of children, in the
best interests of the child, and that children, for the full and harmonious development of their personality, should grow
up in a family environment and in an atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding,
Noting with appreciation the work to promote and protect the rights of the child carried out by all relevant
organs, bodies, entities and organizations of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, by relevant
mandate holders and special procedures of the United Nations and by relevant regional organizations, where
appropriate, and intergovernmental organizations, and recognizing the valuable role of national human rights
institutions and civil society, including non‑governmental organizations,
Recognizing the importance of international, regional and bilateral multi-stakeholder partnerships and initiatives
to advance the effective protection and promotion of the rights of the child and the elimination of all forms of violence
against children, including all violent punishment of children,
Encouraging all States to strengthen efforts to prevent the military use of schools in contravention of
international law and to promote and protect the right to education, to make it accessible, inclusive, quality and

_______________
231

Resolution 62/88.
Resolution 70/1.
233
A/74/240.
234
A/74/231.
235
A/74/259.
236
A/74/249.
237
A/74/162.
238
A/74/189.
239
A/74/136.
232

772

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

non-discriminatory and to facilitate the continuation of education in situations of armed conflict, and encouraging all
States to strengthen efforts to protect children affected by armed conflict, including from the recruitment or use by
armed forces or armed groups and by supporting long-term and sustainable reintegration and rehabilitation for these
children,
Urging all States to respect, protect and promote the right of girls and boys to express themselves freely, and
their right to be heard, to ensure that their views are given due weight, in accordance with their age and maturity, in
all matters affecting them, and to involve children, including children with disabilities, in decision-making processes,
taking into account the evolving capacities of children and the importance of involving children’s organizations and
child-led initiatives,
Deeply concerned that children disproportionately suffer the consequences of discrimination, exclusion and
inequality and that the situation of children in many parts of the world remains negatively affected by the prolonged
effects of poverty and inequality, reaffirming that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions is one of the
greatest global challenges and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, recognizing the impact of
poverty beyond the socioeconomic context and the intrinsic interlinkage between poverty eradication and the
promotion of sustainable development, and in this regard underlining the importance of the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and recognizing that a strong focus is needed on poverty, deprivation and
inequality to prevent and protect children from all forms of violence and to promote the resilience of children, their
families and their communities,
Profoundly concerned that children in many parts of the world remain negatively affected by the adverse
impacts of climate change and environmental degradation, including persistent drought and extreme weather events,
land degradation, sea level rise, coastal erosion and ocean acidification, loss of biodiversity and pollution, which
further threaten health, food security and efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development, and in this
regard calling for the implementation of the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change,240
Recognizing that the risk of maternal mortality is highest for girls under 15 years of age and that complications
in pregnancy and childbirth are a leading cause of death among girls under 15 years of age in many countries,
Recalling the importance of promoting and protecting the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrant
children, regardless of their migration status, with the best interests of the child as a primary consideration; reaffirming
all latest international policy developments and relevant United Nations agreements in this regard; strengthening
international and regional cooperation, within the framework of the United Nations and relevant regional fora,
Expressing serious concern that children with disabilities, particularly girls, face stigmatization, discrimination
or exclusion and are disproportionately subjected to mental and physical violence and sexual abuse in all settings,
Expressing concern that millions of children worldwide continue to grow up deprived of parental care, separated
from their families for many reasons, including but not limited to poverty, discrimination, violence, abuse, neglect,
trafficking in persons, humanitarian emergencies, armed conflict, natural disaster, climate change, migration, death or
illness of a parent and lack of access to education, health and other family-support services,
Recalling its resolution 64/142 of 18 December 2009, which contained the Guidelines for the Alternative Care
of Children in its annex, which serve as a set of orientations to help to inform policy and practice for the protection
and well-being of children deprived of parental care or who are at risk of being so, and acknowledging the progress
that has been achieved since its adoption,
1. Welcomes the commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child,208 the human rights treaty with the largest number of ratifications, and acknowledges that the Convention
and the Optional Protocols thereto209 contain a comprehensive set of international legal standards for the protection
and well-being of children;

_______________
240

See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.

773

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Recognizes that, while progress has been made, many challenges remain, and that, in this regard, both the
high-level commemorative event on 25 September 2019 and the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
20 November 2019 were occasions for States to reflect on implementation gaps and to take additional measures to
ensure that the rights of children are fully realized;
3. Calls upon States parties to increase their efforts for the full implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child;
4. Reaffirms paragraphs 1 to 5 of its resolution 71/177 of 19 December 2016 and that the general principles
of, inter alia, the best interests of the child, non‑discrimination, participation and survival and development provide
the framework for all actions concerning children;
5. Urges States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto as a matter of priority and to implement them effectively, and encourages
further efforts by the Secretary-General in this regard;
6. Urges States parties to withdraw reservations that are incompatible with the object and purpose of the
Convention or the Optional Protocols thereto and to consider reviewing regularly other reservations with a view to
withdrawing them in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;222
7. Notes the work of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and
for Children and Armed Conflict, the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the sale and sexual
exploitation of children, including child prostitution, child pornography and other sexual abuse material, and the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, and, in this regard, their contribution to the progress achieved in the promotion
and protection of the rights of children;
8. Reaffirms section II of its resolution 73/155, on the promotion and protection of the rights of the child and
non-discrimination against children, in which it addressed non-discrimination; registration, family relations, adoption
and alternative care; economic and social well-being of children; eradication of poverty; right to education; right to
the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health; right to food; child labour; prevention and elimination of
and response to violence against children; promoting and protecting the rights of children, including children in
particularly difficult situations; migrant children; children and the administration of justice; prevention and eradication
of the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography; and children affected by armed conflict;
9. Calls upon States to ensure the enjoyment by all children of all their civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights without discrimination of any kind;
10. Notes with concern the large number of children belonging to national, ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, migrant children, refugee or asylum-seeking children, internally displaced children, children of African
descent and children of indigenous origin who are victims of discrimination, including racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, stresses the need to incorporate special measures, in accordance with the principle
of the best interests of the child and respect for his or her views and the child’s gender-specific needs, including
children with disabilities, into education programmes and programmes to combat these practices, and calls upon States
to provide special support and to ensure equal access to services for those children;
11. Recalls every child’s right to be registered immediately after birth, to a name, to acquire a nationality and
to recognition everywhere as a person before the law, as set out in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,211 respectively, reminds States of their obligation to ensure the
registration of the birth of all children without discrimination of any kind, including in the case of late birth registration,
calls upon States to ensure that birth registration procedures are universal, accessible, simple, expeditious and effective
and provided at minimal or no cost, and recognizes the importance of birth registration as a critical means of
preventing statelessness;
12. Urges States to improve the situation of children living in poverty, in particular extreme poverty,
deprived of adequate food and nutrition, water and sanitation facilities, with limited or no access to basic physical
and mental health-care services, shelter, education, participation and protection, taking into account that, while a
severe lack of goods and services hurts every human being, it is particularly threatening and harmful to children,
774

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

leaving them unable to enjoy their rights, to reach their full potential and to participate as full members of society,
and exposed to conditions that lead to increased violence;
13. Calls upon States to scale up scientifically accurate and age-appropriate comprehensive education,
relevant to cultural contexts, that provides adolescent girls and boys and young women and men, in and out of school,
consistent with their evolving capacities, and with appropriate direction and guidance from parents and legal
guardians, with the best interests of the child as their basic concern, with information on sexual and reproductive
health and HIV prevention, gender equality and women’s empowerment, human rights, physical, psychological and
pubertal development and power in relationships between women and men, to enable them to build self-esteem and
foster informed decision-making, communication and risk-reduction skills and to develop respectful relationships, in
full partnership with young people, parents, legal guardians, caregivers, educators and health-care providers, in order
to, inter alia, enable them protect themselves from HIV infection and other risks;
14. Reaffirms the right to education on the basis of equal opportunity and non‑discrimination, and calls
upon States to make primary education compulsory, inclusive and available free to all children, ensuring that all
children have equal access to education of good quality, making secondary education generally available and
accessible to all, in particular through the progressive introduction of free education, bearing in mind that special
measures to ensure equal access, including affirmative action, contribute to achieving equal opportunity and
combating exclusion by eliminating social, economic and gender disparities in education and ensuring school
attendance, in particular for girls, children with disabilities, pregnant adolescent girls, children living in poverty,
indigenous children, children of African descent, persons belonging to ethnic or religious minorities and children
in vulnerable or marginalized situations;
15. Urges States to take immediate and effective measures to secure the prohibition and elimination of the
worst forms of child labour and to end child labour in all its forms, by 2025 at the latest;
16. Strongly condemns all forms of violence against children in all settings, including physical, psychological
and sexual violence, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, child abuse and exploitation, hostagetaking, domestic violence, incest, trafficking in or sale of children and their organs, paedophilia, child prostitution,
child pornography and other child sexual abuse material, child sex tourism, gang and armed violence, sexual
exploitation of children online and offline, bullying, including cyberbullying, and harmful practices, including female
genital mutilation and child, early and forced marriage, and urges States to strengthen efforts to prevent and protect
children from all such violence through a comprehensive, gender-responsive and age-appropriate approach and to
develop an inclusive multifaceted and systematic framework, which is integrated into national planning processes, to
respond effectively to violence against children and to provide for safe and child-sensitive counselling, complaint and
reporting mechanisms and safeguards for the rights of affected children;
17. Calls upon all States to protect the human rights of all children and to ensure, for children belonging to
minorities in vulnerable situations, including migrant children, indigenous children, children of African descent,
internally displaced children and children with disabilities, the enjoyment of all human rights as well as access to
health care, social services, social protection and accessible and inclusive education on an equal basis with others, and
to ensure that all such children, in particular unaccompanied migrant children, internally displaced children and those
who are victims of violence and exploitation, receive special protection and assistance and that the best interests of
the child are a primary consideration in their policies of integration, return and family reunification;
18. Condemns in the strongest terms all violations and abuses committed against children in armed conflict,
and in this regard urges all States and other parties to armed conflict that are engaged, in contravention of applicable
international law, in the recruitment and use of children, in patterns of killing and maiming of children and/or rape
and other sexual violence against children, acknowledging that sexual violence in these situations disproportionately
affects girls, but that boys are also targets, in recurrent attacks on schools and/or hospitals and related personnel and
in patterns of abduction of children, as well as in all other violations and abuses against children, to take time-bound
and effective measures to end and prevent them and to encourage age- and gender-specific support services, including
psychological, social and sexual and reproductive health-care services, and education, social protection and
reintegration programmes;
19. Calls upon all Member States to ensure that children associated or allegedly associated with armed
groups should be treated primarily as victims and in line with the best interests of the child, and to consider
775

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

non-judicial measures as alternatives to prosecution and detention and take measures that focus on rehabilitation
and reintegration in an environment that fosters the health, self-respect and dignity of the child, in accordance with
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law, as well as human rights law, in particular the Convention on
the Rights of the Child;
20. Calls upon States to protect children affected by armed conflict, in particular from violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law, and to ensure that they receive timely, effective humanitarian
assistance, noting the efforts taken to end impunity by ensuring accountability and punishing perpetrators, and calls
upon the international community to hold those responsible for violations accountable, inter alia, through the
International Criminal Court;
Children without parental care
21. Recalls that the Convention on the Rights of the Child recognizes that a child, for the full and harmonious
development of his or her personality and potential, should grow up in a family environment and that a child
temporarily or permanently deprived of his or her family environment, or in whose own best interests cannot be
allowed to remain in that environment, shall be entitled to special protection and assistance provided by the State, and
that States parties shall, in accordance with their national laws and their obligations under the relevant international
instruments in this field, ensure safe and appropriate quality alternative care for such a child;
22. Urges all States parties to intensify their efforts to comply with their obligations under the Convention on
the Rights of the Child to preserve the identity of children, including their nationality, name and family relations, as
recognized by law, to protect children in matters relating to birth registration, family relations and adoption or other
forms of alternative care, recognizing that every effort should be directed to enabling children to remain in or swiftly
return to the care of their parents or, when appropriate, other close family members and that, where alternative care is
necessary, family and community-based care should be promoted over placement in institutions;
23. Recalls that the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities212 requires all States parties to
ensure the full enjoyment by children with disabilities of all human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis
with other children, including with respect to family life;
24. Reaffirms that children shall not be separated from their parents against their will except when competent
authorities, subject to judicial review, determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures, that such
separation is necessary for the best interests of the child and that such determination may be necessary in a particular
case such as one involving abuse or neglect of the child by the parents or one where the parents are living separately
and a decision must be made as to the child’s place of residence;
25. Also reaffirms that a child shall not be deprived of his or her liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily and that the
arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child shall be in conformity with the law and shall be used only as a measure
of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time, and that every child deprived of liberty shall be treated
with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which takes into account the
needs of persons of his or her age;
26. Notes that children without parental care are more likely than their peers to experience human rights
violations, such as exclusion, violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation, and in this regard expresses deep concern on
the potential harm of institutionalization and institutional care to children’s growth and development;
27. Recognizes that many children living without parental care have families, including at least one parent
alive and/or relatives, and in this regard encourages actions to achieve family reunification unless it is not in the best
interests of the child;
28. Stresses that no child should be forced to give up family connections in order to escape poverty, or to
receive care, comprehensive, timely and quality health services or education, or because they are in contact with
the law;
29. Recognizes that poverty, all forms of violence, including mental and physical violence, domestic
violence, structural violence and survival activities may lead children into the criminal justice system, including
776

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the juvenile justice system, and that detention in the criminal justice system is sometimes used as a substitute for
prevention and referral to child protection authorities and services;
30. Also recognizes that financial and material poverty, or conditions directly and uniquely imputable to
such poverty, should never be the only justification for the removal of a child from the care of his or her parents or
primary caregivers and legal guardians, for receiving a child into alternative care or for preventing his or her
reintegration, but should be seen as a signal for the need to provide appropriate support to their family, benefiting
the child directly;
31. Urges States to strengthen child welfare and child protection systems and improve care reform efforts,
which should include increased multisectoral collaboration, inter alia, between child welfare and health, education
and justice sectors, active coordination among all relevant authorities, improved cross-border systems and improved
capacity-building and training programmes for relevant stakeholders;
32. Expresses deep concern regarding the large and growing number of migrant children, particularly those
who are unaccompanied or separated from their parents or primary caregivers, who may be particularly vulnerable
along their journey, and expresses the commitment to protect the human rights of migrant children, given their
vulnerability, in particular unaccompanied migrant children and migrant children with disabilities, to ensure that they
receive appropriate protection and assistance and to provide for their health, education and psychosocial development,
ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in policies on integration, return and family
reunification;
33. Calls upon States to take all measures necessary to prevent and combat illegal adoptions and all adoptions
that are not in the best interests of the child;
34. Urges States to take effective action to provide support to families and to prevent the unnecessary
separation of children from their parents, including by:
(a) Prioritizing investments in child protection services and social services to support quality alternative care,
including families and communities in order to prevent the separation of children from their families, with the best
interests of the child as the primary consideration;
(b) Adopting and enforcing laws and improving the implementation of policies and programmes, budget
allocation and human resources to support children, particularly children with disabilities and children living in
disadvantaged, stigmatized and marginalized families, to address the root causes of unnecessary family separation
and ensure that they are cared for effectively by their own families and communities;
(c) Taking all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect the child from
all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation,
including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the
child;
(d) Recognizing the right of a child who has been placed by competent authorities for the purposes of care,
protection or treatment of his or her physical or mental health to a periodic review of the treatment provided to the
child and all other circumstances relevant to his or her placement;
(e) Ensuring that the removal of children from the care of their family should be seen as a measure of last
resort and should, whenever possible, be temporary and removal decisions should be regularly reviewed and the
child’s return to parental care, once the causes of removal have been resolved or have disappeared, should have the
best interests of the child as a primary consideration and be based on comprehensive assessment;
(f) Developing and strengthening inclusive and responsive family-oriented policies and programmes for
poverty reduction, also designed to promote and strengthen parents’ ability to care for their children, and to confront
family poverty and social exclusion, recognizing the multidimensional aspects of poverty, focusing on inclusive and
quality education and lifelong learning for all, including initiatives to promote involved and positive parenting, health
and well-being for all at all ages, equal access to economic resources, full and productive employment, decent work,
social security, livelihoods and social cohesion and promoting and protecting the human rights of all family members;

777

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(g) Providing gender-sensitive and child-sensitive social protection systems, which are key to ensuring
poverty reduction, including, as appropriate, targeted cash transfers for families in vulnerable situations, as can be the
case of families headed by a single parent, in particular those headed by women or by children, and which are most
effective in reducing poverty when accompanied by other measures, such as providing access to basic services, highquality education, affordable quality childcare services and health-care services;
(h) Supporting and assisting families’ and caregivers’ capacities in regard to child development, including
through comprehensive education and training, and the promotion of involved and positive parenting to enable them
to provide children with care in a safe environment;
(i) Providing early and comprehensive information, services and support to children with disabilities and
their families with a view to preventing concealment, abandonment, neglect, discrimination and segregation and to
ensuring they have equal rights with respect to family life;
(j) Designing and implementing programmes to provide pregnant adolescents and adolescent mothers with
education, including access to quality education, social services and support, to enable them to continue and complete
their education, care for their children and protect them from discrimination, as well as to ensure healthy and safe
pregnancy;
(k) Ensuring that all decisions, initiatives and approaches related to children without parental care are made
on a case-by-case basis, by suitably qualified professionals in a multidisciplinary team, through a judicial,
administrative or other adequate and recognized procedure, with legal safeguards, taking into account the best interests
of the child, and regularly reviewed, with a view to ensuring the child’s safety, security and participation, and grounded
in the best interests of the child concerned, including through incorporating a gender perspective and in conformity
with the principle of non-discrimination;
(l) Putting in place rigorous and systematic judicial and administrative “gatekeeping” procedures that are
designed to ensure that quality alternative care for children is used only after consideration of the best interests of the
child as a primary consideration and that children receive the most appropriate care for their needs, in line with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and taking into
account the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children;241
35. Also urges States to take action to ensure the enjoyment of human rights for all children without parental
care, in accordance with the international human rights framework, including the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, not least the rights to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standards of physical and mental health, education,
to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities appropriate to the age and maturity of the child, and
also to take action to provide a range of alternative care options and to protect all children without parental care,
including by:
(a) Promoting the implementation of international frameworks, and the Guidelines for the Alternative Care
of Children, including through training on those for care staff and others working with children, and strengthening
national legislation, regulations and policies to protect the rights of children without parental care;
(b) Ensuring the availability of a comprehensive range of quality accessible and disability-inclusive
alternative care options, in the best interests of the child and on a case-by-case basis, in line with the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and by taking into account the
Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, for emergency, short-term and long-term care;
(c) Strengthening regulation, including registration, licensing, oversight and accountability mechanisms,
promoting the development and dissemination of evidence-based methods, and monitoring and assessing the quality
of care and status of children and all other circumstances relevant to the placement in all alternative care settings,
including kinship care settings, through a periodic review, to ensure that the rights and the best interests of the child
are upheld and that children are able to report violence, abuse and other concerns;

_______________
241

778

Resolution 64/142, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(d) Improving data collection, information management and reporting systems related to children without
parental care in all settings and situations in order to close existing data gaps and develop global and national baselines,
including by investing in quality, accessible, timely and reliable disaggregated data through capacity-building,
financial support and technical assistance and ensuring that quality data guides policymaking;
(e) Ensuring adequate and systematic training in the rights of the child, including by encouraging States to
take the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children into account for professional groups working with and for
children, including with children without parental care, including specialized judges, law enforcement officials,
lawyers, social workers, medical doctors, care professionals, health professionals and teachers, and coordination
among various governmental bodies involved in the promotion and protection of the rights of the child;
(f) Prioritizing quality alternative care options over institutionalization with the best interests of the child as
the primary consideration, and, where relevant, adopting policies, strategies and comprehensive plans of action in that
respect, including by implementing relevant reforms, developing or reforming legislation, budget allocation,
awareness-raising campaigns, training, and increasing the capacity of all relevant actors;
(g) Progressively replacing institutionalization with quality alternative care, including, inter alia, family and
community-based care and, where relevant, redirecting resources to family and community-based care services, with
adequate training and support for caregivers and robust screening and oversight mechanisms;
(h) Undertaking every effort, where the immediate family is unable to care for a child with disabilities, to
provide quality alternative care within the wider family, and, failing that, within the community in a family setting,
bearing in mind the best interests of the child and taking into account the child’s views and preferences;
(i) Protecting the human rights of children in alternative care and ensuring swift accountability for human
rights violations or abuses, including by protecting children from all forms of violence and abuse, including bullying,
in all care settings;
(j) Recognizing the multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination faced by children in vulnerable
situations such as those living in child-headed households, unaccompanied and separated children, girls, children with
HIV/AIDS and other serious illnesses, children with disabilities, children in detention, children who exceed the age
limit for care systems as established by national legislation, children belonging to national, ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities in vulnerable situations, indigenous children and children of African descent, and the necessity
to increase the support for children in this regard;
(k) Establishing and developing safe, well-publicized, child-friendly, confidential and accessible and effective
mechanisms to enable children in alternative care settings or their representatives to seek counselling, to report
violence against children or other safeguarding concerns and file complaints on incidents of violence and to ensure
that all children have access to such mechanisms;
(l) Ensuring that adolescents and young people leaving alternative care receive appropriate support in
preparing for the transition to independent living, including support in gaining access to employment, education,
training, housing and psychological support, participating in rehabilitation with their families where that is in their
best interest, and gaining access to after-care services consistent with the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of
Children;
(m) Mainstreaming a gender perspective into all alternative care policies and implementing gender-responsive
measures that address the specific needs of girls in alternative care settings;
(n) Ensuring appropriate care and protection of children who work and/or live on the street without any
parental contact or supervision, including through measures to support their sustainable reintegration into their
families and, when family reintegration is not possible or appropriate, through a case-by-case approach to provide
quality alternative care that is appropriate and in the best interests of the child;
(o) Protecting unaccompanied and separated children at all stages of migration through the establishment of
specialized procedures for their identification, referral, care and family reunification, and provide access to healthcare services, including mental health, education, legal assistance and the right to be heard in administrative and
judicial proceedings, including by swiftly appointing a competent and impartial legal guardian, as essential means to
779

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

address their particular vulnerabilities and discrimination, protect them from all forms of violence and provide access
to sustainable solutions that are in their best interests;
(p) Ensuring that child protection authorities are promptly informed and assigned to participate in procedures
for the determination of the best interests of the child once an unaccompanied or separated child crosses an
international border, in accordance with international law, including by training border officials in the rights of the
child and child-sensitive procedures, such as those that prevent family separation and reunite families when family
separation occurs;
(q) Taking measures to ensure that all children who are separated from their parents in accordance with
applicable law and procedures, and where such separation is necessary for the best interests of the child, are promptly
referred to child protection authorities and provided with appropriate and quality alternative care, inter alia, family
and community-based care;
(r) Promoting alternatives to detention for children and taking steps to minimize the risk of violence against
children in detention, as well as encourage and facilitate frequent family visits and regular contact and communication
between children and their family members unless it is in the child’s best interest not to do so, as well as with the
outside world, and to ensure that no child should be subject to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment or that disciplinary sanctions for detained children do not include a prohibition of contact with family
members;
(s) Taking appropriate measures to prevent and respond to the separation of children from their families in
humanitarian contexts, inter alia, by giving priority to family tracing and family reunification and reintegration, and,
where appropriate, to cooperate with international humanitarian and refugee organizations, including by facilitating
their work, in line with their obligations under international law;
(t) Taking appropriate measures to protect children who are victims of trafficking and are deprived of parental
care, as well as enacting and enforcing legislation to prevent and combat the trafficking in and exploitation of children
in care facilities, and supporting children who are victims of human trafficking in returning to their families and in
receiving appropriate mental health and psychological assistance that is victim-centred and trauma-informed, and
taking appropriate measures to prevent and address the harms related to volunteering programmes in orphanages,
including in the context of tourism, which can lead to trafficking and exploitation;
Follow-up
36. Expresses its gratitude for the work of Ms. Marta Santos Pais and welcomes the appointment of Ms. Najat
Maalla M'jid as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, pursuant to its
resolution 62/141 of 18 December 2007, expresses its support for her work, and recognizes the progress achieved
since the establishment of the mandate of the Special Representative, as extended by the General Assembly in its
resolution 73/155, in promoting the prevention and elimination of all forms of violence against children in all regions
and in advancing the implementation of the recommendations of the United Nations study on violence against
children, including through partnerships with regional organizations, as well as advocacy through thematic
consultations, field missions and thematic reports addressing emerging concerns;
37. Urges all States, requests United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and invites regional
organizations and civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to cooperate with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children in promoting the further implementation of the
recommendations of the United Nations study on violence against children and in supporting Member States in the
context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,232 encourages States to provide
support to the Special Representative, including adequate voluntary financial support for the continued, effective and
independent performance of her mandate, and invites organizations, including the private sector, to provide voluntary
contributions for that purpose;
38. Recognizes the work of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, its increased level of work and the progress achieved since the establishment of
the mandate of the Special Representative, welcomes the “Act to protect children affected by conflict” campaign
initiated by the Special Representative, and, bearing in mind its resolution 63/241 of 24 December 2008 and
paragraphs 35 to 37 of its resolution 51/77 of 12 December 1996, as well as paragraph 39 of its resolution
780

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

72/245 of 24 December 2017, recommends that the Secretary-General extend the mandate of the Special
Representative for an additional period of one year, until 2021;
39. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and relevant United
Nations entities, within their respective mandates, to consider the issue of children deprived of liberty, bearing in mind
the report on children deprived of liberty;
40. Notes with appreciation the steps taken regarding Security Council resolutions 1539 (2004) of 22 April
2004, 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005, 1882 (2009) of 4 August 2009, 1998 (2011) of 12 July 2011, 2068 (2012) of
19 September 2012, 2225 (2015) of 18 June 2015 and 2427 (2018) of 9 July 2018 and the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to implement the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict in accordance with
those resolutions, with the participation of and in cooperation with national Governments and relevant United Nations
and civil society actors, including at the country level, requests the Secretary-General to ensure that information
collected and communicated by the monitoring and reporting mechanism is accurate, objective and verifiable, and in
this regard encourages the work and the deployment of United Nations child protection advisers in peacekeeping
operations and political and peacebuilding missions;
41. Decides:
(a) To request the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a
comprehensive report on the rights of the child, containing information on the implementation of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, bearing in mind the thirtieth anniversary of its adoption, in 2019;
(b) To request the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a
comprehensive report on the rights of the child containing information on the status of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and on the issues addressed in the present resolution, with a focus on the rights of the child and the
Sustainable Development Goals;
(c) To request the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
continue to submit reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on the activities undertaken in the
fulfilment of her mandate, including information on her field visits and on the progress achieved and the challenges
remaining on the children and armed conflict agenda;
(d) To request the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, in
carrying out her mandate for the protection of children in situations of armed conflict, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to continue to engage proactively with relevant United
Nations bodies and agencies, Member States, regional and subregional organizations and non-State armed groups,
including by negotiating action plans, securing commitments, advocating for appropriate response mechanisms and
ensuring attention and follow-up to the conclusions and recommendations of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, and reaffirms the important role that the Special Representative can play in contributing
to conflict prevention;
(e) To request the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children to continue
to submit annual reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on the activities undertaken in
fulfilment of her mandate, consistent with paragraphs 58 and 59 of its resolution 62/141, including information on
her field visits and on the progress achieved and the challenges remaining on the violence against children agenda;
(f) To request the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the sale and sexual exploitation of
children, including child prostitution, child pornography and other child sexual abuse material, to continue to submit
reports to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council on the activities undertaken in fulfilment of her
mandate, including information on her field visits and on the progress achieved and the challenges remaining in the
prevention and eradication of the sale of children, child prostitution, child pornography and other child sexual abuse
material and the sexual exploitation and abuse of children;
(g) To invite the Chair of the Committee on the Rights of the Child to present an oral report on the work of
the Committee and to engage in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth and seventysixth sessions as a way to enhance communication between the Assembly and the Committee;
(h) To continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-sixth session under the item entitled “Promotion
and protection of the rights of children”.
781

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/134
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/395, para. 31)242

74/134. The girl child
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 72/154 of 19 December 2017 and all relevant resolutions on the girl child, and
recalling its resolution 66/170 of 19 December 2011 on the International Day of the Girl Child and the agreed
conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women, in particular those relevant to the girl child,
Recalling all human rights and other instruments relevant to the rights of the child, in particular the girl child,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child,243 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,244 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,245 the Optional
Protocols thereto246 and the Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of
Marriages,247
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development,248 and reaffirming also other internationally agreed development goals and commitments relevant
to the girl child,
Noting the adoption of the Southern African Development Community Model Law on Eradicating Child
Marriage and Protecting Children Already in Marriage,
Reaffirming all relevant outcomes of major United Nations summits and conferences relevant to the girl child,
including the outcome document of the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly on children, entitled
“A world fit for children”,249 the Beijing Declaration250 and Platform for Action,251 the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”,252 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,253
the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development,254 the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS adopted at the twenty-sixth special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS, entitled “Global Crisis
– Global Action”,255 and the political declarations on HIV and AIDS adopted by the high-level meetings of the General

_______________
242

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Armenia, Bahamas, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Gambia, Ghana, Haiti,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paraguay, Philippines, Senegal, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, United Republic of Tanzania (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the
Southern African Development Community) and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
243
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
244
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
245
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
246
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531, and resolution 66/138, annex; United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2131, No. 20378; and ibid.,
vol. 2518, No. 44910.
247
Ibid., vol. 521, No. 7525.
248
Resolution 69/313, annex.
249
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
250
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
251
Ibid., annex II.
252
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
253
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
254
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
255
Resolution S-26/2, annex.

782

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Assembly held in 2006,256 2011257 and 2016,258 and reiterating that their full and effective implementation is essential
to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recognizing that chronic poverty remains one of the biggest obstacles to meeting the needs and promoting and
protecting the rights of the child, including the girl child, and that girls living in poverty are more likely to be married
as children or to work to ease family hardships, often ending education and suffering other harmful consequences,
further limiting their opportunities and leaving them entrenched in poverty, and recognizing also that the eradication
of poverty must remain a high priority for the international community,
Recognizing also that urgent national and international action is required to eliminate poverty, including extreme
poverty, and noting that the impacts of global financial and economic crises, volatile energy and food prices and
continuing food insecurity as a result of various factors are felt directly by households,
Recognizing further that social protection, education, adequate health care, nutrition, full access to clean water,
including safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, skills development and combating discrimination and violence
against girls, among other things, are all necessary for the empowerment of the girl child, and recalling the importance
of mainstreaming a gender perspective across the United Nations system in relation to the girl child,
Underscoring that women and girls may be disproportionately affected by and are more vulnerable to the
adverse impacts of climate change and are already experiencing an increase in such impacts, including persistent
drought and extreme weather events, land degradation, sea level rise, coastal erosion and ocean acidification, which
further threaten health, food security and efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development, and noting
in this regard the implementation of the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change,259
Deeply concerned that the extreme situation of girls in child-headed households persists and that poverty, armed
conflict, climate-related and other hazards, natural disasters, disease outbreaks, including the impact of the HIV and
AIDS epidemic, and other humanitarian emergencies increase the incidence of child-headed households, forcing
children, particularly girls, to undertake adult responsibilities, including being the main household earner and caring
for younger siblings, and making them particularly vulnerable to poverty, violence, including physical and sexual
violence, and discrimination, which seriously inhibits their development and violates and/or impairs the full
enjoyment of their human rights,
Deeply concerned also about the continuing lack of recent information and statistics, disaggregated by sex, on
the status of children in child-headed households, which are necessary to inform appropriate policy responses by
Member States and the United Nations system,
Recognizing that women and girls are more vulnerable to HIV infection and that they bear a disproportionate
burden of the impact of the HIV and AIDS epidemic, including the unpaid care and domestic work related to the care
of and support for those living with and affected by HIV and AIDS, and that this negatively affects girls by depriving
them of their childhood and diminishing their opportunities to receive an education, often resulting in their having to
head households and increasing their vulnerability to the worst forms of child labour and to sexual exploitation,
Noting with concern that millions of girls are engaged in child labour and its worst forms, including those who
have been victims of trafficking in persons and affected by armed conflict and humanitarian emergencies, that children
without nationality or birth registration are vulnerable to trafficking in persons and child labour and that many children
face the double burden of having to combine economic activities with unpaid care and domestic work, which deprive
them of their childhood and hamper the full enjoyment of their right to education and opportunities for decent
employment in the future, and noting in this regard the need to recognize, reduce and redistribute girls’
disproportionate share of unpaid care and domestic work,

_______________
256

Resolution 60/262, annex.
Resolution 65/277, annex.
258
Resolution 70/266, annex.
259
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
257

783

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing that girl children are often at greater risk of being exposed to and encountering various forms of
discrimination and violence and forced labour, which, among other things, would hinder efforts towards the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly those Goals that are relevant to gender equality and
the empowerment of girls, and reaffirming the need to achieve gender equality to ensure a just and equitable world
for girls, including by partnering with men and boys, as an important strategy for advancing the rights of the girl child,
Recognizing also that the empowerment of and investment in girls, which is critical for economic growth, and
the achievement of all Sustainable Development Goals, including the eradication of poverty and extreme poverty, as
well as the meaningful participation of girls in decisions that affect them, are key in breaking the cycle of
discrimination and violence and in promoting and protecting the full and effective enjoyment of their human rights,
and recognizing further that empowering girls requires their active participation in decision-making processes and as
agents of change in their own lives and communities, including through girls’ organizations with the active support
and engagement of their parents, legal guardians, families and care providers, boys and men, as well as the wider
community,
Deeply concerned about all forms of violence against children, including those that disproportionately affect
girls, such as child prostitution, child pornography and other child sexual abuse material, rape, sexual abuse, domestic
violence, trafficking in persons and the use of information and communications technology and social media to
perpetrate violence against women and girls, and, in addition, about the corresponding impunity and lack of
accountability, and that violence against women and girls is underrecognized and underreported, particularly at the
community level, which reflects discriminatory norms that reinforce the lower status of girls in society,
Deeply concerned also about discrimination against the girl child and the violation of the rights of the girl child,
including girls with disabilities, bearing in mind their specific needs, which often result in less access for girls to
education, and to quality education, nutrition, including food allocation, and physical and mental health-care services,
in girls enjoying fewer of the rights, opportunities and benefits of childhood and adolescence than boys, and in leaving
them more vulnerable than boys to the consequences of unprotected and premature sexual relations and often being
subjected to various forms of cultural, social, sexual and economic exploitation and violence, abuse, rape, incest,
honour-related crimes and harmful practices, such as female infanticide, child, early and forced marriage, prenatal sex
selection and female genital mutilation,
Deeply concerned further that, despite its widespread practice, child, early and forced marriage is still
underreported, recognizing that this requires further attention and that child, early and forced marriage exposes the
girl child to greater risk of HIV and sexually transmitted infections, often leads to premature sexual relations, early
pregnancy and early childbearing and increases the risk of obstetric fistula and high levels of maternal mortality and
morbidity, and furthermore entails complications during pregnancy and childbirth, which often lead to disability,
stillbirth and maternal death, particularly for young women and girls, which require appropriate prenatal and postnatal
health-care services for mothers, including in the area of skilled birth attendance and emergency obstetric care, and
noting with concern that this reduces girls’ opportunities to complete their education, gain comprehensive knowledge,
participate in the community or develop employable skills and is likely to have a long-term adverse impact on their
physical and mental health and well-being, their employment opportunities and their quality of life and that of their
children, and violates and/or impairs the full enjoyment of their human rights,
Deeply concerned that young women and girls are particularly affected by water scarcity, unsafe water,
inadequate sanitation and poor hygiene, and concerned furthermore that girls, especially those in rural areas, are often
excluded from full and continued participation in school owing to their burden of water procurement at home, a lack
of water and sanitation facilities in schools and inadequate access to effective feminine hygiene products,
Emphasizing that increased and equal access to quality education for young people, especially adolescent girls,
including in the areas of sexual and reproductive health, as well as health care, hygiene and sanitation, dramatically
lowers their vulnerability to preventable diseases and infections, in particular HIV and other sexually transmitted
infections,
Recognizing that, despite gains in providing access to education, girls are still more likely than boys to remain
excluded from education, and recognizing also that among gendered barriers to girls’ equal enjoyment of their right
to education are child marriage, early pregnancy, gender-based violence, the disproportionate share of unpaid care and
domestic work and gender stereotypes and negative social norms that lead families and communities to place less
value on girls’ education when compared with that of boys,

784

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Deeply concerned that school-related violence against girls, including sexual violence and harassment on the
way to and from and at school, such as violence perpetrated by teachers, continues to deter girls’ education and, in
many cases, the transition to and completion of secondary education, and that these risks may influence parents’
decision to allow girls to attend school,
Noting that school meals and take-home rations attract and retain children in schools, and recognizing that
school feeding is an incentive to enhance enrolment and reduce absenteeism, especially for girls,
Stressing the need for the international community, the relevant United Nations entities, the specialized agencies,
civil society and international financial institutions to continue to actively support, through the allocation of enhanced
financial resources and technical assistance, targeted comprehensive programmes that address the needs and priorities
of the girl child,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;260

2. Stresses the need for the full and urgent implementation of the rights of the child, including the girl child,
as provided under international human rights instruments, and urges States to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,243 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,244 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities245 and the Optional
Protocols thereto246 as a matter of priority;
3. Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138),261
and the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182),262 of the International Labour Organization to
consider doing so;
4. Urges States to develop or review relevant programmes that promote gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls and equal access to basic social services, such as education, nutrition, water and
sanitation, birth registration, health care, vaccinations and protection from diseases representing the major causes of
mortality, including non-communicable diseases, and to mainstream a gender perspective into all development
policies and programmes, including those specific to the girl child;
5. Also urges States to improve the situation of girl children living in poverty, including extreme poverty,
deprived of adequate food and nutrition, water and sanitation facilities, with limited or no access to basic physical and
mental health-care services, shelter, education, participation and protection;
6. Recognizes that ensuring equal access to inclusive, equitable and quality education requires transformations
in education systems, mainstreaming a gender perspective into educational programmes, infrastructure development
and teacher training, and in this regard calls upon States to invest in quality education, including through adequate
financing, to ensure that all girls, including those who are marginalized or in vulnerable situations, enjoy their right to
education;
7. Notes the role of the United Nations in supporting national Governments in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development263 and in realizing girls’ right to education;
8. Calls upon States to recognize the right to education on the basis of equal opportunity and
non-discrimination by making primary education compulsory and available free to all children, including those living
in rural areas, and ensuring that all children have equal access to quality education, as well as making secondary and
tertiary education available and accessible to all, in particular through the progressive introduction of free secondary
education, bearing in mind that special measures to ensure equal access, including affirmative action, ensuring
physical access to education, including by increasing financial incentives to families, improving the safety of girls on
the way to and from school, ensuring that all schools are accessible, safe, secure and free from violence and providing

_______________
260

A/74/246.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14862.
262
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
263
Resolution 70/1.
261

785

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

hygienic, separate and adequate sanitation facilities, contribute to achieving equal opportunity and combating
exclusion and ensuring school attendance, in particular for girls and children from low-income families and children
who become heads of households;
9. Calls upon all States to place enhanced emphasis on quality education for the girl child, including
catch-up and literacy education for those who did not receive formal education, special initiatives for keeping girls in
school through post-primary education, including those who are already married or pregnant, to promote access to
skills and entrepreneurship training for young women and to tackle gender stereotypes, in order to ensure that young
women entering the labour market have opportunities to obtain full and productive employment and decent work, and
equal pay for equal work or work of equal value;
10. Encourages States to adopt, as appropriate, and implement inclusive policies and programmes to promote
girls’ education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, including information and communications
technology, throughout their education, by, inter alia, expanding the scope of education and training opportunities
ranging from basic digital fluency to advanced technical skills, recognizing that girls who develop such skills may
enjoy more academic success and higher-paying jobs in the future, and recognizing also that girls and women have
an equally important role to play in these arenas as men and boys;
11. Calls upon States, with the support, where appropriate, of international organizations, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, to develop policies and programmes, giving priority to formal, informal and
non-formal education programmes, including scientifically accurate and age-appropriate comprehensive education,
relevant to cultural contexts, that provides adolescent girls and boys and young women and men in and out of school,
consistent with their evolving capacities, and with appropriate direction and guidance from parents and legal
guardians, with information on sexual and reproductive health and HIV prevention, gender equality and women’s
empowerment, human rights, physical, psychological and pubertal development and power in relationships between
women and men, to enable them to build self-esteem and informed decision-making, communication and risk
reduction skills and to develop respectful relationships, in full partnership with young persons, parents, legal
guardians, caregivers, educators and health-care providers, in order to, inter alia, enable them to protect themselves
from HIV infection and other risks;
12. Urges States to acknowledge the different needs of girls and boys during their childhood and adolescence
and, as appropriate, to make adapted investments that are consistent with and responsive to their changing needs, in
particular ensuring that girls have access to clean water, including safe drinking water, sanitation, hygiene and
feminine hygiene products as well as private toilet facilities, including feminine hygiene product disposal facilities, in
educational institutions and other public spaces, which will improve their health and access to education and increase
their safety;
13. Calls upon States, in collaboration with civil society and other relevant actors, to promote educational and
health practices in order to foster a culture in which menstruation is recognized as healthy and natural, and girls are
not stigmatized on this basis, recognizing that girls’ attendance at school can be affected by negative perceptions of
menstruation and lack of means to maintain safe personal hygiene, such as water, sanitation and hygiene facilities in
schools that meet the needs of girls;
14. Urges States to strengthen efforts to urgently eradicate all forms of discrimination against women and
girls, and calls upon all States, the United Nations system and civil society to take measures to address the obstacles
that continue to affect the achievement of the goals set forth in the Beijing Platform for Action,251 as contained in
paragraph 33 of the further actions and initiatives,264 including reviewing remaining laws that discriminate against
women and girls in order to modify or abolish them and, where appropriate, strengthening national mechanisms to
implement inclusive policies and programmes for the girl child and, in some cases, to enhance coordination among
responsible institutions for the realization of the human rights of girls, including access to justice, fighting impunity
for perpetrators of and ensuring the availability of appropriate penalties for crimes of sexual violence committed
against the girl child, and to mobilize all necessary resources and support in order to achieve those goals;
15. Also urges States to ensure that the applicable conventions of the International Labour Organization
relating to the employment of girls and boys are respected and effectively enforced and that girls who are employed

_______________
264

786

Resolution S-23/3, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

have equal access to decent work and equal pay for equal work or work of equal value, are protected from economic
and sexual exploitation, discrimination, sexual harassment, violence and abuse in the workplace, are aware of their
rights and have access to formal and non-formal education, skills development and technical and vocational training,
and urges States to develop gender-sensitive measures, including national action plans, where appropriate, to eliminate
child labour and its worst forms, commercial sexual exploitation, hazardous forms of child labour, trafficking and
slavery-like practices, including forced and bonded labour, and the recruitment or use of children in armed conflict in
violation of applicable international law, and to recognize that girls, including in child-headed households, face greater
risks in this regard;
16. Calls upon States, with the support of relevant stakeholders, including the private sector, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations, as appropriate, to take all measures necessary
to ensure the right of girls to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health, including sexual and
reproductive health, and to develop sustainable health systems, strengthen existing ones to ensure primary health care
with an integrated HIV response and make them more accessible to adolescent girls;
17. Also calls upon States to strengthen the capacity of national health systems, and in this regard invites the
international community to assist national efforts, upon request, including by allocating adequate resources in order
to provide the essential services needed to prevent obstetric fistula and to treat those cases that occur by providing the
continuum of services, including family planning, prenatal and postnatal care, skilled birth attendance, emergency
obstetric care and post-partum care, to adolescent girls, including those living in poverty and in underserved rural
areas where obstetric fistula is most common;
18. Urges all States to enact, uphold and strictly enforce laws and policies aimed at preventing and ending
child, early and forced marriage and protecting those at risk and to ensure that marriage is entered into only with the
informed, free and full consent of the intending spouses, to enact and strictly enforce laws concerning the minimum
legal age of consent and the minimum age for marriage, to raise the minimum age for marriage, engage all relevant
stakeholders, including girls, where necessary, and ensure that these laws are well known, to further develop and
implement holistic, comprehensive and coordinated policies, plans of action and programmes and to support already
married girls and adolescents and ensure the provision of viable alternatives and institutional support, especially
educational opportunities for girls, to ensure the survival, protection, development and advancement of the girl child
in order to promote and protect the full enjoyment of her human rights and to ensure equal opportunities for girls,
including by making such plans an integral part of her total development process;
19. Urges States to enact, as appropriate, and implement legislation to protect, support and empower children
living in child-headed households, in particular those headed by girls, that includes provisions to ensure their physical,
psychosocial and economic well-being, including protecting their property and inheritance rights, access to healthcare services, nutrition, clean water, including safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, shelter, education,
scholarships and training opportunities, and that their family is protected and assisted in staying together, including
through, where appropriate, social protection programmes and economic support;
20. Also urges States to forge partnerships with relevant stakeholders, particularly by working with and
involving communities in developing programmes and mechanisms designed to ensure the safety and protection as
well as the empowerment of children, especially girls, and to ensure that they receive the support that they need from
their communities;
21. Calls upon States to strengthen research, data collection and analysis on the girl child, disaggregated by
household structure, sex, age, disability status, economic situation, marital status and geographical location, and
improve gender statistics on time use, unpaid care work and water and sanitation in order to provide a better
understanding of the situations of girls, especially of the multiple forms of discrimination that they face, and to inform
the development of necessary policies and programme responses, which should take a holistic, age-appropriate
approach to addressing the full range of the forms of discrimination that girls may face, in order to protect their rights
effectively;
22. Urges States to take all measures necessary to ensure the full enjoyment by girls with disabilities of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, on an equal basis with other children, and to adopt, implement and
strengthen appropriate policies and programmes designed to address their needs;

787

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

23. Urges all States to enact and enforce legislation to protect girls from all forms of violence, discrimination,
exploitation and harmful practices in all settings, including female infanticide and prenatal sex selection, female
genital mutilation, rape, domestic violence, incest, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, child prostitution, child
pornography and other child sexual abuse material, trafficking and forced migration, forced labour and child, early
and forced marriage, and to develop age-appropriate, safe, confidential and disability-accessible programmes and
medical, social and psychological support services to assist girls who are subjected to violence and discrimination;
24. Urges States to strengthen and intensify their efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of school-related
violence against girls and to hold perpetrators accountable;
25. Calls upon all States to enact and enforce the necessary legislative or other measures, in cooperation with
relevant stakeholders, including the private sector and the media, to prevent the distribution over the Internet of child
pornography and other child sexual abuse material, ensuring that adequate mechanisms are in place to enable the
reporting and removal of such material and that its creators, distributors and collectors are prosecuted, as appropriate;
26. Urges States to formulate or review, as needed, comprehensive, multidisciplinary and coordinated national
plans, programmes or strategies to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against women and girls, which
should have dedicated resources, be widely disseminated and provide targets and timetables for implementation, as
well as effective domestic enforcement procedures through the establishment of monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms involving all parties concerned, including consultations with women’s organizations, giving attention to
the recommendations relating to the girl child of the Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council on violence
against women, its causes and consequences, and on trafficking in persons, especially women and children, and of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children;
27. Also urges States to ensure that children who are capable of forming their own views have the right to
express those views freely in all matters affecting them, with the views of the child being given due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child, to ensure that this right is fully and equally enjoyed by the girl
child, to meaningfully involve girl children, including those with special needs, as well as girls with disabilities, and
their representative organizations in decision-making processes, as appropriate, and to include them as full partners in
identifying their own needs and in developing, planning, implementing and assessing policies and programmes to
meet those needs, with a view to ensuring their full and effective participation;
28. Recognizes that a considerable number of girl children are particularly vulnerable, including orphans,
children living on the street, internally displaced and refugee children, children affected by trafficking and sexual and
economic exploitation, children living with or affected by HIV and AIDS, and children who are incarcerated or who
live without parental support, and therefore urges States, with the support of the international community, where
relevant, to take appropriate measures to address the needs of such children by implementing national, subregional
and regional policies and strategies to build and strengthen governmental, community and family capacities to provide
a supportive environment for such children, including by providing appropriate counselling and psychosocial support,
and ensuring their safety, enrolment in school and access to shelter, good nutrition and health and social services on
an equal basis with other children;
29. Urges all States and the international community to respect, promote and protect the rights of the girl child,
taking into account the particular vulnerabilities of the girl child in pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict situations
and in climate-related and other hazards and natural disasters, as well as in other humanitarian emergencies, all of
which may result in the creation of child-headed households, and urges States to take special measures for the
protection of girls in all phases of humanitarian emergencies, from relief to recovery, and in particular to ensure that
children have access to basic services, which include clean water, including safe drinking water, sanitation and
hygiene, to protect them from sexually transmitted infections, including HIV infection, gender-based violence,
including rape, sexual abuse and sexual exploitation, torture, abduction and trafficking, including forced labour,
paying special attention to refugee and displaced girls, and to take into account their special needs in disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation assistance and reintegration processes;
30. Deplores all acts of sexual exploitation and abuse of and trafficking in women and children, including in
humanitarian crises and by humanitarian workers and peacekeepers, including military, police and civilian personnel
involved in United Nations operations, takes note of the voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse introduced by the Secretary-General, welcomes the efforts undertaken by United Nations
agencies and peacekeeping operations to implement a zero-tolerance policy in this regard, and requests the Secretary788

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

General or the Member States from which those humanitarian workers originate and personnel-contributing countries
to continue to take all appropriate action necessary to combat such abuses and exploitation by such personnel,
including through the full implementation without delay of those measures adopted in the relevant General Assembly
resolutions based on recommendations of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;265
31. Calls upon Member States to devise, enforce and strengthen effective child- and youth-sensitive measures
to combat, eliminate and prosecute all forms of trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual and economic
exploitation, as part of a comprehensive anti-trafficking strategy within wider efforts to eliminate all forms of violence
against women and girls, including by taking effective measures against the criminalization of girls who are victims
of exploitation and ensuring that girls who have been exploited receive access to the necessary psychosocial support,
and in this regard urges Member States, the United Nations and other international, regional and subregional
organizations, as well as civil society, including non‑governmental organizations, the private sector and the media, to
fully and effectively implement the relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons266 and the activities outlined therein, with full respect for the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime;267
32. Reaffirms that everyone has a right to a nationality as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,268 and in this regard calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider adopting and implementing
nationality legislation consistent with their applicable obligations under international law and to facilitate the
acquisition of nationality by and ensure free or low-cost birth registration for children born on their territories or their
nationals abroad who would otherwise be stateless;
33. Calls upon Governments, civil society, including the media, and non‑governmental organizations to
promote human rights education and full respect for and the enjoyment of the human rights of the girl child, inter alia,
through the translation, production and dissemination of age-appropriate and gender-sensitive information material
on those rights to all sectors of society, in particular to children;
34. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to ensure that all organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, individually and collectively,
in particular the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN‑Women), the World Health Organization, the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, the United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International Labour Organization, take into account the rights and the particular
needs of the girl child in country programmes of cooperation in accordance with national priorities, including through
the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework;
35. Requests all human rights treaty bodies and the human rights mechanisms of the Human Rights Council,
including the special procedures, to adopt regularly and systematically a gender perspective in the implementation of
their mandates and to include in their reports information on the qualitative analysis of violations of the human rights
of women and girls, and encourages the strengthening of cooperation and coordination in that regard;
36. Requests States to ensure that, in all policies and programmes designed to provide comprehensive HIV
and AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support, particular attention and support are given to the girl child at risk,
living with or affected by HIV, including pregnant girls and young and adolescent mothers and girls with disabilities,
and child heads of households, with a view to achieving Sustainable Development Goal 3, in particular the target of
ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030;
37. Invites States to promote initiatives aimed at reducing the prices of antiretroviral drugs, especially secondline drugs, available to the girl child, including bilateral and private sector initiatives as well as initiatives on a

_______________
265

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1).
Resolution 64/293.
267
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
268
Resolution 217 A (III).
266

789

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

voluntary basis taken by groups of States, including those based on innovative financing mechanisms that contribute
to the mobilization of resources for social development, including those that aim to provide further access to drugs at
affordable prices to developing countries on a sustainable and predictable basis, and in this regard takes note of the
International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID;
38. Calls upon all States to integrate food and nutritional support with the goal that children, especially girl
children, have access at all times to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food
requirements for an active and healthy life;
39. Calls upon States to ensure that social protection programmes, including HIV-sensitive programmes, are
provided to orphans and other vulnerable children, with particular attention to addressing the needs and vulnerabilities
of girl children, ensuring school attendance and protecting their rights;
40. Urges States and the international community to increase resources at all levels, particularly in the
education and health sectors, so as to enable young people, especially girls, to gain the knowledge, attitudes and life
skills that they need to fulfil their social, economic and other potential and overcome their challenges, including the
prevention of HIV infection and early pregnancy, and to enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health, including sexual and reproductive health;
41. Urges States, the international community, relevant United Nations entities, civil society and international
financial institutions to continue to actively support, through the allocation of financial resources and technical
assistance, efforts to address girls’ right and access to education;
42. Strongly calls upon States and the international community to create an environment in which the wellbeing of the girl child is ensured, inter alia, by cooperating, supporting and participating in global efforts towards the
full and timely realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for Development248 and of all other relevant internationally agreed
development goals, in particular for the eradication of poverty at the global, regional and country levels, recognizing
that strengthened availability and effective allocation of resources are required at all levels in this regard, and
reaffirming that investment in children, particularly girls, and the realization of their rights are among the most
effective ways to eradicate poverty;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session on
the implementation of the present resolution, including a status analysis on improvements in the social, economic and
political investments made by Member States towards empowering girls in rural areas, using information provided
by Member States, the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations,
with a view to assessing the impact of the present resolution on the well-being of the girl child.
RESOLUTION 74/135
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/396, para. 10)269

74/135. Rights of indigenous peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the Economic and
Social Council relating to the rights of indigenous peoples, reaffirming its resolutions 65/198 of 21 December 2010,
66/142 of 19 December 2011, 67/153 of 20 December 2012, 68/149 of 18 December 2013, 69/2 of 22 September
2014, 69/159 of 18 December 2014, 70/232 of 23 December 2015, 71/178 of 19 December 2016, 71/321 of
8 September 2017, 72/155 of 19 December 2017, 72/247 of 24 December 2017 and 73/156 of 17 December 2018,

_______________
269

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Republic of Moldova, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).

790

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 27/13 of 25 September 2014,270 30/4 of 1 October 2015,271 33/12
and 33/13 of 29 September 2016,272 36/14 of 28 September 2017,273 39/13 of 28 September 2018274 and 42/19 of
26 September 2019,275
Reaffirming the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,276 which addresses the
individual and collective rights of indigenous peoples and has positively influenced the drafting of several
constitutions and statutes at the national and local levels and contributed to the progressive development of
international and national legal frameworks and policies,
Recalling the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held in New York on 22 and 23 September 2014,277 in which Heads of
State and Government, ministers and representatives of Member States reiterated the important and continuing role
of the United Nations in promoting and protecting the rights of indigenous peoples, recalling the inclusive preparatory
process for the high-level plenary meeting, including the comprehensive engagement of the representatives of
indigenous peoples, and welcoming and reaffirming the commitments, measures and efforts undertaken by States, the
United Nations system, indigenous peoples and other actors in its implementation,
Encouraging the active engagement of indigenous peoples in the implementation of the outcome document of
the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,
including at the regional and global levels,
Recalling the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,278 and stressing the need to ensure that no one is left
behind and to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first, including indigenous peoples, who should participate in,
contribute to and benefit without discrimination from the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, and encouraging
Member States to give due consideration to all the rights of indigenous peoples while implementing the 2030 Agenda,
Stressing the importance of promoting and pursuing the objectives of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples also through international cooperation to support national and regional efforts to achieve
the ends of the Declaration, including the right to maintain and strengthen the distinct political, legal, economic, social
and cultural institutions of indigenous peoples and the right to participate fully, if they so choose, in the political,
economic, social and cultural life of the State,
Bearing in mind the policy instruments in the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration279 for
Member States to draw on, including to respond to the needs of migrants who face situations of vulnerability, including
indigenous peoples,
Taking note with appreciation of the agreed conclusions of the sixty-third session of the Commission on the
Status of Women,280 in which Governments at all levels and as appropriate, with the relevant entities of the United
Nations system and international and regional organizations, within their respective mandates and bearing in mind
national priorities, were urged to promote and protect the rights of indigenous women and girls living in rural and
remote areas by addressing the multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and barriers they face, including
violence, ensuring access to quality and inclusive education, health care, public services, economic resources,
including land and natural resources, and women’s access to decent work, and promoting their meaningful

_______________
270

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1,
A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2), chap. IV, sect. A.
271
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), chap. III.
272
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1 and A/71/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
273
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
274
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. II.
275
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
276
Resolution 61/295, annex.
277
Resolution 69/2.
278
Resolution 70/1.
279
Resolution 73/195, annex.
280
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2019, Supplement No. 7 (E/2019/27), chap. I, sect. A.

791

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

participation in the economy and in decision-making processes at all levels and in all areas, while respecting and
protecting their traditional and ancestral knowledge, and while recognizing their cultural, social, economic, political
and environmental contributions, including to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and noting the importance
for indigenous women and girls of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
Recognizing that violence against indigenous women and girls has a negative impact on their enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms and constitutes a major impediment to indigenous women’s full, equal,
meaningful and effective participation in society, the economy and political decision-making, and in this regard
recalling Human Rights Council resolution 32/19 of 1 July 2016, entitled “Accelerating efforts to eliminate violence
against women: preventing and responding to violence against women and girls, including indigenous women and
girls”,281 which brings closer attention to this issue, and recognizing also the negative effects of multiple and
intersecting forms of discrimination,
Stressing the importance of the empowerment and capacity-building of indigenous women and youth, including
their full and effective participation in decision-making processes in matters that affect them directly, including
policies, programmes and resources, where relevant, that target the well-being of indigenous women, children and
youth, in particular in the areas of health, education, employment and the transmission of traditional knowledge,
languages, spiritual and religious traditions and practices, and the importance of taking measures to promote
awareness and understanding of their rights,
Deeply concerned at the vast number of endangered languages, in particular indigenous languages, and stressing
that, despite the continuing efforts, there is an urgent need to preserve, promote and revitalize endangered languages,
in particular indigenous languages,
Recognizing the importance of the International Year of Indigenous Languages to draw attention to the critical
loss of indigenous languages and the urgent need to preserve, revitalize and promote indigenous languages, including
as an educational medium, and to take further urgent steps to that end at the national and international levels,
Welcoming the initiatives and events undertaken by Governments, indigenous peoples and the United Nations
system related to the celebration of the 2019 International Year of Indigenous Languages, including the lead role of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the steering committee for organizing the
International Year, in consultation and cooperation with Member States, the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues,
the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of indigenous peoples and the Expert Mechanism
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, as well as indigenous peoples and a range of different stakeholders,
Recognizing that indigenous peoples can contribute to a range of issues on the international agenda,
Recognizing also the importance to indigenous peoples of revitalizing, using, developing and transmitting to
future generations their histories, languages, oral traditions, philosophies, writing systems and literature,
Expressing concern that, in many cases, suicide rates in indigenous peoples’ communities, in particular among
indigenous youth and children, are significantly higher than in the general population,
Bearing in mind the importance of promoting respect for the rights of indigenous children, in particular
eliminating the worst forms of child labour, in accordance with international law, including relevant human rights law
and international labour law obligations,
Recognizing the importance of access to justice in the promotion and protection of the rights of indigenous
peoples and individuals and the need to examine and take steps to remove obstacles to justice, especially for
indigenous women, indigenous children, youth, older persons and indigenous persons with disabilities,
Reiterating the responsibility of transnational corporations and other business enterprises to respect all human
rights, while recognizing the specific challenges that may be faced by indigenous peoples, and all applicable laws and
international principles and to operate transparently and in a socially and environmentally responsible manner, and

_______________
281

792

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. V, sect. A.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

emphasizing the need to refrain from negatively affecting the well-being of indigenous peoples and to take further
action towards corporate responsibility and accountability, including the prevention, mitigation and remediation of
human rights abuses, in line with the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United
Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,282
Recalling the report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples,283 noting with concern
her findings with regard to attacks against indigenous human rights defenders and her reflections on available
prevention and protection measures, and calling upon all States to consider the recommendations contained in the
report,
Taking note with appreciation of the decision of the Human Rights Council, in its resolution 39/13, that the
theme of the annual half-day panel discussion on the rights of indigenous peoples to be held during the forty-fifth
session of the Council will be on the protection of indigenous human rights defenders,
Noting the half-day intersessional interactive dialogue, held on 15 July 2019, on ways to enhance the
participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions in meetings of the Human Rights Council on
issues affecting them, and awaiting the summary report to be prepared thereon by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for submission to the Council prior to its forty-fourth session,
Recognizing the importance of free, prior and informed consent, as outlined in the United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
Recognizing also the value and the diversity of the cultures and the form of social organization of indigenous
peoples and their holistic traditional knowledge of their lands, natural resources and environment,
Noting that the General Assembly, in the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly
known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, affirmed and recognized the importance of indigenous
peoples’ religious and cultural sites and of providing access to and repatriation of their ceremonial objects and human
remains, as contemplated in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,
Commending Member States, cultural and educational institutions, museums, indigenous peoples and civil
society for their efforts to combat the illicit trade in indigenous peoples’ cultural property, and welcoming all initiatives,
whether by States, institutions or private persons, for the voluntary return of indigenous peoples’ cultural property that
has been illicitly appropriated,
Recognizing that agricultural practices that include indigenous knowledge can contribute to overcoming the
combined challenges of climate change, food security, biodiversity conservation and combating desertification and
land degradation,
Recognizing also the importance of facilitating indigenous peoples’ livelihoods, which may be achieved by,
inter alia, the recognition of their traditions, adequate public policies and economic empowerment,
Recognizing further that the economic empowerment, inclusion and development of indigenous peoples,
including through the establishment of indigenous-owned businesses, can enable them to improve their social,
cultural, civil and political engagement, achieve greater economic independence and build more sustainable and
resilient communities, and noting the contribution of indigenous peoples to the broader economy,
Concerned about the extreme disadvantages that indigenous peoples have typically faced across a range of
social and economic indicators and about the impediments to their full enjoyment of their rights,
Stressing the need to pay particular attention to the rights and special needs of indigenous women, children,
youth, older persons and persons with disabilities, as set out in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, including in the process of protecting and promoting their equal access to justice,

_______________
282
283

A/HRC/17/31, annex.
A/HRC/39/17.

793

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling its resolution 72/128 of 7 December 2017, entitled “Observer status for the Fund for the Development
of the Indigenous Peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean in the General Assembly”, in which it decided to invite
the Fund to participate in the sessions and the work of the Assembly in the capacity of observer,
1. Notes with appreciation the work of the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of
indigenous peoples, takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur,284 and encourages all Governments to respond
favourably to her requests for visits;
2. Urges Governments and the United Nations system, in consultation and cooperation with indigenous
peoples through their representatives and institutions, to continue to implement, when appropriate, measures at the
national level, including legislative, policy and administrative measures, to achieve the ends of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples276 and to promote awareness of it among all sectors of society,
including members of legislatures, the judiciary and the civil service, as well as among indigenous peoples, and invites
international and regional organizations, within their respective mandates, national human rights institutions, where
they exist, civil society, including non-governmental organizations, and other relevant actors to contribute to those
efforts;
3. Underscores the importance of implementing the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples,277 and reiterates the commitment of
Member States to cooperating with indigenous peoples, through their own representative institutions, to develop and
implement national action plans, strategies or other measures, where relevant, to achieve the ends of the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples;
4. Encourages the leadership of the Secretary-General and of the Under-Secretary-General for Economic
and Social Affairs, as the responsible senior official of the United Nations system, in overseeing the implementation
of and following up on the system-wide action plan to ensure a coherent approach to achieving the ends of the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, raising awareness of the rights of indigenous peoples and
increasing the coherence of the activities of the system in this regard, and encourages the funds, programmes and
specialized agencies of the United Nations system, resident coordinators and United Nations country teams to
implement this plan in full alignment with national development needs and priorities;
5. Encourages Member States, resident coordinators and United Nations country teams, within their
mandates and in coordination with the Governments concerned, to involve indigenous peoples regarding issues
affecting them in the preparation of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Frameworks and
country programme action plans;
6. Encourages Member States to work towards achieving the ends of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples;
7. Encourages those States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
Convention, 1989 (No. 169), of the International Labour Organization285 to consider doing so;
8. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to continue to
contribute to the trust fund on indigenous issues, the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Peoples and the
United Nations Indigenous Peoples’ Partnership, invites indigenous organizations and private institutions and
individuals to do likewise, and notes the importance of accessibility, accountability, transparency and balanced
geographical distribution in the management of these funds;
9. Decides to expand the mandate of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Peoples so that it
can assist representatives of indigenous peoples’ organizations and communities in participating in the Forum on
Business and Human Rights and in the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on

_______________
284
285

794

A/HRC/42/37.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1650, No. 28383.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Climate Change, including in its preparatory sessions and in the meetings of the Local Communities and Indigenous
Peoples Platform Facilitative Working Group organized by the secretariat of the Convention, in accordance with their
respective rules and regulations;
10. Also decides to continue to observe the International Day of Indigenous Peoples every year on 9 August,
and requests the Secretary-General to support the observance of the Day from within existing resources;
11. Encourages Member States and all organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and other
international and regional organizations, the private sector and academia, as well as civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, to observe the International Day of Indigenous Peoples in an appropriate manner,
including through educational and public awareness-raising activities;
12. Encourages Member States to give due consideration to all the rights of indigenous peoples in fulfilling
the commitments undertaken in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development278 and in the elaboration of national
action plans and programmes as well as international and regional programmes, applying the pledge to leave no one
behind and to endeavour to reach the furthest behind first;
13. Encourages States to continue to consider including in their voluntary national reviews for the high-level
political forum on sustainable development and their national and global reports information related to indigenous
peoples on the progress made and challenges in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, bearing in mind
paragraphs 78 and 79 of the 2030 Agenda, and also encourages States to compile disaggregated data to measure
progress and to ensure that no one is left behind;
14. Also encourages States, according to their relevant national context and characteristics, to collect and
disseminate data disaggregated by ethnicity, income, gender, age, race, migratory status, disability, geographic
location or other factors, as appropriate, in order to monitor and improve the impact of development policies, strategies
and programmes aimed at improving the well-being of indigenous peoples and individuals, to combat and eliminate
violence and multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination against them and to support work towards the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda;
15. Encourages the Secretary-General to include information pertinent to indigenous peoples in the
forthcoming annual reports on progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals;
16. Stresses the need to strengthen the commitment of States and the entities of the United Nations system to
mainstream the promotion and protection of the rights of indigenous peoples into development policies and
programmes at the national, regional and international levels, and encourages them to give due consideration to the
rights of indigenous peoples in achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda;
17. Also stresses the need for indigenous peoples of all regions to contribute to the high-level political forum
on sustainable development, and encourages States to engage with indigenous peoples at the local, national and
regional levels in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals;
18. Invites the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues and the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples to give due consideration, within their mandates,
to the rights of indigenous peoples as related to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda;
19. Encourages the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues to continue to provide inputs on indigenous issues
to the high-level political forum on sustainable development for consideration in its thematic reviews;
20. Underlines the need to intensify efforts, in cooperation with indigenous peoples, to prevent and eliminate
all forms of violence and discrimination against indigenous women, children, youth, older persons and persons with
disabilities and to support measures that will ensure their empowerment and full and effective participation in
decision-making processes at all levels and in all areas and eliminate structural and legal barriers to their full, equal
and effective participation in political, economic, social and cultural life;
21. Reaffirms the importance of effective accountability with regard to violence against indigenous women
and girls, including sexual violence, domestic violence, abuse, exploitation and sexual harassment, as well as with
regard to taking adequate measures to prevent and eliminate such violence;
795

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

22. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to consider indigenous women’s issues, among others, at
its sixty-fourth session, to be held in 2020, to coincide with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, and encourages Governments to cooperate with indigenous peoples at all levels on
preparations for the 2020 review so as to benefit from their experience and expertise;
23. Encourages States to consider including in their reports related to indigenous peoples and women
information on the progress made and challenges in the implementation of Commission on the Status of Women
resolutions 49/7 of 11 March 2005, entitled “Indigenous women: beyond the ten-year review of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action”,286 and 56/4 of 9 March 2012, entitled “Indigenous women: key actors in
poverty and hunger eradication”;287
24. Proclaims the period 2022–2032 as the International Decade of Indigenous Languages, to draw attention
to the critical loss of indigenous languages and the urgent need to preserve, revitalize and promote indigenous
languages and to take urgent steps at the national and international levels, and invites the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to serve as the lead agency for the International Decade, in collaboration with the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, and other relevant agencies, within existing resources;
25. Invites Member States to consider establishing national mechanisms with adequate funding for the
successful implementation of the International Decade of Indigenous Languages in partnership with indigenous
peoples, and invites indigenous peoples, as custodians of their own languages, to initiate and develop appropriate
measures for the implementation of the International Decade;
26. Welcomes the high-level event on the conclusion of the 2019 International Year of Indigenous Languages,
held at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 17 December 2019, and encourages the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to submit a report on all activities relating to the International Year
to the General Assembly in 2020;
27. Encourages Governments to redouble efforts to eliminate the worst forms of child labour, both in
legislation and in practice, in the context of respect for the human rights of indigenous children, including through
international cooperation, as appropriate;
28. Also encourages Governments to promote actions to eliminate malnutrition of indigenous children,
especially for those living in rural areas, by providing them with adequate food, water and sanitation, education, health
and basic services, and to implement actions for poverty eradication;
29. Encourages transnational corporations and other business enterprises to respect human rights, including
the rights of indigenous children, and to eliminate the worst forms of child labour from their operations;
30. Underscores the need to ensure equal protection of the law and equality before the courts for indigenous
women and girls at all levels and, to that end, the importance of providing systematic gender-sensitivity training, as
appropriate, for police and security forces, prosecutors, judges and lawyers, integrating gender considerations into
security sector reform initiatives, developing protocols and guidelines and enhancing or putting in place appropriate
accountability measures for adjudicators;
31. Encourages States and entities of the United Nations system to strengthen international cooperation,
including to address the disadvantages faced by indigenous peoples, and to increase technical cooperation and
financial assistance in this regard;
32. Encourages the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and other relevant United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in accordance with their mandates, to carry out research and evidencegathering on the prevalence and root causes of suicide among indigenous youth and children and good practices on
its prevention and to consider developing, as appropriate, strategies or policies, consistent with national priorities, in
cooperation with Member States, to tackle it, including through consultation with indigenous peoples, in particular
indigenous youth organizations;

_______________
286

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2005/27 and E/2005/27/Corr.1),
chap. I, sect. D.
287
Ibid., 2012, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2012/27 and E/2012/27/Corr.1), chap. I, sect. D.

796

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

33. Takes note with appreciation of the work led by the Presidents of the General Assembly at its seventieth,
seventy-first, seventy-second and seventy-third sessions in conducting consultations with Member States, indigenous
peoples’ representatives and institutions from all regions of the world and existing mechanisms of the United Nations
on possible measures to enable the participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions in meetings of
relevant United Nations bodies on issues affecting them, which led to the adoption of Assembly resolution 71/321
and its decision to continue its consideration of possible further measures necessary to enhance the participation of
indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions in relevant United Nations meetings on issues affecting them at
its seventy-fifth session, taking into account the achievements in that regard of other bodies and organizations
throughout the United Nations system, to be preceded by consultations with indigenous peoples’ representatives and
institutions from all regions of the world as an input to the intergovernmental process;
34. Invites Member States to support the Secretary-General in his efforts or activities to hold regional
consultations, including through the regional commissions, as appropriate, before the nineteenth session of the
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, including by hosting such consultations, in accordance with resolution
71/321;
35. Encourages the United Nations system to strengthen cooperation with the Fund for the Development of
the Indigenous Peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean, considering its fundamental role in the Latin American
and Caribbean region in processes of dialogue and consultation between States and indigenous peoples;
36. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Rights of indigenous peoples”, and to maintain in the provisional agenda the sub-item entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples”.
RESOLUTION 74/136
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 133 to 2, with 52 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/397, para. 20)288
* In favour: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Ukraine, United States of America
Abstaining: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tonga, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

_______________
288

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.

797

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

74/136. Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,289 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,290 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination291 and other relevant human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16 of 16 April 2004292 and 2005/5
of 14 April 2005293 and relevant Human Rights Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of 28 March
2008,294 18/15 of 29 September 2011295 and 21/33 of 28 September 2012,296 as well as General Assembly resolutions
60/143 of 16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006, 62/142 of 18 December 2007, 63/162 of 18 December
2008, 64/147 of 18 December 2009, 65/199 of 21 December 2010, 66/143 of 19 December 2011, 67/154 of
20 December 2012, 68/150 of 18 December 2013, 69/160 of 18 December 2014, 70/139 of 17 December 2015,
71/179 of 19 December 2016, 72/156 of 19 December 2017 and 73/157 of 17 December 2018 on this issue, and its
resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220 of 22 December 2007, 63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of
18 December 2009, 65/240 of 24 December 2010, 66/144 of 19 December 2011, 67/155 of 20 December 2012,
68/151 of 18 December 2013, 69/162 of 18 December 2014, 70/140 of 17 December 2015, 71/181 of 19 December
2016, 72/157 of 19 December 2017 and 73/262 of 22 December 2018, entitled “A global call for concrete action for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”,
Acknowledging other important initiatives of the General Assembly aimed at raising awareness about the
suffering of victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and forms of discrimination,
including in the historical perspective, in particular regarding commemoration of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade,
Recalling the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal, and the Judgment of the Tribunal which recognized as
criminal, inter alia, the SS organization and its integral parts, including the Waffen SS, through its officially accepted
members implicated in or with knowledge of the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity connected
with the Second World War, as well as other relevant provisions of the Charter and the Judgment,
Mindful of the horrors of the Second World War, and stressing in this regard that the victory over Nazism in the
Second World War contributed to the establishment of the conditions for the creation of the United Nations, designed
to prevent future wars and save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Noting that neo-Nazism is more than just the glorification of a past movement, it is a contemporary phenomenon
with strong vested interests in racial inequality and an investment in gaining broad support for its false claims of racial
superiority,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September
2001,297 in particular paragraph 2 of the Declaration and paragraphs 84 to 86 of the Programme of Action, as

_______________
289

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
291
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
292
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
293
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23, E/2005/23/Corr.1 and E/2005/23/Corr.2), chap. II, sect. A.
294
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
295
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and A/66/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
296
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
297
See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF.189/12/Corr.1, chap. I.
290

798

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

well as the relevant provisions of the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference of 24 April 2009,298
in particular paragraphs 11, 13 and 54,
Alarmed at the spread in many parts of the world of various extremist political parties, movements, ideologies
and groups of a racist or xenophobic character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and at the fact that this trend
has resulted in the implementation of discriminatory measures and policies at the local or national level,
Noting with concern that, even where neo-Nazis do not formally participate in government, the presence therein
of extreme right-wing ideologues can have the effect of injecting into governance and political discourse the same
ideologies that make neo-Nazism so dangerous,
Alarmed at music lyrics and video games that advocate racial hatred and incite discrimination, hostility or
violence,
Concerned by the use of Internet platforms by groups that advocate hatred to plan, fundraise and circulate
information about public events aimed at promoting racism, xenophobia and related intolerance, such as rallies,
demonstrations and acts of violence,
Seriously concerned that neo-Nazi groups, as well as other groups and individuals espousing ideologies of
hatred, have increasingly targeted susceptible individuals, mainly children and youth, by means of specifically tailored
websites with the aim of their indoctrination and recruitment,
Deeply concerned by all recent manifestations of violence and terrorism incited by violent nationalism, racism,
antisemitism, Islamophobia, Christianophobia, Afrophobia, xenophobia and related intolerance, including during
sports events,
Recognizing with deep concern the continued alarming increase in instances of discrimination, intolerance and
extremist violence motivated by antisemitism, Islamophobia and Christianophobia and prejudices against persons of
other ethnic origins, religions and beliefs,
Underlining the existing lack of uniformity of norms regarding protected speech and expression and prohibited
racial discrimination and advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination,
hostility or violence,
Noting with concern, in this regard, that the variation in national standards prohibiting hate speech may provide
safe havens for neo-Nazi, violent nationalist, xenophobic or racist speech owing to the fact that many neo-Nazi and
relevant extremist groups of a racist or xenophobic character operate transnationally by relying on Internet service
providers or social media platforms,
Stressing that the purpose of addressing hate speech is not to limit or prohibit freedom of speech, but to prevent
incitement to discrimination, hostility and violence, which shall be prohibited by law,
Expressing its concern about the use of digital technologies by neo-Nazis and other extremist and hate groups
to disseminate their ideology, while recognizing that digital technologies are of great importance for the enjoyment of
human rights and for combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Recalling that, in 2020, the international community will celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of victory over
Nazism in the Second World War, and looking forward in this regard to the initiative to hold a special solemn meeting
at the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration297 and of the outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference,298 in which States condemned the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-Fascism and
violent nationalist ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena could never be
justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
2. Recalls the provisions of the Durban Declaration and of the outcome document of the Durban Review
Conference, in which States recognized the positive contribution that the exercise of the right to freedom of

_______________
298

See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.

799

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

expression, in particular by the media and new technologies, including the Internet, and full respect for the freedom
to seek, receive and impart information can make to the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared in accordance with
the request contained in its resolution 73/157;299
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and her Office
for their efforts to fight racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including the maintenance
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of the database on practical means to
combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
5. Expresses deep concern about the glorification, in any form, of the Nazi movement, neo-Nazism and
former members of the Waffen SS organization, including by erecting monuments and memorials, holding public
demonstrations in the name of the glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo-Nazism, declaring or
attempting to declare such members and those who fought against the anti-Hitler coalition, collaborated with the Nazi
movement and committed war crimes and crimes against humanity participants in national liberation movements, as
well as by the renaming of streets glorifying them;
6. Calls for the universal ratification and effective implementation of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,291 and urges those States parties that have not yet done so to
consider making the declaration under its article 14, thus providing the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination with the competence to receive and consider communications from individuals or groups of
individuals within their jurisdiction claiming to be victims of a violation by a State party of any of the rights set forth
in the Convention;
7. Urges States to eliminate all forms of racial discrimination by all appropriate means, including legislation
as required by circumstances, while ensuring that the definition of racial discrimination set out therein complies with
article 1 of the Convention;
8. Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the Convention to give serious
consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a matter of priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur;
9. Acknowledges that discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity or religion in all its forms and
manifestations, including neo-Nazism, Islamophobia, Christianophobia and antisemitism, is a threat to societies as a
whole, not just to those racial and ethnic groups that are their direct target;
10. Recalls that any legislative or constitutional measures adopted with a view to countering extremist political
parties, movements, ideologies and groups of a racist or xenophobic character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead
groups and similar extremist ideological movements, should be in conformity with the relevant international human
rights obligations, in particular articles 4 and 5 of the Convention and articles 19 to 22 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights;290
11. Encourages States parties to the Convention to take appropriate measures to ensure that their legislation
is in accordance with their obligations under the Convention, including those under article 4;
12. Emphasizes once more the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that “any commemorative
celebration of the Nazi regime, its allies and related organizations, whether official or unofficial, should be prohibited”
by States,300 also emphasizes that such manifestations do injustice to the memory of the countless victims of the
Second World War and negatively influence children and young people, and stresses in this regard that it is important
that States take measures, in accordance with international human rights law, to counteract any celebration of the Nazi
SS organization and all its integral parts, including the Waffen SS, and that failure by States to effectively address such
practices is incompatible with the obligations of States Members of the United Nations under its Charter;

_______________
299
300

800

A/74/253.
A/72/291, para. 79.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

13. Expresses deep concern about increased frequency of attempts and activities intended to desecrate or
demolish monuments erected in remembrance of those who fought against Nazism during the Second World War,
as well as to unlawfully exhume or remove the remains of such persons, and in this regard urges States to fully
comply with their relevant obligations, inter alia, under article 34 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949;301
14. Firmly condemns incidents that glorify and promote Nazism, such as acts involving pro-Nazi graffiti and
paintings, including on monuments dedicated to victims of the Second World War;
15. Expresses alarm over the use by neo-Nazi groups, as well as other groups and individuals espousing
ideologies of hatred, of information technologies, the Internet and social media to recruit new members, especially
targeting children and young people, and to disseminate and to amplify their hate-filled messages, while recognizing
that the Internet can also be used to counteract these groups and their activities;
16. Notes with concern the significant number of racist incidents worldwide, including the rise of skinhead
groups, which have been responsible for many of these incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and xenophobic
violence targeting, inter alia, persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, or on any
other grounds, including arson attacks on houses and vandalization of and violence in schools and places of worship
and cemeteries;
17. Reaffirms that such acts may, in certain circumstances, be qualified as falling within the scope of the
Convention, that they may not be justifiable as exercises of freedom of peaceful assembly, freedom of association and
freedom of expression and that they will often fall within the scope of article 20 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and may be subject to certain restrictions, as set out in articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Covenant;
18. Encourages States to take appropriate concrete measures, including legislative and educational ones, in
accordance with their international human rights obligations, in order to prevent revisionism in respect of the Second
World War and the denial of the crimes against humanity and war crimes committed during the Second World War;
19. Calls upon States to take active measures to ensure that education systems develop the necessary content
to provide accurate accounts of history, as well as promote tolerance and other international human rights principles;
20. Takes note of the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that education that seeks to undercut the
racist effects of nationalist populism should include accurate and representative accounts of national history that give
voice to racial and ethnic diversity and that expose the untruths of those who attempt to write ethnic groups out of
national histories and identities in order to sustain ethnonationalist myths of racially or ethnically “pure” nations;302
21. Condemns without reservation any denial of or attempt to deny the Holocaust, as well as any manifestation
of religious intolerance, incitement, harassment or violence against persons or communities, on the basis of ethnic
origin or religious belief;
22. Affirms its deep commitment to the duty of remembrance, and welcomes the call of the Special Rapporteur
for the active preservation of those Holocaust sites that served as Nazi death camps, concentration and forced labour
camps and prisons, as well as his encouragement to States to take measures, including legislative, law enforcement
and educational measures, to put an end to all forms of Holocaust denial;303
23. Takes note of the conclusions of the Special Rapporteur that revisionism and attempts to falsify history
may, in certain circumstances, fall under the prohibition of hate speech under article 4 (a) of the Convention, which
States are required to declare as offences punishable by law,304 and that neo-Nazi recruitment attempting to
mainstream extreme ideologies or racial, ethnic or religious hatred and intolerance may fall under article 4 (b) of the
Convention;

_______________
301

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.
A/73/305 and A/73/305/Corr.1, para. 56.
303
A/72/291, para. 91.
304
A/HRC/38/53, para. 15.
302

801

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

24. Calls upon States to continue to take all appropriate measures aimed at preventing and countering hate
speech, including on the Internet, and incitement to violence against persons in vulnerable situations, including the
organization of meetings and violent protests, fundraising and engagement in other activities;
25. Expresses deep concern about attempts at commercial advertising aimed at exploiting the sufferings of
the victims of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the Second World War by the Nazi
regime;
26. Stresses the need to respect the memory and that the practices described above do injustice to the memory
of the countless victims of crimes against humanity committed in the Second World War, in particular those committed
by the SS organization and by those who fought against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi
movement, and may negatively influence children and young people, and that failure by States to effectively address
such practices is incompatible with the obligations of States Members of the United Nations under its Charter,
including those related to the purposes and principles of the Organization;
27. Also stresses that all such practices may fuel contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
antisemitism, Islamophobia, Christianophobia, xenophobia and related intolerance and contribute to the spread and
multiplication of various extremist political parties, movements and groups of a racist or xenophobic character,
including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for increased vigilance;
28. Expresses concern that the human rights and democratic challenges posed by extremist political parties,
movements and groups are universal and no country is immune to them;
29. Emphasizes the need to take appropriate measures necessary to counter the practices described above, and
calls upon States and all other stakeholders to take more effective measures in accordance with international human
rights law to prevent, counter and combat those phenomena and extremist movements of a racist or xenophobic
character, which pose a real threat to democratic values, and to increase their vigilance and be proactive in
strengthening their efforts to recognize and effectively address those challenges;
30. Underlines the importance of data and statistics on racist and xenophobic crimes for identifying the types
of offences committed, the profiles of victims and of perpetrators and whether the latter are affiliated with extremist
movements or groups, thus enhancing better understanding of the phenomenon and identifying effective measures to
address such racist and xenophobic crimes, and recalls in this regard the commitments made in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development305 on data, monitoring and accountability, including collecting data disaggregated by
characteristics relevant in national contexts;
31. Encourages States to adopt further measures to support training for the police and other law enforcement
bodies on the ideologies of extremist political parties, movements and groups whose advocacy constitutes incitement
to racist and xenophobic violence, to strengthen their capacity to address racist and xenophobic crimes, to fulfil their
responsibility for bringing to justice the perpetrators of such crimes and to combat impunity;
32. Expresses deep concern about the increased number of seats occupied by representatives of extremist
parties of a racist or xenophobic character in a number of national and local parliaments, and emphasizes in this regard
the need for all democratic political parties to base their programmes and activities on respect for human rights and
freedoms, democracy, the rule of law and good governance and to condemn all messages disseminating ideas that are
based on racial superiority or hatred and that have the objective of fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
33. Takes note of the concern of the Special Rapporteur regarding the resurgence of neo-Nazism in
contemporary times and growing support for and acceptance of neo-Nazism and related ideology in an increasing
number of countries;306

_______________
305
306

802

Resolution 70/1.
A/HRC/38/53, para. 16.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

34. Notes with appreciation, in this regard, the call of the Special Rapporteur upon political leaders and parties
to strongly condemn incitement to racial discrimination or xenophobia, to promote tolerance and respect and to refrain
from forming coalitions with extremist parties of a racist or xenophobic character;307
35. Welcomes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to continue to take steps through national
legislation, in accordance with international human rights law, aimed at preventing hate speech and incitement to
violence, to withdraw support – financial and otherwise – from political parties and other organizations that engage
in neo-Nazi or other hate speech and to take steps to dismantle responsible organizations where such hate speech aims,
or can reasonably be expected, to incite violence;308
36. Encourages States to improve diversity within law enforcement agencies, and urges them to take all
appropriate measures to facilitate the filing of complaints about and to impose appropriate sanctions against those
within the public service found to have committed racially motivated violence or to have used hate speech;
37. Expresses deep concern about the increase in reported cases of racist, antisemitic, Islamophobic,
Arabophobic, Afrophobic and xenophobic manifestations during sports events, including those committed by
extremist groups of a racist or xenophobic character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and calls upon States,
international organizations, sports federations and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen measures to address such
incidents, while also welcoming the steps that many States, sports federations and clubs have taken to eliminate racism
at sporting events, including through sport practised without discrimination of any kind and in the Olympic spirit,
which require human understanding, tolerance, inclusion, fair play and solidarity;
38. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to introduce into national criminal law a provision
according to which committing an offence with racist or xenophobic motivations or aims constitutes an aggravating
circumstance, allowing for enhanced penalties,309 and encourages those States whose legislation does not contain such
provisions to consider that recommendation;
39. Notes measures taken by States to prevent discrimination against, in particular but not limited to, persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, people of African descent, Roma, migrants,
refugees and asylum seekers, and to ensure their integration into society, urges States to ensure the full and effective
implementation of legal, policy and institutional measures protecting these individuals and groups, including women
and girls, and recommends that States effectively guarantee to everyone, without discrimination of any kind, their
human rights, including those related to safety and security, access to justice, adequate reparation and appropriate
information about their rights, and pursue prosecution and adequate punishment, as appropriate, of those responsible
for racist and xenophobic crimes against them, including the possibility of seeking reparation or satisfaction for
damages suffered as a result of such crimes;
40. Underlines that the roots of extremism are multifaceted and must be addressed through adequate measures
such as education, awareness-raising and the promotion of dialogue, and in this regard recommends the increase of
measures to raise awareness among young people of the dangers of the ideologies and activities of extremist political
parties, movements and groups;
41. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of education, including human rights
education, as a complement to legislative measures, and calls upon States to continue to invest in education, in both
conventional and non-conventional curricula, inter alia, in order to transform attitudes and counteract ideas of racial
hierarchies and superiority, and counter their negative influence, and to promote the values of non-discrimination,
equality and respect for all, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;
42. Recognizes the paramount role of education in promoting human rights and combating racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, especially in promoting the principles of tolerance, inclusion and
respect for ethnic, religious and cultural diversity and preventing the spread of extremist racist and xenophobic
movements and ideas;

_______________
307

A/72/291, para. 83.
A/HRC/38/53, para. 35 (c).
309
A/69/334, para. 81.
308

803

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

43. Strongly condemns the use of educational material and rhetoric in educational settings, which promulgate
racism, discrimination, hatred and violence on the basis of ethnic origin, nationality, religion or belief;
44. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur presented at the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly, in which he emphasized the importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and
human suffering which arose out of the adoption of ideologies such as Nazism and Fascism;310
45. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed at bringing communities together
and providing them with space for genuine dialogue, such as round tables, working groups and seminars, including
training seminars for State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising activities, especially those
initiated by civil society representatives, which require continued State support;
46. Underlines the positive role that relevant United Nations entities and programmes, in particular the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
47. Reaffirms article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties condemn all propaganda and all
organizations which are based on ideas or theories of superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or
ethnic origin, or which attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and undertake to
adopt immediate and positive measures designed to eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and, to
this end, with due regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights289 and the rights
expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention, inter alia:
(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred,
and incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or
group of persons of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist activities,
including the financing thereof;
(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and also organized and all other propaganda activities,
which promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall recognize participation in such organizations or activities as
an offence punishable by law;
(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local, to promote or incite racial
discrimination;
48. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome document of the Durban Review
Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility
or violence should be prohibited by law, that all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred, or
incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts, shall be declared offences
punishable by law, in accordance with the international obligations of States, and that these prohibitions are consistent
with freedom of opinion and expression;
49. Notes the launch by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech, which can play its part in addressing hate speech around the world while upholding freedom of opinion and
expression, in collaboration with Governments, civil society, the private sector and other partners;
50. Recognizes the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, as well as
full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information, including through the Internet, can play in
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
51. Calls upon States to strengthen freedom of expression, which can play a crucial role in promoting
democracy and combating racist and xenophobic ideologies based on racial superiority;
52. Expresses concern about the increased use of digital technologies to promote and disseminate racism,
racial hatred, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related intolerance, and in this regard calls upon States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to counter the dissemination of the above-mentioned ideas
while respecting their obligations under articles 19 and 20 of the Covenant, which guarantee the right to freedom of
expression and outline the grounds on which the exercise of this right can be legitimately restricted;

_______________
310

804

A/64/295, para. 104.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

53. Recognizes the need to promote the use of new information and communications technologies, including
the Internet, to contribute to the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
54. Also recognizes the positive role that the media can play in combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, promoting a culture of tolerance and inclusion and representing the diversity of a
multicultural society;
55. Encourages States, civil society and other relevant stakeholders to use all opportunities, including those
provided by the Internet and social media, to counter, in accordance with international human rights law, the
dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred and to promote the values of equality, non‑discrimination,
diversity and democracy;
56. Encourages national human rights institutions, where they exist, to develop appropriate programmes to
promote tolerance, inclusion and respect for all and to collect relevant information in this regard;
57. Notes the importance of strengthening cooperation at the regional and international levels with the aim of
countering all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular
regarding issues raised in the present resolution;
58. Stresses the importance of cooperating closely with civil society and international and regional human
rights mechanisms in order to counter effectively all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, as well as extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead
groups, and other similar extremist ideological movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
59. Recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 2005/5,293 that the Special
Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue, make relevant recommendations in future reports and seek and take into
account in this regard the views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
60. Invites States to consider including in their reports for the universal periodic review and their reports to
relevant treaty bodies information on the steps taken to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, including with the aim of implementing the provisions of the present resolution;
61. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session and to the Human Rights Council at its forty-fourth session, reports on the implementation of the present
resolution, and encourages the Special Rapporteur to pay specific attention to paragraphs 5, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 24, 25,
42 and 44 above, based on the views collected in accordance with the request of the Commission, as recalled in
paragraph 59 above;
62. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and non-governmental organizations that have submitted
information to the Special Rapporteur in the course of the preparation of her report to the General Assembly;
63. Encourages States and non-governmental organizations to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur,
including by providing information on developments with regard to the issues raised in the present resolution in order
to contribute to the preparation of future reports to the General Assembly;
64. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences and best practices in the fight
against extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other
extremist ideological movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
65. Encourages Governments to invest more resources in building and sharing knowledge on successful
positive measures to prevent and counter racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance that go
beyond sanctioning violations once they have occurred, including the provision of remedies to victims of relevant
violations;
66. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant actors to disseminate, as widely
as possible, information regarding the contents of and the principles outlined in the present resolution, including
through the media, but not limited to it;
67. Decides to remain seized of the issue.

805

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/137
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 135 to 9, with 43 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/397, para. 20)311
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Czechia, France, Germany, Israel, Marshall Islands, Nauru, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine

74/137. A global call for concrete action for the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up
to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the effective implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference,312 in particular its resolutions 66/144 of
19 December 2011 and 67/155 of 20 December 2012, and in this regard underlining the imperative need for their full
and effective implementation,
Recalling also the suffering of the victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
and the need to honour their memory,
Calling upon States to honour the memory of victims of the historical injustices of slavery, the slave trade,
including the transatlantic slave trade, colonialism and apartheid,
Stressing that the outcome of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance has the same status as the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences, summits and
special sessions in the human rights and social fields, and that the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
remains a solid basis and the only instructive outcome of the World Conference, which prescribes comprehensive
measures for combating all the scourges of racism and adequate remedies for victims, and noting with concern the
lack of effective implementation thereof,
Alarmed at the global rise in hate speech, constituting incitement to racial discrimination, hostility and violence,
stressing the importance of addressing it, and in this regard noting the launch of the United Nations Strategy and Plan
of Action on Hate Speech in June 2019,

_______________
311

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by the Russian Federation, and the State of Palestine
(on behalf of the States that are members of the Group of 77 and China, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018).
312
See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF.189/12/Corr.1, chap. I.

806

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Underlining the need to promote tolerance, inclusion and respect for diversity and the need to seek common
ground among and within civilizations in order to address common challenges to humanity that threaten shared values,
universal human rights and the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, through
cooperation, partnership and inclusion,
Alarmed at the spread in many parts of the world of various racist extremist movements based on ideologies
that seek to promote nationalist, right-wing agendas and racial superiority, and stressing that these practices fuel
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Deploring the ongoing and resurgent scourges of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in many regions of the world, often targeting migrants and refugees, as well as people of African descent,
expressing concern that some political leaders and parties have supported such an environment, and in this context
expressing its support for migrants and refugees in the context of the severe discrimination that they may face,
Recalling the three Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination previously declared by
the General Assembly, and regretting that the Programmes of Action for those Decades were not fully implemented
and that their objectives have yet to be attained,
Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and have the potential to contribute
constructively to the development and well-being of their societies, and that any doctrine of racial superiority is
scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must be rejected, together with theories
that attempt to determine the existence of separate human races,
Underlining the intensity, magnitude and organized nature of slavery and the slave trade, including the
transatlantic slave trade, and the associated historical injustices, as well as the untold suffering caused by colonialism
and apartheid, and that Africans and people of African descent, Asians and people of Asian descent and indigenous
peoples continue to be victims, and acknowledging that the ongoing effects must be remedied,
Acknowledging the efforts and initiatives undertaken by States to prohibit racial discrimination and racial
segregation and to engender the full enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, as well as civil and political rights,
Emphasizing that, despite efforts in this regard, millions of human beings continue to be victims of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their contemporary forms and manifestations, some of
which manifest in violent forms,
Welcoming the efforts made by civil society in support of the follow-up mechanisms in the implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
Recalling the appointment of the five independent eminent experts by the Secretary-General on 16 June 2003,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 56/266 of 27 March 2002, with the mandate to follow up on the
implementation of the provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to make appropriate
recommendations thereon,
Underlining the primacy of the political will, international cooperation and adequate funding at the national,
regional and international levels needed to address all forms and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance for the successful implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action,
Recalling its resolution 2142 (XXI) of 26 October 1966, in which it proclaimed 21 March as the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Recalling also its resolution 62/122 of 17 December 2007, in which it designated 25 March as the annual
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade,
Recalling further, in the above context, the erection of the permanent memorial for the victims of slavery and
the slave trade, including the transatlantic slave trade, the Ark of Return, based on the theme “Acknowledge the
tragedy, consider the legacy, lest we forget”,

807

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the call upon all the former colonial Powers for reparations, consistent with paragraphs 157 and 158
of the Durban Programme of Action, to redress the historical injustices of slavery and the slave trade, including the
transatlantic slave trade,
Recognizing and affirming that the global fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and all their abhorrent and contemporary forms and manifestations is a matter of priority for the
international community,
I
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
1. Reaffirms the paramount importance of universal adherence to and the full and effective implementation
of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,313 adopted by the General
Assembly in its resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965, in addressing the scourges of racism and racial
discrimination;
2. Calls upon States that have not done so to accede to and/or ratify the Convention, and States parties to
consider making the declaration under article 14 of the Convention, as well as to consider withdrawing reservations
to article 4 of the Convention, as a matter of urgency, and to consider withdrawing reservations that are incompatible
with the object and purpose of the Convention;
3. Underlines, in the above context, that the provisions of the Convention do not respond effectively to
contemporary manifestations of racial discrimination, in particular in relation to xenophobia and related intolerance,
which is recognized as the rationale behind the convening of the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in 2001;
4. Takes note of the acknowledgement by the Human Rights Council and its subsidiary structures of the
existence of both procedural and substantive gaps in the Convention, which must be filled as a matter of urgency,
necessity and priority;
5. Expresses its concern at the lack of progress in the elaboration of complementary standards to the
Convention to fill existing gaps through the development of new normative standards aimed at combating all forms
of contemporary and resurgent scourges of racism;
6. Recalls Human Rights Council resolution 34/36 of 24 March 2017,314 in which the Council requested the
Chair-Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of Complementary Standards to the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ensure the commencement of the
negotiations on the draft additional protocol to the Convention criminalizing acts of a racist and xenophobic nature
during the tenth session of the Ad Hoc Committee;
7. Requests the Chair-Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of Complementary Standards
to present a progress report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
II
International Decade for People of African Descent
8. Welcomes the proclamation of the International Decade for People of African Descent, as contained in its
resolution 68/237 of 23 December 2013, and the celebratory launch of the Decade on 10 December 2014;
9. Also welcomes the programme of activities for the International Decade for People of African Descent, in
which it was recommended that a forum on people of African descent be established and that consideration be given
to the elaboration of a draft United Nations declaration on the promotion and full respect of the human rights of people
of African descent;

_______________
313
314

808

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Recalls the draft programme of action for the International Decade for People of African Descent as an
instructive framework in which all the initiatives aimed at improving the quality of life of people of African descent
are anchored and which, if adopted, would complement the programme of activities for the implementation of the
International Decade for People of African Descent;
11. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the programme of activities for the implementation
of the International Decade for People of African Descent315 and on a global call for concrete action for the total
elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;316
12. Also takes note of the report of the Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent,317 invites the
Human Rights Council, through the Chair of the Working Group, to continue to submit a report on the work of the
Working Group to the General Assembly, and in this regard invites the Chair of the Working Group to engage in an
interactive dialogue with the Assembly under the item entitled “Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance” at its seventy-fifth session;
13. Welcomes the decision to establish the Permanent Forum on People of African Descent, which will serve
as a consultation mechanism for people of African descent and other interested stakeholders as a platform for
improving the quality of life and livelihoods of people of African descent and to contribute to elaborating a United
Nations declaration on the promotion and full respect of human rights of people of African descent, and that the
modalities, format and substantive and procedural aspects of the Permanent Forum will be concluded by Member
States and observer States, with further consultations with people of African descent;
14. Also welcomes the convening of regional meetings by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to effectively implement the programme of activities of the International Decade
for People of African Descent, encourages Member States and other stakeholders to adopt action-oriented
recommendations at the meetings, and calls upon States, regional organizations and other stakeholders to facilitate the
participation of civil society from their respective countries and regions at the meetings;
15. Further welcomes the constructive discussions held in Geneva on the modalities of the Permanent Forum
on People of African Descent, and decides to define them at its seventy-fourth session;
16. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Department
of Global Communications of the Secretariat to continue awareness-raising efforts and public information
campaigns in support of the International Decade for People of African Descent through the use of social networks
and digital media, including the wide distribution of user-friendly, concise and accessible versions of material in
this regard;
17. Welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Human Rights Council with regard to the preparatory process for
the midterm review of the International Decade for People of African Descent;
III
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
18. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to provide the resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandates of the Intergovernmental
Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the
Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent, the Group of Independent Eminent Experts on the
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Elaboration of Complementary Standards, and in this regard to ensure the participation of experts in each session
of those follow-up mechanisms in order to provide advice on the specific issues under discussion and assist the
mechanisms in their deliberations and the adoption of action-oriented recommendations in relation to the
implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action;

_______________
315

A/74/308.
A/74/312.
317
A/74/274.
316

809

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

IV
Group of Independent Eminent Experts on the Implementation of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action
19. Takes note of the report of the Group of Independent Eminent Experts on the Implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action on its sixth session,318 and in this regard notes that the session, which
included private and public sessions, was held in Geneva from 6 to 10 May 2019;
V
Trust fund for the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
20. Recalls the establishment by the Secretary-General, in 1973, of the trust fund for the Programme for the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination as a funding mechanism that has been utilized for
the implementation of the activities of the three Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
declared by the General Assembly, and in this regard appreciates the fact that the trust fund has also been utilized for
the subsequent programmes and operational activities transcending the three Decades;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his report on the implementation of the present resolution to
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, a section outlining the progress in the implementation of
paragraph 18 of its resolution 68/151 of 18 December 2013 regarding the revitalization of the trust fund for the
purpose of ensuring the successful implementation of the activities of the International Decade for People of African
Descent and enhancing the effectiveness of the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the effective implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action;312
22. Strongly appeals to all Governments, intergovernmental and non‑governmental organizations and
individuals, as well as other donors in a position to do so, to contribute generously to the trust fund, and to that end
requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake appropriate contacts and initiatives to encourage
contributions;
VI
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
23. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,319 and encourages the Special Rapporteur,
within her mandate, to continue to focus on the issues of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and incitement to hatred, which impede peaceful coexistence and harmony within societies, and to
submit reports in this regard to the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly;
24. Reiterates its previous requests to the Special Rapporteur to consider examining national models of
mechanisms that measure racial equality and their value added in the eradication of racial discrimination and to report
on such challenges, successes and best practices in her next report, and expresses concern at the lack of progress in
this regard;
VII
Follow-up and implementation activities
25. Requests the Human Rights Council to consider, at its forty-third session, the question of developing a
multi-year programme of activities to provide for the renewed and strengthened outreach activities needed to inform
and mobilize the global public in support of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to strengthen

_______________
318
319

810

See A/74/173.
See A/74/321.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

awareness of the contribution that they have made in the struggle against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, in consultation with Member States, national human rights institutions, relevant civil society
organizations and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes;
26. Welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Human Rights Council, through its Advisory Committee, in
preparing a study on appropriate ways and means of assessing the situation regarding racial equality, while identifying
possible gaps and overlaps;
27. Also welcomes the commemorative plenary meeting of the General Assembly held on 25 March 2019 to
mark the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, on the mitigation and countering of rising
nationalist populism and extreme supremacist ideologies;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
29. Requests the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Human Rights Council to
continue to convene annual commemorative meetings of the Assembly and the Council during the commemoration
of the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, with the appropriate focus and themes, and to
hold a debate on the midterm review of the International Decade for People of African Descent with the participation
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and in this context
encourages the participation of eminent personalities active in the struggle against racial discrimination, Member
States and civil society organizations in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Assembly and the Council,
respectively;
30. Decides to remain seized of this priority matter at its seventy-fifth session under the item entitled
“Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”.
RESOLUTION 74/138
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 130 to 52, with 7 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/398, para. 23)320
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Brazil, Colombia, Fiji, Mexico, Palau, Switzerland, Tonga

_______________
320

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Burundi, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Zimbabwe.

811

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

74/138. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right
of peoples to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution 73/159 of 17 December 2018, and
Human Rights Council resolutions on the subject, including resolution 42/9 of 26 September 2019,321 as well as all
resolutions adopted by the Commission on Human Rights in this regard,
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it condemned any State that permitted or
tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly, transit or use of mercenaries with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries,
or of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the relevant resolutions and international
instruments adopted by the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
Organization of African Unity, inter alia, the Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination of
mercenarism in Africa,322 as well as by the African Union,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations concerning the strict
observance of the principles of sovereign equality, political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the
self-determination of peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international relations and
non-interference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all peoples have the right freely to
determine their political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development and that every State has
the duty to respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of foreign military intervention and occupation that are
threatening to suppress, or have already suppressed, the right to self-determination of peoples and nations,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,323
Acknowledging with appreciation the work and contributions of the open-ended intergovernmental working
group established by the Human Rights Council with the mandate of considering the possibility of elaborating an
international regulatory framework, including the option of elaborating a legally binding instrument on the regulation,
monitoring and oversight of the activities of private military and security companies,
Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries constitute to peace and security in
developing countries in various parts of the world, in particular in areas of armed conflict, and about the threat they
pose to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of the affected countries,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the negative effects on the policies
and economies of affected countries resulting from international criminal mercenary activities,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which mercenaries or mercenary-related activities are used or the
form that they take to acquire some semblance of legitimacy, they are a threat to peace, security and the selfdetermination of peoples and an obstacle to the enjoyment of all human rights by peoples,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the latest report of the Working Group of the Human Rights Council on
the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination;324

_______________
321

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.
323
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
324
A/74/244.
322

812

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing, protection and training are causes
for grave concern to all States and that they violate the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations;
3. Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert operations by third Powers
encourage, inter alia, the demand for mercenaries on the global market;
4. Urges, once again, all States to take the steps necessary and to exercise the utmost vigilance against the
menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to take legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other
territories under their control are not used for, and that their nationals do not take part in, the recruitment, assembly,
financing, training, protection or transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities designed to impede the right of
peoples to self-determination, to destabilize or overthrow the Government of any State or to dismember or impair,
totally or in part, the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States conducting themselves
in accordance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
5. Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of recruitment, training, hiring or
financing of mercenaries by private companies offering international military consultancy and security services, and
to impose a specific ban on such companies intervening in armed conflicts or actions to destabilize constitutional
regimes;
6. Encourages States that import military assistance or consultancy and security services provided by private
companies to establish national regulatory mechanisms for registering and licensing those companies in order to
ensure that the imported services provided by those private companies neither impede the enjoyment of human rights
nor violate human rights in the recipient country;
7. Emphasizes its utmost concern about the impact of the activities of private military and security companies
on the enjoyment of human rights, in particular when operating in armed conflicts, and notes that private military and
security companies and their personnel are rarely held accountable for violations of human rights;
8. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider acceding to or ratifying the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries;325
9. Welcomes the cooperation extended by those countries that have received a visit by the Working Group
on the use of mercenaries since the establishment of its mandate and the adoption by some States of national legislation
that restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and transit of mercenaries;
10. Condemns recent mercenary activities in developing countries in various parts of the world, in particular
in areas of conflict, and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of those countries
and the exercise of the right of their peoples to self-determination, and stresses the importance for the Working Group
on the use of mercenaries of looking into sources and root causes, as well as the political motivations of mercenaries
and for mercenary-related activities;
11. Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement whenever and wherever criminal
acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if so
requested, in accordance with national law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
12. Condemns any form of impunity granted to perpetrators of mercenary activities and to those responsible
for the use, recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries, and urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law, to bring them, without distinction, to justice;
13. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with their obligations under international law, to cooperate with
and assist the judicial prosecution of those accused of mercenary activities in transparent, open and fair trials;

_______________
325

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789.

813

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Welcomes the decision by the Human Rights Council, in its resolution 42/9,321 to renew for a period of
three years the mandate of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries for it to continue to undertake the tasks
described by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 7/21 of 28 March 2008326 and in all other relevant resolutions
on the subject;
15. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries and other experts to continue their participation,
including by submitting contributions, in other subsidiary bodies of the Human Rights Council considering issues
related to the use of mercenaries and mercenary-related activities in all their forms and manifestations, including
private military and security companies;
16. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to continue the work carried out by the previous
mandate holders with respect to the strengthening of the international legal framework for the prevention and sanction
of the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries, taking into account the proposal for a new legal
definition of a mercenary drafted by the Special Rapporteur on the use of mercenaries as a means of impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination in his report submitted to the Commission on Human Rights at
its sixtieth session327 and the evolving phenomenon of mercenaries and its related forms;
17. Also requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to continue to study and identify sources and
causes, emerging issues, manifestations and trends regarding mercenaries or mercenary-related activities and private
military and security companies and their impact on human rights, particularly on the right of peoples to selfdetermination;
18. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as a matter of priority,
to publicize the adverse effects of the activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples to self-determination and, when
requested and where necessary, to render advisory services to States that are affected by those activities;
19. Recommends that all Member States, including those confronted with the phenomenon of private military
and security companies, as contracting States, States of operations, home States or States whose nationals are
employed to work for a private military and security company, contribute to the work of the open-ended
intergovernmental working group, taking into account the initial work done by the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries;
20. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Working Group on the use of mercenaries in the fulfilment of
its mandate;
21. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue
to provide the Working Group on the use of mercenaries with all the assistance and support necessary for the fulfilment
of its mandate, both professional and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation between the Working
Group and other components of the United Nations system that deal with countering mercenary-related activities, in
order to meet the demands of its current and future activities;
22. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to consult States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations on the implementation of the present resolution and to report, with specific
recommendations, to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session its findings on the use of mercenaries
to undermine the enjoyment of all human rights and to impede the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination;
23. Decides to consider the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self‑determination at its seventy-fifth session under the item entitled
“Right of peoples to self-determination”.

_______________
326
327

814

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II, sect. A.
See E/CN.4/2004/15, para. 47.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/139
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 167 to 5, with 11 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/398, para. 23)328
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Cameroon, Guatemala, Honduras, Kiribati, Lesotho, Palau, Rwanda, Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu

74/139. The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Aware that the development of friendly relations among nations, based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, is among the purposes and principles of the United Nations, as defined in the
Charter,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, entitled “Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations”,
Bearing in mind the International Covenants on Human Rights,329 the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,330 the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples331 and the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted at the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,332
Recalling the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations,333

_______________
328

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Angola, Armenia, Austria, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt (on behalf of the States that are members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October
2018), El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe.
329
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
330
Resolution 217 A (III).
331
Resolution 1514 (XV).
332
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
333
Resolution 50/6.

815

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration,334
Recalling further the advisory opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,335 and noting in particular the reply
of the Court, including on the right of peoples to self-determination, which is a right erga omnes,336
Recalling the conclusion of the Court, in its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004, that the construction of the wall by
Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, along with measures
previously taken, severely impedes the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,337
Stressing the urgency of achieving without delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace settlement between the Palestinian and Israeli sides, based on the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations, the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative338 and the Quartet road map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,339
Stressing also the need for respect for and preservation of the territorial unity, contiguity and integrity of all of
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and recalling in this regard its resolution 58/292 of
6 May 2004,
Recalling its resolution 73/158 of 17 December 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012,
Affirming the right of all States in the region to live in peace within secure and internationally recognized borders,
1. Reaffirms the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, including the right to their independent
State of Palestine;
2. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system to continue
to support and assist the Palestinian people in the early realization of their right to self-determination.
RESOLUTION 74/140
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/398, para. 23)340

74/140. Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights, of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied

_______________
334

Resolution 55/2.
See A/ES‑10/273 and A/ES‑10/273/Corr.1.
336
Ibid., advisory opinion, para. 88.
337
Ibid., para. 122.
338
A/56/1026‑S/2002/932, annex II, resolution 14/221.
339
S/2003/529, annex.
340
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Paraguay, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe and State of Palestine.
335

816

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

in the International Covenants on Human Rights,341 as well as in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial, foreign or alien
occupation and their emergence into sovereign statehood and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of foreign military intervention and occupation that are
threatening to suppress, or have already suppressed, the right to self-determination of peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the persistence of such actions, millions of people have been
or are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need for
concerted international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation of the right of peoples to self-determination and other
human rights as a result of foreign military intervention, aggression and occupation adopted by the Commission on
Human Rights at its sixty-first342 and previous sessions,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination,
including resolution 73/160 of 17 December 2018,
Reaffirming also its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000, containing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, and recalling its resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005, containing the 2005 World Summit Outcome,
which, inter alia, upheld the right to self-determination of peoples under colonial domination and foreign
occupation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the right of peoples to self‑determination,343
1. Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right of all peoples, including those under colonial, foreign
and alien domination, to self-determination is a fundamental condition for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights and for the preservation and promotion of such rights;
2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign military intervention, aggression and occupation, since these
have resulted in the suppression of the right of peoples to self-determination and other human rights in certain parts
of the world;
3. Calls upon those States responsible to cease immediately their military intervention in and occupation
of foreign countries and territories and all acts of repression, discrimination, exploitation and maltreatment, in
particular the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed in the execution of those acts against the peoples
concerned;
4. Deplores the plight of millions of refugees and displaced persons who have been uprooted as a result
of the aforementioned acts, and reaffirms their right to return to their homes voluntarily in safety and with
honour;
5. Requests the Human Rights Council to continue to give special attention to violations of human
rights, especially the right to self-determination, resulting from foreign military intervention, aggression or
occupation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this question to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session under the item entitled “Right of peoples to self‑determination”.

_______________
341

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23, E/2005/23/Corr.1 and
E/2005/23/Corr.2), chap. II, sect. A.
343
A/74/309.
342

817

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/141
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399, para. 69)344

74/141. The human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 64/292 of 28 July 2010, in which it recognized the right to safe and clean drinking
water and sanitation as a human right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights, and 72/178
of 19 December 2017, entitled “The human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation”,
Reaffirming all previous resolutions of the Human Rights Council regarding the human rights to safe drinking
water and sanitation, inter alia, Council resolution 39/8 of 27 September 2018,345
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,346 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,347 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,347 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,348 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women,349 the Convention on the Rights of the Child350 and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,351
Recalling also that the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation are derived from the right to an
adequate standard of living and are inextricably related to the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health, as well as to the right to life and human dignity,
Noting general comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on the right
to water (articles 11 and 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights)352 and the
statement on the right to sanitation of the Committee of 19 November 2010,353 and taking note of the reports of the
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States to ensure the promotion and protection of and respect for all human
rights, which are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated, and must be treated globally, in a fair and
equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,

_______________
344

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Chad, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
345
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
346
Resolution 217 A (III).
347
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
348
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
349
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
350
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
351
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
352
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.
353
Ibid., 2011, Supplement No. 2 (E/2011/22), annex VI.

818

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development354 and
outcome documents of review conferences, reaffirming the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,355 the
outcome documents of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly356 and the declarations adopted by
the Commission on the Status of Women on the occasion of the tenth, fifteenth and twentieth anniversaries of the
Fourth World Conference on Women,357 and looking forward to its upcoming twenty-fifth anniversary,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, for the achievement of sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social
and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, ensuring that no one is left behind, and stressing the
importance of monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recalling its resolution 71/222 of 21 December 2016, by which it proclaimed the period 2018–2028 the
International Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”,
Stressing the importance of monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the internationally agreed
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, including the Goal on ensuring the availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all,
Recalling the designation, pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 47/193 of 22 December 1992 and 67/291
of 24 July 2013, of 22 March as World Water Day and 19 November as World Toilet Day, which are important
opportunities to promote, among other issues, awareness of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation and
of the remaining challenges in this regard,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of June 1992358 and its resolution 66/288
of 27 July 2012, entitled “The future we want”, and emphasizing the critical importance of water and sanitation within
the three dimensions of sustainable development,
Noting the relevant commitments and initiatives promoting the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation made at recent regional and subregional conferences and meetings,
Affirming the importance of continually improving the availability of high-quality, accessible, timely and
reliable disaggregated data on progress related to safe drinking water and sanitation services as an indispensable means
for States to plan for, implement and monitor the progressive realization of the human rights to safe drinking water
and sanitation for all without discrimination,
Welcoming the work of the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund in the 2019
update published by their Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene on household
drinking water, sanitation and hygiene,359 and noting the fact that it has an extensive global database and has developed
global norms to benchmark progress, while taking into consideration the fact that official figures very often do not
fully capture all the dimensions of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Noting the fact that, globally, between 2000 and 2017, according to the Joint Monitoring Programme, the
percentage of the population using safely managed drinking water increased from 61 to 71 per cent and the percentage
of the population using basic drinking water services decreased from 20 to 19 per cent, and welcoming the fact that

_______________
354

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
355
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
356
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
357
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2005/27 and E/2005/27/Corr.1),
chap. I, sect. A; ibid., 2010, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum (E/2010/27 and E/2010/27/Corr.1), chap I, sect. A; and ibid., 2015,
Supplement No. 7 (E/2015/27), chap. I, sect. C, resolution 59/1, annex.
358
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
359
World Health Organization/United Nations Children’s Fund, Progress on Household Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
2000–2017: Special Focus on Inequalities (Geneva, 2019).

819

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the percentage of the population using safely managed sanitation services increased from 28 to 45 per cent and the
percentage of the population using basic sanitation services increased from 28 to 29 per cent,
Deeply concerned that, almost 10 years after the adoption of resolution 64/292, 785 million people still lack
basic drinking water services and 144 million people still collect water directly from surface water sources,
representing a combined 11 per cent of the world population, while 2 billion people still lack basic sanitation services
and 673 million people still practise open defecation, representing a combined 26 per cent of the world population,
Deeply concerned also about the lack of access to adequate water and sanitation services and its dramatic
consequences for the overall health situation in humanitarian emergencies and crises, including in times of conflict
and natural disaster, and acknowledging that people living in countries affected by armed conflict and natural disasters
and in countries particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, as well as people living in refugee
camps, including in refugee host countries, are more likely to lack access to basic drinking water and to basic sanitation
than people living in unaffected countries,
Deeply concerned further that women and girls often face, especially in humanitarian emergencies and crises,
including in times of armed conflict or natural disaster, particular barriers in accessing water and sanitation, as well as
menstrual hygiene management, and that they shoulder the main burden of collecting household water and of care
responsibilities, including those arising from waterborne diseases, in many parts of the world, restricting their time for
other activities, such as education and leisure, or, for women, for earning a livelihood,
Deeply alarmed that water, sanitation and hygiene-related diseases hit children the hardest, while noting that
child diarrhoea is the second leading cause of death in children under 5 years of age, and underscoring that progress
on reducing child mortality, morbidity and stunting is linked to children’s and women’s access to safe drinking water
and sanitation and that, in humanitarian emergencies and crises, including in times of armed conflict or natural disaster,
children suffer the most from interruptions in water and sanitation services,
Deeply concerned that persons with disabilities, especially children, often face barriers in accessing water and
sanitation facilities that are accessible and appropriate to their needs, which has an impact on their ability to live
independently and participate fully in all aspects of life, including education and employment, which is particularly
concerning with regard to homelessness and humanitarian emergencies and crises,
Deeply alarmed by indiscriminate attacks and attacks deliberately targeting civilian objects in armed conflict,
which may injure personnel and cut off the power that keeps water, sanitation and hygiene systems running,
Deeply concerned that widespread silence and stigma surrounding menstruation and menstrual hygiene mean
that women and girls often lack basic information and education thereon, are excluded and stigmatized, that their
health can be negatively affected and that they are thus prevented from realizing their full potential,
Deeply concerned also that the lack of access to adequate water and sanitation services, including for menstrual
hygiene management, especially in schools, workplaces, health centres and public facilities, negatively affects gender
equality, the empowerment of women and girls and their enjoyment of human rights, including the right to education
and the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, and recognizing that
women have specific hygiene needs during menstruation, pregnancy, childbearing and rearing and throughout the life
course,
Deeply concerned further that women and girls are particularly at risk of and exposed to attacks, sexual and
gender-based violence, harassment and other threats to their safety while collecting household water and when
accessing sanitation facilities outside their homes or, when lacking adequate sanitation facilities, practising open
defecation and urination, limiting their ability to move freely and safely in the public sphere,
Deeply concerned that non-existent or inadequate sanitation facilities and serious deficiencies in water
management and wastewater treatment can negatively affect water provision and sustainable access to safe drinking
water and that, according to the United Nations World Water Development Report 2017, over 80 per cent of the
world’s wastewater, and over 95 per cent in some developing countries, is released into the environment without
treatment,
Affirming the importance of regional and international cooperation, where appropriate, as a means to promote
the progressive realization of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, with the understanding that it has
no bearing on the issues of international water law, including international watercourse law,
820

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing concern that climate change has contributed and continues to contribute to the increased frequency
and intensity of both sudden-onset natural disasters and slow-onset events, and that these events have adverse effects
on the full enjoyment of all human rights, including the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, and
recalling the need to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to climate change,
Recognizing that, while the implications of climate change-related impacts and environmental damage for the
enjoyment of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation affect individuals and communities around the
world, the consequences are felt most acutely by those segments of the population that are already in vulnerable
situations, such as people living in informal settlements, people living in small island States and rural and local
communities, and recognizing also that indigenous peoples, because of their specific situation and nature, may be
among the first to face the direct consequences of climate change owing to their dependence upon and close
relationship with the environment and its resources,
1. Reaffirms that the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, as components of the right to an
adequate standard of living, are essential for the full enjoyment of the right to life and all human rights;
2. Recognizes that the human right to safe drinking water entitles everyone, without discrimination, to have
access to sufficient, safe, acceptable, physically accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic use, and
that the human right to sanitation entitles everyone, without discrimination, to have physical and affordable access to
sanitation, in all spheres of life, that is safe, hygienic, secure, socially and culturally acceptable and that provides
privacy and ensures dignity, while reaffirming that both rights are components of the right to an adequate standard of
living;
3. Welcomes the work of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights to safe
drinking water and sanitation, and takes note of his reports;
4. Reaffirms that States have the primary responsibility to ensure the full realization of all human rights and
to endeavour to take steps, individually and through international assistance and cooperation, especially economic
and technical cooperation, to the maximum of their available resources, to progressively achieve the full realization
of the rights to safe drinking water and sanitation by all appropriate means, including, in particular, the adoption of
legislative measures;
5.

Calls upon States:

(a) To ensure the progressive realization of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation for all in a
non-discriminatory manner while eliminating inequalities in access, including for individuals belonging to groups at
risk and those who are marginalized on the grounds of race, gender, age, disability, ethnicity, culture, religion and
national or social origin or on any other grounds;
(b) To implement the internationally agreed Sustainable Development Goals and targets,360 including the
Goal on ensuring the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all, consistent with their
obligations under international law;
(c) To take into consideration the New Urban Agenda,361 which envisages cities and human settlements that
fulfil their social function, the full realization of the right to adequate housing as a component of the right to an
adequate standard of living, without discrimination, and universal access to safe and affordable drinking water and
sanitation;
(d) To ensure access to safe and affordable drinking water and adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene
for all women and girls, as well as for menstrual hygiene management, including for hygiene facilities and services
in public and private spaces;
(e) To take measures to empower women and girls for preparedness in humanitarian emergencies and crises,
including in times of armed conflict or natural disaster, by ensuring access to water and sanitation services and

_______________
360
361

See resolution 70/1.
Resolution 71/256, annex.

821

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

implementing gender-responsive policies, plans and programmes that address, inter alia, effective menstrual hygiene
management and adequate disposal options for menstrual products, without compromising their safety and dignity;
(f) To address the widespread stigma and shame surrounding menstruation and menstrual hygiene by
promoting educational and health practices in order to foster a culture in which menstruation is recognized as healthy
and natural and by ensuring access to factual information thereon, including for men and boys, addressing the negative
social norms around the issue, as well as ensuring universal access to hygienic products and gender-sensitive facilities,
including disposal and waste management options for menstrual products, while recognizing that women’s and girls’
attendance at school, university or, for women, work can be affected by negative perceptions of menstruation and lack
of means to maintain personal hygiene, such as safe water, sanitation and hygiene facilities in schools, public places
and, for women, the workplace;
(g) To promote both women’s leadership and their full, effective and equal participation in decision-making
on water and sanitation management and to ensure that a gender-based approach is adopted in relation to water and
sanitation programmes;
(h) To reduce the time spent by women and girls in collecting household water, in order to address the negative
impact of inadequate water and sanitation services on the access of girls to education, including through improved
public services and infrastructure;
(i) To promote safe public spaces and improve the security and safety of women and girls through genderresponsive rural and urban planning and infrastructure when accessing sanitation facilities outside their homes or
practising open defecation and urination;
(j) To protect women and girls from being physically threatened or assaulted, including from sexual violence,
while collecting household water and when accessing sanitation facilities outside their home or practising open
defecation and urination, including through promoting safe public spaces and improving the security and safety of
women and girls through gender-responsive rural and urban planning and infrastructure;
(k) To progressively eliminate open defecation by adopting policies to increase access to sanitation, including
for individuals who are vulnerable or marginalized;
(l) To take steps to promote action to raise international awareness of the issue of waterborne diseases, in
particular cholera and child diarrhoea, which can be prevented through safe drinking water and adequate sanitation
and hygiene and engaging in partnerships with relevant stakeholders to implement projects aimed at scaling up access
to safe water and sanitation in developing countries;
(m) To apply broad and inclusive participatory approaches, consulting and coordinating with local
communities and other stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, on adequate solutions to ensure
sustainable and non‑discriminatory access to safe drinking water and sanitation;
(n) To enhance efforts to substantially reduce the share of untreated wastewater released into the environment
and to ensure that plans and programmes for improving sanitation services take into account the need for appropriate
systems for the treatment of wastewater produced, including disposal of infant faeces, with the aim of reducing the
risks to human health, drinking water resources and the environment;
(o) To identify patterns of failure to respect, protect or fulfil the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation for all persons without discrimination and to address their structural causes in policymaking and budgeting
within a broader framework, while undertaking holistic planning aimed at achieving sustainable universal access,
including in instances where the private sector, donors and non‑governmental organizations are involved in service
provision;
(p) To provide for effective accountability mechanisms for all water and sanitation service providers,
including private sector providers, to ensure that they respect human rights and do not cause or contribute to human
rights violations or abuses;
6. Calls upon States and international organizations to provide financial resources and support capacitybuilding and technology transfer to help countries, at their request, in particular developing countries, to provide safe,
clean, accessible and affordable drinking water and sanitation for all;
822

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Calls upon non-State actors, including business enterprises, both transnational and others, to comply with
their responsibility to respect human rights, including the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, including
by cooperating with State investigations into allegations of abuses of the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation and by progressively engaging with States to detect and remedy abuses of the human rights to safe drinking
water and sanitation;
8. Stresses the important role of the international cooperation and technical assistance provided by States,
specialized agencies of the United Nations system and international and development partners, as well as by donor
agencies, urges development partners to adopt a human rights-based approach when designing and implementing
development programmes in support of national initiatives and plans of action related to the rights to safe drinking
water and sanitation, and invites regional and international organizations to complement efforts by States to
progressively realize the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation in accordance with their respective
mandates;
9. Calls upon Member States to expand international cooperation and capacity-building support to
developing countries in water- and sanitation-related activities and programmes, including water harvesting,
desalination, water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and reuse technologies;
10. Also calls upon Member States to enhance global partnerships for sustainable development as a means to
achieve and sustain the Goals and the targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,360 and highlights that
the 2030 Agenda marks a paradigm shift towards a more balanced and integrated plan of action for achieving
sustainable development that reflects the universality, indivisibility and interdependence of all human rights;
11. Reaffirms that the high-level political forum on sustainable development, under the auspices of the General
Assembly and of the Economic and Social Council, has the central role in overseeing follow-up and review at the
global level of the Sustainable Development Goals, and encourages Member States to share their experiences and
best practices;
12. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-sixth session.
RESOLUTION 74/142
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399, para. 69)362

74/142. International Equal Pay Day
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the obligation of all States to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
also that all forms of discrimination, including discrimination against women and girls, are contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,363 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,364 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,364 the Convention on the Elimination

_______________
362

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
363
Resolution 217 A (III).
364
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

823

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,365 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,366 the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,367 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination368 and other relevant human rights instruments,
Reaffirming also the commitment made to gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls,
contained in the outcome documents of relevant international conferences and summits, in particular the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women369 and the outcomes of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century”,370
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development371 addresses the need to achieve gender equality
and the empowerment of all women and girls, in order to ensure that no one is left behind, and that the systematic
mainstreaming of a gender perspective in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda is crucial,
Recalling also the commitment to achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and
men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value, contained in
the Sustainable Development Goals, in particular target 8.5,
Noting the work of the Equal Pay International Coalition, which was established to contribute to the
achievement of equal pay for work of equal value and the relevant Sustainable Development Goals, in particular
target 8.5,
Taking note of the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment,
Taking note with appreciation of the major contributions made by civil society, including women’s and
community-based organizations and feminist groups, as well as businesses and workers’ and employers’
organizations, to promoting equal pay for work of equal value and the economic empowerment of women and girls,
Recognizing that progress on the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls has
been held back owing to the persistence of historical and structural unequal power relations between women and men,
poverty and inequalities and disadvantages in access to resources and opportunities that limit women’s and girls’
capabilities,
Expressing deep concern that this progress has been particularly slow when it comes to women’s economic
empowerment, that work traditionally held by women has been undervalued and that tackling pay inequality has
proved to be particularly difficult,
Recalling in this regard Human Rights Council resolution 41/14 of 11 July 2019 on equal pay372 and its
recommendation to declare an International Equal Pay Day, in order to celebrate the efforts of all stakeholders to
achieve equal pay for work of equal value and urge further action for the goal of equal pay for work of equal value
for all,
Reaffirming its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the proclamation
of international years and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years
and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for the proclamation of
international years, and paragraphs 13 and 14, in which it is stated that an international day or year should not be
proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,

_______________
365

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
367
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
368
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
369
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
370
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
371
Resolution 70/1.
372
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. II.
366

824

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1.
in 2020;

Decides to proclaim 18 September as International Equal Pay Day, to be observed each year beginning

2. Invites all Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, other international
organizations and civil society, including non‑governmental organizations and the private sector, to observe
International Equal Pay Day in an appropriate manner, in order to celebrate the efforts of all stakeholders to achieve
equal pay for work of equal value and urge the further action required to achieve the goal of equal pay for work of
equal value for all, and encourages all stakeholders to continue to support the goal of equal pay for work of equal
value;
3. Invites the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)
and the International Labour Organization, within their respective mandates and existing resources, in collaboration
with all relevant organizations already involved in the promotion of equal pay for work of equal value, to work
together to facilitate the observance of International Equal Pay Day and to support Member States, upon their request,
in observing the Day;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States and
organizations of the United Nations system;
5. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution shall
be met from voluntary contributions.
RESOLUTION 74/143
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.1, para. 13)373

74/143. Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Reaffirming also that no one shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment,
Recalling that freedom from torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is a
non-derogable right under international law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian
law, which must be respected and protected under all circumstances, including in times of international and
non-international armed conflict or disturbance or any other public emergency, that the absolute prohibition of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is affirmed in relevant international instruments and
that legal and procedural safeguards against such acts must not be subject to measures that would circumvent this
right,
Recalling also that the prohibition of torture is a peremptory norm of international law without territorial
limitation and that international, regional and domestic courts have recognized the prohibition of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment as customary international law,

_______________
373

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Vanuatu.

825

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling further the definition of torture contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment374 and the obligation of States to abide strictly by the
definition of torture contained in article 1, without prejudice to any international instrument or national legislation
which contains or may contain provisions of wider application, and emphasizing the importance of properly
interpreting and implementing the obligations of States with respect to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Recognizing that States must protect the rights of those facing criminal sentences, including the death penalty
and life imprisonment without the possibility of parole, and of other affected persons in accordance with their
international obligations,
Noting that, under the Geneva Conventions of 1949,375 torture or inhuman treatment are a grave breach and that,
under the statute of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, the statute of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994 and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,376 acts of torture can constitute crimes
against humanity and, when committed in a situation of armed conflict, constitute war crimes,
Recognizing the importance of the implementation of the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance,377 which makes a significant contribution to the prevention and prohibition of
torture, including by prohibiting secret places of detention and by ensuring legal and procedural safeguards for persons
deprived of their liberty, and encouraging all States that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to
the Convention,
Recognizing also that the prevalence of corruption, including in law enforcement and justice systems, can have
a negative impact on the fight against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including by eroding fundamental safeguards and preventing victims of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment from effectively seeking justice, redress and compensation through the justice system,
Recognizing further that the effective implementation of the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment promotes, inter alia, peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, contributes to access to justice for all, builds effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels
and contributes to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,378
Commending the persistent efforts of civil society organizations, including non‑governmental organizations, as
well as national human rights institutions and national preventive mechanisms, and the considerable network of
centres for the rehabilitation of victims of torture, to prevent and combat torture and to alleviate the suffering of victims
of torture,
Deeply concerned about all acts which can amount to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment committed against persons exercising their rights of peaceful assembly and freedom of expression in
all regions of the world,
1. Condemns all forms of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including
through intimidation, which are and shall remain prohibited at any time and in any place whatsoever and can thus
never be justified, and calls upon all States to implement fully the absolute and non-derogable prohibition of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;

_______________
374

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
376
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
377
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
378
See resolution 70/1.
375

826

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Also condemns any action or attempt by States or public officials to legalize, authorize or acquiesce in
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment under any circumstances, including on grounds
of national security and counter-terrorism or through judicial decisions, and urges States to ensure the accountability
of those responsible for all such acts;
3. Stresses that States must neither punish personnel for not obeying orders to commit or conceal acts
amounting to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment nor allow pleas of respondeat
superior as a criminal defence in cases in which such orders were obeyed;
4. Emphasizes that acts of torture or inhuman treatment are grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of
1949,375 that acts of torture and cruel treatment in armed conflict are serious violations of international humanitarian
law and in this regard constitute war crimes, that acts of torture can constitute crimes against humanity and that the
perpetrators of all acts of torture must be prosecuted and punished, and in this regard notes the efforts of the
International Criminal Court to end impunity by seeking to ensure accountability and punishment of perpetrators of
such acts, in accordance with the Rome Statute,376 bearing in mind its principle of complementarity, and encourages
States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Rome Statute;
5. Also emphasizes that States must take persistent, determined and effective measures to prevent and combat
all acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, stresses that all acts of torture must
be made offences under national criminal law punishable by appropriate penalties that take into account their grave
nature, and calls upon States to prohibit under national law acts constituting cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment;
6. Stresses that States must ensure that no statement that is established to have been made as a result of torture
is invoked as evidence in any proceedings, except against a person accused of torture as evidence that the statement
was made, urges States to extend that prohibition to statements made as a result of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and recognizes that adequate corroboration of statements, including confessions, used as
evidence in any proceedings constitutes one safeguard for the prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
7. Urges States not to expel, return (“refouler”), extradite or in any other way transfer a person to another
State where there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture,
stresses the importance of effective legal and procedural safeguards in this regard, and recognizes that diplomatic
assurances, where given, do not release States from their obligations under international human rights, humanitarian
and refugee law, in particular the principle of non-refoulement;
8. Recalls that, for the purpose of determining whether there are such grounds, the competent authorities
shall take into account all relevant considerations, including, where applicable, the existence in the State concerned
of a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights;
9. Urges States to ensure that border control operations and reception centres fully comply with international
human rights obligations and commitments, including the prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment;
10. Calls upon all States to adopt and implement effective measures to prevent torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in particular in the context of the use of force by law enforcement
officials and in places of detention and other places where persons are deprived of their liberty, including legal and
procedural safeguards, as well as to ensure that the competent judicial or disciplinary authorities and, where relevant,
the prosecution can effectively ensure compliance with such safeguards;
11. Recalls its resolution 43/173 of 9 December 1988 on the Body of Principles for the Protection of All
Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, and in this context stresses that ensuring that any individual
arrested or detained is promptly brought before a judge or other independent judicial officer in person, and permitting
prompt and regular medical care and legal counsel throughout all stages of detention, as well as visits by family
members and independent monitoring mechanisms, are effective measures for the prevention of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
827

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Stresses the obligation of States to ensure that anyone who is arrested is informed at the time of arrest of
the reasons for the arrest and is promptly informed of any charges against him or her, in accessible forms of
communication, including in a language that he or she understands, and is provided with information about, and an
explanation of, his or her rights;
13. Calls upon States to include education and information regarding the absolute prohibition of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the training of law enforcement personnel and other
personnel authorized to resort to force or who may be involved in the custody, interrogation or treatment of any
individual subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment, which may include training on the use of force,
all available modern scientific methods for the investigation of crimes and the critical importance of reporting
instances of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment to superior authorities;
14. Emphasizes that States shall keep under systematic review interrogation rules, instructions, methods and
practices, as well as arrangements for the custody and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention
or imprisonment in any territory under their jurisdiction, and stresses the importance of the development of domestic
guidelines on the conduct of interrogations, with a view to preventing any cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment;
15. Welcomes the collaboration between practitioners, experts and other relevant stakeholders on the
elaboration of a set of universal standards for non‑coercive interviewing methods and procedural safeguards aimed at
operationalizing the presumption of innocence, improving effective policing and ensuring that no person is subjected
to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment during questioning, and encourages the
continued collaboration between practitioners, experts and other relevant stakeholders towards this goal;
16. Encourages all States to take appropriate effective legislative, administrative, judicial and other measures
to apply the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules);379
17. Reminds all States that prolonged incommunicado detention or detention in secret places can facilitate the
perpetration of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and can in itself constitute a
form of such treatment, and urges all States to respect the safeguards concerning the liberty, security and dignity of
the person and to ensure that prolonged incommunicado detention and secret places of detention and interrogation are
abolished;
18. Emphasizes that conditions of detention must respect the dignity and human rights of persons deprived of
their liberty, highlights the importance of reflecting on this in efforts to promote respect for and protection of the rights
of persons deprived of their liberty, calls upon States to address and prevent detention conditions amounting to torture
or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, notes in this regard concerns about solitary
confinement, and encourages States to take effective measures to address overcrowding in detention facilities, which
may have an impact on the dignity and human rights of persons deprived of their liberty;
19. Welcomes the establishment of national preventive mechanisms to prevent torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, urges States to consider establishing, appointing, maintaining or
enhancing independent and effective mechanisms that have experts with the required capabilities and professional
knowledge to undertake monitoring visits to places of detention, inter alia, with a view to preventing acts of torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and calls upon States parties to the Optional Protocol to
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment380 to fulfil their
obligation to designate or establish national preventive mechanisms at the latest one year after the entry into force of
the Protocol or of its ratification or accession, that are truly independent, composed of experts with the required
capabilities and professional knowledge, properly resourced and effective;
20. Calls upon all States to take appropriate effective legislative, administrative, judicial and other measures
to prevent and prohibit the production, trade, export, import and use of equipment that has no practical use other than
for the purpose of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;

_______________
379
380

828

Resolution 70/175, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2375, No. 24841.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

21. Urges States, as an important element in preventing and combating torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, to ensure that no authority or official orders, applies, permits or tolerates any
sanction, reprisal, intimidation or other prejudice against any person, group or association, including persons deprived
of their liberty, for contacting, seeking to contact or having been in contact with any national or international
monitoring or preventive body active in the prevention and combating of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
22. Also urges States to ensure accountability for any act of sanction, reprisal, intimidation or other form of
unlawful prejudicial conduct against any person, group or association, including persons deprived of their liberty, for
cooperating, seeking to cooperate or having cooperated with any national or international monitoring or preventive
body active in the prevention and combating of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, by ensuring impartial, prompt, independent and thorough investigations of any alleged act of sanction,
reprisal, intimidation or other form of unlawful prejudicial conduct; to bring the perpetrators to justice; to provide
access to effective remedies for victims, in accordance with their international human rights obligations and
commitments; and to prevent any recurrence;
23. Calls upon States parties to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment374 to fulfil their obligation to submit for prosecution or extradite those alleged to have
committed acts of torture, regardless of where such acts were committed, if the alleged offender is present in any
territory under their jurisdiction, and encourages other States also to do so, bearing in mind the need to fight impunity;
24. Encourages States to consider establishing or maintaining appropriate national processes to record
allegations of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to ensure that such
information is accessible in accordance with applicable law;
25. Stresses that an independent, competent domestic authority must promptly, effectively and impartially
investigate all allegations of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, as well as wherever
there is reasonable ground to believe that such an act has been committed, and that those who encourage, instigate,
order, tolerate, acquiesce in, consent to or perpetrate such acts must be held responsible, brought to justice and
punished in a manner commensurate with the severity of the offence, including the officials in charge of any place of
detention or other place where persons are deprived of their liberty where the prohibited act is found to have been
committed;
26. Recalls, in this respect, the Principles on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (the Istanbul Principles)381 as a valuable tool in efforts
to prevent and combat torture and the updated set of principles for the protection and promotion of human rights
through action to combat impunity;382
27. Emphasizes that it is important for law enforcement officials to be able to play their role in safeguarding
the right not to be subjected to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and for States
to ensure the proper functioning of the criminal justice system, in particular by taking effective measures to combat
corruption, establish proper legal aid programmes and provide for the adequate selection, training and remuneration
of law enforcement officials;
28. Encourages all States to ensure that persons charged with torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment have no involvement in the custody, interrogation or treatment of any person under arrest,
detention, imprisonment or other deprivation of liberty while such charges are pending and, if such persons are
convicted, after the conviction;
29. Calls upon all States to adopt a victim-oriented approach383 in the fight against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, paying special attention to the views and needs of victims in policy
development and other activities relating to rehabilitation, prevention and accountability for torture;

_______________
381

Resolution 55/89, annex.
E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1.
383
See A/HRC/16/52.
382

829

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

30. Also calls upon all States to adopt a gender-responsive approach in the fight against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including by taking into consideration the United Nations Rules for
the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),384 and
to pay special attention to sexual and gender-based violence;
31. Calls upon States to ensure that the rights of persons who are marginalized and most vulnerable, including
persons with disabilities, bearing in mind the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,385 are fully
integrated into torture prevention and protection, and welcomes the efforts of the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in this regard;
32. Stresses that national legal systems must ensure that victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment have effective access to justice and obtain redress, and that the complainants and witnesses
are protected against all ill-treatment or intimidation as a consequence of making a complaint or giving evidence;
33. Calls upon States to provide redress for victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, encompassing effective remedy and adequate, effective and prompt reparation, which should include
restitution, fair and adequate compensation, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition, taking into
full account the specific needs of the victim;
34. Urges States to ensure that appropriate rehabilitation services are promptly available to all victims without
discrimination of any kind and without limitation in time, until the fullest rehabilitation possible has been achieved,
and are provided either directly by the public health system or through the funding of private rehabilitation facilities,
including those administered by civil society organizations, and to consider making rehabilitation services available
to the immediate families or dependants of the victims and to persons who have suffered harm while intervening to
assist victims in distress or to prevent victimization;
35. Also urges States to establish, maintain, facilitate or support rehabilitation centres or facilities where
victims can receive such treatment and where effective measures for ensuring the safety of their staff and patients are
taken;
36. Urges all States that have not yet done so to become parties to the Convention against Torture and the
Optional Protocol thereto as a matter of priority;
37. Urges all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to make the declarations provided for
in articles 21 and 22 of the Convention concerning inter-State and individual communications, to consider the
possibility of withdrawing their reservations to article 20, to notify the Secretary-General of their acceptance of the
amendments to articles 17 and 18, with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the Committee against Torture as
soon as possible, and to comply strictly with their obligations under the Convention, including, in view of the high
number of reports not submitted in time, their obligation to submit reports in accordance with article 19 of the
Convention, and invites States parties to incorporate a gender perspective and information concerning persons who
are marginalized and most vulnerable, including children and juveniles and persons with disabilities, when submitting
reports to the Committee;
38. Welcomes the work and the reports of the Committee and of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, recommends that their reports continue to include
information on the follow-up by States parties to their recommendations, and supports the Committee and the
Subcommittee in their efforts to further improve the effectiveness of their working methods;
39. Emphasizes the importance of the Committee and the Subcommittee having due regard to the principle of
non-discrimination, paying particular attention to the rights of those who are marginalized, most vulnerable or in
vulnerable situations, including through a victim-oriented and gender-responsive approach in the fight against torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;

_______________
384
385

830

Resolution 65/229, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

40. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in conformity with her mandate
established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, and other relevant United Nations
entities, in accordance with their mandates and existing resources, to continue to provide, at the request of States,
advisory services for the prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including for the preparation of national reports to the Committee, for the implementation of recommendations of the
Committee, and for the establishment and operation of national preventive mechanisms, as well as technical
assistance, including for the development, production and distribution of teaching materials for this purpose, and
further calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide the support
necessary to enable the Subcommittee to provide advice and assistance to States parties to the Optional Protocol;
41. Emphasizes the importance of States ensuring proper follow-up to the recommendations and conclusions
of the relevant treaty bodies and mechanisms, including the Committee, the Subcommittee, national preventive
mechanisms and the Special Rapporteur, while recognizing the important role of the universal periodic review,
national human rights institutions and other relevant national or regional bodies in preventing torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
42. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur addressing the achievements
made towards eradicating torture and other ill-treatment and reflecting on the primary challenges facing the universal
implementation of the Convention386 and of his report contained in document A/74/148, encourages him to continue
to include, in his recommendations, proposals on the prevention and investigation of torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment, including its gender-based manifestations, requests him to continue to consider
including in his reports information on the follow-up by States to his recommendations, visits and communications,
including progress made and problems encountered, and on other official contacts, and further encourages future
collaboration between practitioners, experts and other relevant stakeholders towards these goals;
43. Calls upon all States to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in the performance of his tasks,
to supply all necessary information requested by him, to fully and expeditiously respond to and follow up on his urgent
appeals, to give serious consideration to responding favourably to requests by him to visit their countries and to enter
into a constructive dialogue with him on requested visits to their countries as well as with respect to the follow-up to
his recommendations;
44. Stresses the need for the continued regular exchange of views among the Committee, the Subcommittee,
the Special Rapporteur and other relevant United Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as for the pursuit of
cooperation with relevant United Nations programmes, notably the United Nations crime prevention and criminal
justice programme, with regional organizations and mechanisms, as appropriate, and with civil society organizations,
including non-governmental organizations, with a view to enhancing further their effectiveness and cooperation on
issues relating to the prevention and eradication of torture by, inter alia, improving coordination;
45. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, within the overall budgetary framework of the United Nations,
the provision of adequate staff and facilities for the bodies and mechanisms involved in preventing and combating
torture and assisting victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including, in
particular, the Committee, the Subcommittee and the Special Rapporteur, commensurate with the strong support
expressed by Member States for preventing and combating torture and assisting victims of torture, in order to enable
them to discharge their mandates in a comprehensive, sustained and effective manner, and taking fully into account
the specific nature of their mandates;
46. Recognizes the global need for international assistance to victims of torture, stresses the importance of the
work of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, appeals to all States and
organizations to contribute annually to the Fund, preferably with a substantial increase in the level of contributions,
and welcomes the establishment of and encourages contributions to the Special Fund established by the Optional
Protocol to support the implementation of the recommendations made by the Subcommittee and of educational
programmes by the national preventive mechanisms;

_______________
386

A/73/207.

831

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

47. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to transmit to all States the appeals of the General Assembly
for contributions to the Funds, to include the Funds, on an annual basis, among the programmes for which funds are
pledged at the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, and to submit to the Human Rights
Council, and to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth, seventy-sixth and seventy-seventh sessions, a report on the
operations of the Funds, and encourages the Chair of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Victims of Torture to continuously raise awareness among States and relevant stakeholders about the overall trends
and developments in its operations;
48. Welcomes and acknowledges the work of the Convention against Torture Initiative, launched in March
2014 on the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention, to achieve the universal ratification and improved
implementation of the Convention by 2024, as well as related regional initiatives on the prevention and eradication of
torture;
49. Calls upon all States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as relevant intergovernmental and civil society organizations, including
non-governmental organizations, to commemorate, on 26 June, the United Nations International Day in Support of
Victims of Torture;
50. Decides to consider at its seventy-fifth, seventy-sixth and seventy-seventh sessions the reports of the
Secretary-General, including the report on the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture and the Special
Fund established by the Optional Protocol, the report of the Committee, the report of the Subcommittee and the interim
report of the Special Rapporteur;
51. Also decides to give its full consideration to the subject matter at its seventy-seventh session.
RESOLUTION 74/144
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.1, para. 13)387

74/144. Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional
Protocol thereto: accessibility
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 72/162 of 19 December 2017 and its previous relevant resolutions, as well as relevant
resolutions of the Human Rights Council and of the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions,
Recalling also the universality, indivisibility, interdependence and interrelatedness of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the need for persons with disabilities to be guaranteed the full enjoyment of their rights
and freedoms without discrimination,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,388 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities389 and the Optional Protocol thereto,390 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination

_______________
387

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia and Zimbabwe.
388
Resolution 217 A (III).
389
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
390
Ibid., vol. 2518, No. 44910.

832

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

against Women,391 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,392 the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination393 and all other relevant international human rights instruments,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,394 the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030395 and the New Urban Agenda,396
Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,397 which is inclusive of persons with disabilities
and in which Member States pledged to leave no one behind, recognizing that the contributions of persons with
disabilities are important to its full and effective implementation, and acknowledging that Member States, while
implementing the 2030 Agenda, should, inter alia, respect, protect and promote human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without discrimination of any kind,
Welcoming the fact that, since the opening for signature of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto on 30 March 2007, 162 States and 1 regional integration organization
have signed and 180 States and 1 regional integration organization have ratified or acceded to the Convention and
94 States have signed and 96 States have ratified the Optional Protocol,
Noting with appreciation the work and activities that have been and continue to be undertaken in support of the
Convention and towards the fulfilment and mainstreaming of the rights of all persons with disabilities, particularly
through, inter alia, the Conference of States Parties to the Convention, the Under-Secretary-General and Senior
Adviser on Policy, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, other human rights treaty bodies, the
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of persons with disabilities, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Disability and Accessibility, the Inter-Agency Support Group on the Convention and the InterAgency Standing Committee Task Team on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action,
Noting the need for Member States, the United Nations system and other stakeholders to further strengthen the
normative framework on disability, including the rights of persons with disabilities, in line with the pledge of leaving
no one behind contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and to consider disability as a global issue,
cutting across the pillars of the United Nations,
Welcoming progress towards mainstreaming disability, including the rights of persons with disabilities, in the
work of the United Nations, and noting with appreciation the launch of the United Nations Disability Inclusion
Strategy and the leadership of the Secretary-General to bring about transformative and systematic change on disability
inclusion across the United Nations system,
Welcoming also the contributions of the Steering Committee on Accessibility to improving the accessibility of
United Nations premises, conferences and meetings, and information and communications, and notes other disabilityrelated initiatives such as the Global Disability Summit,
Welcoming further the observance of international disability-related days, including “World Autism Awareness
Day” on 2 April 2019 on the theme “Assistive technologies, active participation”, which promoted accessibility for
persons on the autism spectrum to affordable assistive technologies in order to eliminate the barriers to their
participation on an equal basis with others, as well as the observance of World Down Syndrome Day on 21 March
2019 on the theme “Leave no one behind in education”, which focused on inclusive and accessible education,
Taking note with appreciation that the 2018 Disability and Development Report398 presents an overview of the
status of accessibility for persons with disabilities, and the persistent gaps in this regard, and identifies good practices

_______________
391

Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
393
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
394
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
395
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
396
Resolution 71/256, annex.
397
Resolution 70/1.
398
United Nations publication, Sales No. 19.IV.4.
392

833

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and recommended actions in accessibility for the effective implementation of the Convention and the disabilityinclusive achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Recalling that persons with disabilities include those who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or
sensory impairments which, in interaction with various barriers, may hinder their full and effective participation in
society on an equal basis with others, including in relation to their access to the physical environment, to transportation,
to information and communications, including information and communications technologies and systems, and to
other facilities and services open or provided to the public, in both urban and rural areas,
Expressing concern that women and girls with disabilities are subject to multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination, which limit their enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis with
others, and recognizing that the realization of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls is crucial
to making progress across all the Sustainable Development Goals and targets,
Recognizing the importance of accessibility for persons with disabilities to the physical, social, economic and
cultural environment, to health and education and to information and communications, and the need to identify and
eliminate prejudice, discrimination, obstacles and barriers that limit the access of persons with disabilities to the
physical environment, to transportation, to information and communications, including information and
communications technologies and systems, and to other facilities and services open or available to the public, in both
urban and rural areas, on an equal basis with others,
Emphasizing that accessibility is a precondition for persons with disabilities to live independently, participate
fully and equally in all aspects of life and fully enjoy all their human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal
basis with others, and recognizing the importance of accessibility measures, including through the use of universal
design and assistive technologies, as a means of investing in society as a whole and as an integral part of the
2030 Agenda,
Recognizing the need to take into account the specific challenges linked to accessibility for older persons with
disabilities, especially those faced by older women with disabilities,
Recognizing also the need to promote and protect the human rights of all persons with disabilities, including
those who require more intensive support to attain and maintain maximum independence, full physical, mental, social
and vocational abilities and full inclusion and participation in all aspects of life,
Recognizing further the benefits of universal design as a means of designing environments, including
technologies, products, programmes and services, that are inclusive and accessible to all, recognizing that universal
design should not exclude assistive devices for particular groups of persons with disabilities, and recognizing also that
the application of universal design from the initial stages of any development could help make the building of
accessible physical environments, as well as information and communications technologies and systems, much less
costly than retrofitting adaptations to remove barriers to accessibility,
Recognizing that accessibility measures, such as standards, laws and policies, should include reasonable
accommodations which are necessary and appropriate modifications and adjustments not imposing a disproportionate
or undue burden, where needed in a particular case, to ensure that persons with disabilities may enjoy and exercise all
human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis with others,
Recognizing also that persons with disabilities are often disproportionately affected in situations of risk,
including situations of armed conflict, humanitarian emergencies and the occurrence of natural disasters and in their
aftermath, and that they may require specific protection and safety measures, recognizing further the need to support
further participation and inclusion of persons with disabilities in the development of measures and decision-making
processes relating thereto, in order to ensure disability-inclusive risk reduction and humanitarian action, and
recognizing the special coping mechanisms developed by persons with disabilities to withstand the effects of conflict
and natural disasters,
Recognizing further the contribution of family members towards the full and equal enjoyment by persons with
disabilities of their human rights, including through participation in organizations which empower persons with
disabilities to have a voice and full control of their own lives, and recognizing the need for States to raise awareness
throughout society, including at the family level, regarding persons with disabilities and to foster respect for their
rights and dignity, including accessibility,
834

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the need for States to accelerate the development, implementation and mainstreaming of strategies
that respect, protect and fulfil the rights of all persons with disabilities, including women and girls, to the enjoyment
of civil, political, economic, cultural and social rights, without discrimination, by adopting legislation, policies and
programmes that are inclusive of and accessible to all persons with disabilities, and affirming that realizing their
human rights requires their full, effective and meaningful participation and inclusion in all aspects of public, political,
economic, cultural, social and family life, on an equal basis with all others,
Recognizing also that information and communications technologies, including assistive technology and
devices, have shown their potential to strengthen the exercise of human rights, and that they can create conditions
enabling persons with disabilities to fully enjoy their human rights and can contribute to their social inclusion and
empowerment and allow them to live independently in the community on an equal basis with others and to fully,
effectively and meaningfully participate in society and in the workplace,
Emphasizing the right to privacy and the respect for data-protection regulations and standards in all uses of
information and communications technologies and systems,
Welcoming the positive role of civil society in the promotion and implementation of accessibility for persons
with disabilities, and stressing the importance of closely consulting and actively involving persons with disabilities,
including women and girls, through their representative organizations, in the development and implementation of
legislation and policies that affect their lives and in other decision-making processes concerning issues relating to persons
with disabilities, thereby minimizing the risk of creating barriers to accessibility for all persons with disabilities,
Stressing the need for capacity-development efforts aimed at empowering persons with disabilities and their
representative organizations to ensure equal access to quality education, full and productive employment and decent
work on an equal basis and without discrimination to persons with disabilities, including by promoting access to
inclusive education systems, skills development, volunteering opportunities and vocational and entrepreneurial
training in order to enable persons with disabilities to attain and maintain maximum independence,
Acknowledging the importance of taking measures to raise awareness of the rights of persons with disabilities
in order to eliminate discrimination, stereotypes, prejudices and other barriers which constitute a major impediment
to their full, equal and effective participation in society and the economy, as well as in political and public life,
Concerned that the continuing lack of reliable statistics, data and information on the situation of persons with
disabilities at the national, regional and global levels contributes to their exclusion in official statistics, policies and
programmes, and in this regard recognizing the need to intensify efforts to build the capacity of Member States, and
to strengthen, at the national level, data collection, analysis and use of data disaggregated by disability, sex and age
for specific indicators, using appropriate measurement tools, including, as appropriate, the United Nations Children’s
Fund Module on Child Functioning and the Washington Group short set of questions on disability and other datacollection methodologies, to support the development of evidence-based policies and programmes that are accessible
to and inclusive of persons with disabilities, including women and girls, on an equal basis with others,
1. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities389 and the Optional Protocol thereto390 as a matter of priority;
2. Encourages States that have ratified the Convention and submitted one or more reservations to it to
review regularly the effect and continued relevance of such reservations and to consider the possibility of
withdrawing them;
3. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to continue to strengthen efforts undertaken to disseminate accessible and easy-to-understand
information on the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto, including to children and young people to promote
their understanding, and to assist States parties in implementing their obligations under those instruments;
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on accessibility and the status of the Convention and the
Optional Protocol thereto,399 and the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of
persons with disabilities;400

_______________
399
400

A/74/146.
A/74/186.

835

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying the Marrakesh Treaty
to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise Print Disabled;
6. Emphasizes the importance of mainstreaming disability issues as an integral part of relevant sustainable
development strategies, and encourages States to apply a human rights-based and gender-sensitive approach and to
intensify their efforts to advance the rights of persons with disabilities in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,397 consistent with their international obligations;
7. Encourages States to review and repeal any law or policy that restricts the full and effective participation
in political and public life of persons with disabilities on an equal basis with others or discriminates against persons
with disabilities, including with regard to accessing a service or facility open to the public, and to establish accessible
and effective channels of redress for discrimination on the basis of disability;
8. Urges States to take steps to eliminate multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination against women
and girls with disabilities through repealing discriminatory laws, policies and practices, to take all effective measures
to remove any other barriers faced by women and girls with disabilities in accessing the physical, social, economic
and cultural environment, transportation, health and education, information and communications, including
information and communications technologies and systems, and other facilities and services open or provided to the
public and to ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all rights stipulated in the Convention;
9. Calls upon all States to ensure the full enjoyment by children with disabilities of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms, on an equal basis with other children, in recognition that discrimination against any child on
the basis of a disability is a violation of the inherent dignity and worth of the child, to enhance inclusion and address
barriers faced by children with disabilities, including addressing discriminatory, attitudinal and environmental barriers
to their participation and inclusion in society and in the community, to develop gender- and age-sensitive policies and
capacities to ensure the rights and address the particular needs of children with disabilities, including children in
vulnerable situations, including migrant children, children without parental care, children in street situations and child
victims of trafficking, and those affected by climate change, and to prevent and respond to cases of gender-based
violence;
10. Recommends that Member States take into account the needs and requirements of older persons with
disabilities in national development plans and national policies, including through the collection of data disaggregated
by sex, age and disability, and encourage communities to develop targeted services for older persons with disabilities;
11. Calls upon States to develop, adopt and promote national accessibility standards and guidelines, in close
consultation with persons with disabilities, through their representative organizations and other relevant stakeholders,
which include the promotion of universal design and also include minimum standards for the physical environment,
transportation, information and communications, including information and communications technologies and
systems, and other facilities and services open or provided to the public, in both urban and rural areas;
12. Also calls upon States to regularly review accessibility standards and laws, as appropriate, in close
consultation with persons with disabilities, including through their representative organizations, national human rights
institutions in compliance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights (the Paris Principles),401 where they exist, and other stakeholders, and to use data in
compliance with data-protection regulations and standards in order to identify, assess and address gaps to ensure that
persons with disabilities can access the physical environment, transportation, information and communications,
including information and communications technologies and systems, and other facilities and services open or
provided to the public on an equal basis with others;
13. Further calls upon States to promote other appropriate forms of assistance and support to persons with
disabilities to ensure their access to information, and to provide information intended for the general public to persons
with disabilities using accessible formats and technologies appropriate to different kinds of disabilities in a timely
manner and without additional cost;
14. Calls upon States to ensure that persons with disabilities have the opportunity to choose their place of
residence and where and with whom they live on an equal basis with others and are not obliged to live in a particular

_______________
401

836

Resolution 48/134, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

living arrangement and that persons with disabilities have access to a range of in-home, residential and other
community support services, including personal assistance necessary to support living and inclusion in the
community, and to prevent isolation or segregation from the community;
15. Also calls upon States to promote and facilitate access to and sharing of accessible and assistive
technologies, especially new and emerging ones, including information and communications systems, mobility aids,
assistive devices and other assistive technologies, by persons with disabilities, and to promote research and
development in this regard, so that these technologies and systems become accessible at minimum cost and at an early
stage;
16. Urges States to consider laws, policies and procedures relating to public procurement to ensure that
persons with disabilities can access any service or facility open to the public on an equal basis with others;
17. Calls upon States to continue to take appropriate measures to raise awareness and to provide training and
other support to public officials, service providers and other relevant stakeholders on accessibility issues facing
persons with disabilities, and to address discrimination, stereotypes, prejudices and harmful practices in order to
promote the provision of accessible and inclusive public services and facilities that take into account all aspects of
accessibility, including the rights of persons with disabilities;
18. Encourages States to disseminate information to and work with the private sector, including employers
and other relevant stakeholders, to implement accessibility measures for any facilities or services that are open or
provided to the public that take into account all aspects of accessibility for persons with disabilities;
19. Urges States to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against persons with disabilities,
including women and girls, in situations of risk, including situations of armed conflict, humanitarian emergencies and
the occurrence of natural disasters, and ensure that their specific needs are addressed, such as access to basic services,
including health-care services, rehabilitation assistance, psychosocial support and educational programmes, as well
as transportation and information and communications technologies and systems on an equal basis with others;
20. Calls upon States to ensure that persons with disabilities are able to access inclusive, quality primary,
secondary and tertiary education, vocational training, adult education and lifelong learning without discrimination and
on an equal basis with others and to facilitate the full and equal participation of persons with disabilities in education
by taking appropriate steps through the provision of information in accessible and alternative communication formats,
reasonable accommodation and other support as required;
21. Also calls upon States to strengthen efforts to empower all persons with disabilities and enhance their
participation and promote their leadership in society through taking measures to address and remove all barriers that
prevent or restrict their access and full inclusion and participation in the community on an equal basis with others,
including in the government and public sector, the private sector, civil society and all branches and bodies of the
national monitoring system of the Convention, and to work to ensure that persons with disabilities are closely
consulted and actively involved, through their representative organizations, in the design, implementation and
monitoring of all legislation, policies and programmes which have an impact on their lives;
22. Encourages States to provide support to existing organizations and promote the creation of organizations,
including civil society organizations and networks of persons with disabilities, as appropriate, and to promote and
support persons with disabilities in taking leadership roles in public decision-making bodies at all levels, recognizing
the importance for States of having an open, inclusive and transparent engagement with civil society in the
implementation of measures on persons with disabilities;
23. Calls upon States to collect and analyse data disaggregated by income, sex, race, age, ethnicity, migratory
status, disability, geographical location and other characteristics relevant to national contexts to assist, inter alia, with
the identification and eradication of barriers and all forms of discrimination, including multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination, that prevent persons with disabilities from enjoying all the rights stipulated in the Convention, to
guide inclusive policy planning and to be used on an ongoing basis to assess and advance accessibility, and also calls
upon States to improve data-collection systems for adequate monitoring and evaluation frameworks on the
implementation of the Convention and the Sustainable Development Goals for all persons with disabilities;
24. Urges States and other relevant stakeholders, including national human rights institutions in compliance
with the Paris Principles, where they exist, to continue to support the inclusion of persons with disabilities in the
837

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by, inter alia, supporting the disaggregation of data
by disability, sex and age for specific indicators, using appropriate measurement tools, including, as appropriate, the
United Nations Children’s Fund Module on Child Functioning and the Washington Group short set of questions on
disability and other data-collection methodologies, to assist States in measuring the achievement of the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals and 169 associated targets and programming policies in the context of the Goals;
25. Encourages States, United Nations entities and relevant international organizations, inter alia:
(a) To ensure that international cooperation is disability- and gender-sensitive and inclusive, including
through the implementation of disability markers to monitor the implementation of programmes and the collection of
data and statistics on persons with disabilities in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the Sustainable Development Goals, targets and indicators, as well as other international frameworks;
(b) To support, promote and strengthen international cooperation and assistance, and enhance partnerships
and coordination, including South-South cooperation, among themselves and with the active participation of persons
with disabilities, through their representative organizations, as well as other relevant civil society organizations and
stakeholders, in strengthening the means of implementation of the Convention and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including through the mobilization of financial resources, technical cooperation and facilitation of
access to and sharing of accessible and assistive technologies on mutually agreed terms;
(c) To facilitate and support capacity-building initiatives aimed at fostering the exchange of technical
knowledge, information and other programmes at the regional and international levels relating to good practices in
achieving accessibility outcomes and to promote international cooperation that is accessible and inclusive of persons
with disabilities;
26. Recalls its decision on accessible seating for representatives with disabilities in resolution 73/341 of
12 September 2019 on the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly, and in this regard welcomes the note
by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat implementing the decision;
27. Invites the Chair of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Special Rapporteur
on the rights of persons with disabilities to address and engage in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly
annually, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”, as a way to enhance communication
between the Assembly and the Committee;
28. Calls upon the United Nations system, including its agencies, funds and programmes, within their
respective mandates, to continue to work collaboratively to accelerate the full and effective mainstreaming of
disability inclusion into the United Nations system, including by implementing and reporting on the United Nations
Disability Inclusion Strategy across its programmes and operations;
29. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a progress
report on steps taken by the United Nations system towards mainstreaming disability inclusion, including
implementation of the United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy, within existing resources;
30. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations and other relevant stakeholders to take part in
implementing the recommendations endorsed by the Steering Committee on Accessibility in June 2019;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the rights of persons with disabilities with a focus on the participation of persons with disabilities and their
representative organizations in decision-making processes, including good practices and challenges in the
implementation of the Convention in that regard, in consultation with persons with disabilities and their representative
organizations, relevant United Nations agencies, including the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Disability and Accessibility, the Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the United Nations Children’s Fund, taking into account the views of relevant
stakeholders and using existing available materials, and to include a segment on the status of the Convention and the
Optional Protocol thereto;
32. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to maintain the levels of resources required by the relevant
offices in the United Nations system for the fulfilment of their tasks with respect to their work on the rights of and
inclusive development for persons with disabilities.

838

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/145
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)402

74/145. Freedom of religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Recalling article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,403 article 18 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights404 and other relevant human rights provisions,
Recalling also its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it proclaimed the Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling further its previous resolutions on freedom of religion or belief and on the elimination of all forms of
intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or belief, including its resolution 73/176 of 17 December 2018
and Human Rights Council resolution 40/10 of 21 March 2019,405
Recognizing the important work carried out by the Human Rights Committee in providing guidance with respect
to the scope of freedom of religion or belief,
Noting the conclusions and recommendations of the expert workshops organized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and contained in the Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of
advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence,
adopted in Rabat on 5 October 2012,406
Considering that religion or belief, for those who profess either, is one of the fundamental elements in their
conception of life and that freedom of religion or belief, as a universal human right, should be fully respected and
guaranteed,
Seriously concerned by continuing acts of intolerance and violence based on religion or belief against
individuals, including against persons belonging to religious communities and religious minorities around the world,
and by the increasing number and intensity of such incidents, which are often of a criminal nature and may have
international characteristics,
Deeply concerned by the limited progress that has been made in the elimination of all forms of intolerance and
of discrimination based on religion or belief, and believing that further intensified efforts are therefore required to
promote and protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief and to eliminate all forms of
hatred, intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief, as noted at the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to
8 September 2001, as well as at the Durban Review Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009,
Recalling that States have the primary responsibility to promote and protect human rights, including the human
rights of persons belonging to religious minorities, including their right to exercise their religion or belief freely,

_______________
402

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and
Uruguay.
403
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
404
Resolution 217 A (III).
405
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
406
A/HRC/22/17/Add.4, appendix.

839

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Concerned that State and non-State actors sometimes tolerate or encourage acts of violence, or credible threats
of violence, against persons belonging to religious communities and religious minorities,
Concerned also by the increasing number of laws and regulations that limit the freedom of thought, conscience
and religion or belief and by the implementation of existing laws in a discriminatory manner,
Convinced of the need to urgently address the rapid rise in various parts of the world of religious extremism that
affects the human rights of individuals, in particular persons belonging to religious communities and religious
minorities, the situations of violence and discrimination that affect many individuals, particularly women and children,
on the basis of or in the name of religion or belief or in accordance with cultural and traditional practices, and the
misuse of religion or belief for ends inconsistent with the principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations and
in other relevant instruments of the United Nations,
Seriously concerned about all attacks on religious places, sites and shrines that violate international law, in
particular international human rights law and international humanitarian law, including any deliberate destruction of
relics and monuments, and including also those carried out in connection with incitement to national, racial or religious
hatred,
Emphasizing that States, regional organizations, national human rights institutions, non-governmental
organizations, religious bodies, the media and civil society as a whole have an important role to play in promoting
tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity and in the universal promotion and protection of human rights,
including freedom of religion or belief,
Underlining the importance of education, including human rights education, in the promotion of tolerance,
which involves the acceptance by the public of and its respect for diversity, including with regard to religious
expression, and underlining also the fact that education, in particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way
to promoting tolerance and the elimination of discrimination based on religion or belief,
1. Stresses that everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, which
includes the freedom to have or not to have, or to adopt, a religion or belief of one’s own choice and the freedom,
either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest one’s religion or belief in teaching,
practice, worship and observance, including the right to change one’s religion or belief;
2. Emphasizes that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief applies equally to all
persons, regardless of their religion or belief and without any discrimination as to their equal protection by the law;
3. Strongly condemns violations of freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, as well as all forms
of intolerance, discrimination and violence based on religion or belief;
4. Recognizes with deep concern the overall rise in instances of discrimination, intolerance and violence,
regardless of the actors, directed against members of many religious and other communities in various parts of the
world, including cases motivated by Islamophobia, antisemitism and Christianophobia and prejudices against persons
of other religions or beliefs;
5. Reaffirms that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion or belief, as this may have
adverse consequences for the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or belief of all members of the religious
communities concerned;
6. Strongly condemns continuing violence and acts of terrorism targeting individuals, including persons
belonging to religious minorities, on the basis of or in the name of religion or belief, and underlines the importance of
a comprehensive and inclusive community-based preventive approach, involving a wide set of actors, including civil
society and religious communities;
7. Recalls that States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish acts of
violence, intimidation and harassment against a person or a group of persons belonging to a religious minority,
regardless of the perpetrator, and that failure to do so may constitute a human rights violation;
8. Emphasizes that freedom of religion or belief, freedom of opinion and expression, the right to peaceful
assembly and the right to freedom of association are interdependent, interrelated and mutually reinforcing, and stresses
the role that these rights can play in the fight against all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion
or belief;
840

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Strongly condemns any advocacy of hatred based on religion or belief that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any other
means;
10. Expresses concern at the persistence of institutionalized social intolerance and discrimination practised
against many on the grounds of religion or belief, and emphasizes that legal procedures pertaining to religious or
belief-based groups and places of worship are not a prerequisite for the exercise of the right to manifest one’s religion
or belief and that such procedures, when legally required at the national or local level, should be non-discriminatory
in order to contribute to the effective protection of the right of all persons to practise their religion or belief, either
individually or in community with others and in public or private;
11. Recognizes with concern the challenges that persons in vulnerable situations, including persons deprived
of their liberty, refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons, children, persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and migrants, as well as women, are facing as regards their ability to freely
exercise their right to freedom of religion or belief;
12. Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee, restrictions on the freedom to manifest
one’s religion or belief are permitted only if limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety,
order, health or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, are non-discriminatory and are applied in a
manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief;
13. Expresses deep concern at continued obstacles to the enjoyment of the right to freedom of religion or
belief, as well as the increasing number of instances of intolerance, discrimination and violence based on religion or
belief, including:
(a) Acts of violence and intolerance directed against individuals based on their religion or belief, including
religious persons and persons belonging to religious minorities and other communities in various parts of the world;
(b) The rise of religious extremism in various parts of the world that affects the human rights of individuals,
including persons belonging to religious minorities;
(c) Incidents of hatred, discrimination, intolerance and violence based on religion or belief, which may be
associated with or manifested by the derogatory stereotyping, negative profiling and stigmatization of persons based
on their religion or belief;
(d) Attacks on or the destruction of religious places, sites and shrines that violate international law, in
particular international human rights law and international humanitarian law, as they have more than material
significance for the dignity and lives of persons holding spiritual or religious beliefs;
(e) Instances, both in law and practice, that constitute violations of the human right to freedom of religion or
belief, including of the individual right to publicly express one’s spiritual and religious beliefs, taking into account the
relevant articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,403 as well as other international
instruments;
(f) Constitutional and legislative systems that fail to provide adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of
thought, conscience and religion or belief to all without distinction;
14. Urges States to step up their efforts to protect and promote freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief, and to that end:
(a) To ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide adequate and effective guarantees of
freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief to all without distinction by, inter alia, providing access to justice,
including by facilitating legal assistance and effective remedies in cases where the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion or belief or the right to freely choose and practise one’s religion or belief is violated, paying
particular attention to persons belonging to religious minorities;
(b) To implement all accepted universal periodic review recommendations related to the promotion and
protection of freedom of religion or belief;
(c) To ensure that no one within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction is deprived of the right to life,
liberty and security of person because of religion or belief, to provide adequate protection to persons at risk of violent
841

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

attack on the grounds of their religion or belief, to ensure that no one is subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment or arbitrary arrest or detention on that account and to bring to justice all
perpetrators of violations of these rights;
(d) To end violations of the human rights of women and girls and to devote particular attention to appropriate
measures modifying or abolishing existing laws, regulations, customs and practices that discriminate against them,
including in the exercise of their right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, and to foster practical
ways to ensure gender equality;
(e) To ensure that existing legislation is not implemented in a discriminatory manner or does not result in
discrimination based on religion or belief, that no one is discriminated against on the basis of his or her religion or
belief when accessing, inter alia, education, medical care, employment, humanitarian assistance or social benefits, and
that everyone has the right and the opportunity to have access, on general terms of equality, to public services in their
country, without any discrimination based on religion or belief;
(f) To review, whenever relevant, existing registration practices in order to ensure that such practices do not
limit the right of all persons to manifest their religion or belief, either alone or in community with others and in public
or private;
(g) To ensure that no official documents are withheld from the individual on the grounds of religion or belief
and that everyone has the right to refrain from disclosing information concerning their religious affiliation in such
documents against their will;
(h) To ensure, in particular, the right of all persons to worship, assemble or teach in connection with a religion
or belief, their right to establish and maintain places for these purposes and the right of all persons to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas in these areas;
(i) To ensure that, in accordance with appropriate national legislation and in conformity with international
human rights law, the freedom of all persons and members of groups to establish and maintain religious, charitable or
humanitarian institutions is fully respected and protected;
(j) To ensure that all public officials and civil servants, including members of law enforcement bodies, and
personnel of detention facilities, the military and educators, in the course of fulfilling their official duties, respect
freedom of religion or belief and do not discriminate for reasons based on religion or belief, and that they receive all
necessary and appropriate awareness-raising, education or training on respect for freedom of religion or belief;
(k) To take all necessary and appropriate action, in conformity with international standards of human rights,
to combat hatred, discrimination, intolerance and acts of violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by intolerance
based on religion or belief, as well as incitement to hostility and violence, with particular regard to persons belonging
to religious minorities in all parts of the world;
(l) To promote, through education and other means, mutual understanding, tolerance, non-discrimination and
respect in all matters relating to freedom of religion or belief by encouraging, in society at large, a wider knowledge
of the diversity of religions and beliefs and of the history, traditions, languages and cultures of the various religious
minorities existing within their jurisdiction;
(m) To prevent any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on religion or belief that impairs the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis and to detect signs
of intolerance that may lead to discrimination based on religion or belief;
15. Welcomes and encourages initiatives by the media to promote tolerance and respect for religious and
cultural diversity and the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of religion or belief,
and stresses the importance of unhindered participation in the media and in public discourse for all persons, regardless
of their religion or belief;
16. Stresses the importance of a continued and strengthened dialogue in all its forms, including among and
within religions or beliefs, and with broader participation, including of women, to promote greater tolerance, respect
and mutual understanding, and welcomes different initiatives in this regard, including the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations initiative and the programmes led by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization;
842

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Welcomes and encourages the continuing efforts of all actors in society, including national human rights
institutions, non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups based on religion or belief, to promote the
implementation of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief,407 and further encourages their work in promoting freedom of religion or belief, in highlighting
cases of religious intolerance, discrimination and persecution and in promoting religious tolerance;
18. Recommends that States, the United Nations and other actors, including national human rights institutions,
non-governmental organizations and bodies and groups based on religion or belief, in their efforts to promote freedom
of religion or belief, ensure the widest possible dissemination of the text of the Declaration in as many different
languages as possible and promote its implementation;
19. Takes note with appreciation of the work and the interim report on the elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on freedom of religion or belief;408
20. Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, to respond favourably to his
requests to visit their countries and to provide all information and follow-up necessary for the effective fulfilment of
his mandate;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special Rapporteur receives the resources necessary to
fully discharge his mandate;
22. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session;
23. Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance at its seventy-fifth
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/146
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)409

74/146. Implementing the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs
of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms through providing a safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders
and ensuring their protection
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Guided also by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,410 the International Covenants on Human Rights411
and other relevant instruments,

_______________
407

Resolution 36/55.
A/74/358.
409
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Vanuatu..
410
Resolution 217 A (III).
411
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
408

843

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling its resolution 53/144 of 9 December 1998, by which it adopted by consensus the Declaration on the
Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, commonly referred to as the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, and encouraging States to uphold the purposes, principles and provisions of the Declaration in the context
of its implementation,
Stressing, in this regard, that all human rights and fundamental freedoms apply to all persons equally, including
human rights defenders in the context of the Declaration, and that these rights and freedoms must be respected,
protected and fulfilled without discrimination,
Recalling all its other previous resolutions on this subject, including its resolutions 66/164 of 19 December
2011, 68/181 of 18 December 2013, 70/161 of 17 December 2015 and 72/247 of 24 December 2017, and Human
Rights Council resolutions 13/13 of 25 March 2010,412 22/6 of 21 March 2013,413 31/32 of 24 March 2016,414 34/5
of 23 March 2017415 and 40/11 of 21 March 2019,416
Reaffirming that States have the primary responsibility and are under the obligation to respect, promote and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons,
Reiterating that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal, indivisible, interdependent and
interrelated and should be promoted and implemented in a fair and equitable manner, without prejudice to the
implementation of each of those rights and freedoms,
Reaffirming the importance of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders and its full and effective
implementation, and that promoting respect, support and protection for the activities of human rights defenders,
including women, indigenous and environmental human rights defenders, is essential to the overall enjoyment of
human rights, and recognizing the substantial role that human rights defenders can play in supporting efforts to
strengthen conflict prevention, peace and sustainable development, including environmental protection, through
dialogue, openness, participation and justice, including by monitoring, reporting on and contributing to the promotion
and protection of all civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, and other rights, including the right to
development, and in the context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,417
Recognizing the positive, important and legitimate role played by human rights defenders in the promotion and
protection of human rights as they relate to the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy and sustainable environment, and
deeply concerned that human rights defenders working in environmental matters, referred to as environmental human
rights defenders, are among the human rights defenders most exposed and at risk,
Underscoring the positive, important and legitimate role of human rights defenders in promoting and advocating
the realization of all human rights, at the local, national, regional and international levels, including by engaging with
Governments and contributing to the efforts in the implementation of the obligations and commitments of States in
this regard,
Stressing that, in the exercise of the rights and freedoms referred to in the Declaration, human rights defenders,
acting individually and in association with others, shall be subject only to such limitations as are in accordance with
applicable international obligations and are determined by law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and
respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of meeting the just requirements of morality, public order and the
general welfare in a democratic society,

_______________
412

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and A/65/53/Corr.1),
chap. II, sect. A.
413
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
414
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
415
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
416
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
417
Resolution 70/1.

844

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Underscoring that the legal framework within which human rights defenders work peacefully to promote and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms is that of national legislation consistent with the Charter and
international human rights law,
Welcoming the steps taken by some States to create a safe and enabling environment for the promotion,
protection and defence of human rights, and recognizing in this regard the positive efforts by authorities, national
human rights institutions, where they exist, and civil society towards the development and enactment of relevant
national policies, laws, programmes and practices,
Mindful that domestic law and administrative provisions and their application should not hinder but enable the
work of human rights defenders, including by avoiding any criminalization, stigmatization, impediments, obstructions
or restrictions thereof contrary to the obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law,
Gravely concerned that national security, counter-terrorism and cybercrime legislation and other measures, such
as laws regulating civil society organizations, are in some instances misused to target human rights defenders or have
hindered their work and endangered their safety in a manner contrary to international law,
Recognizing the pressing importance of addressing, and taking concrete steps to prevent and stop, the use of
legislation to hinder or limit unduly the ability of human rights defenders to exercise their work, including by
reviewing and, where necessary, amending relevant legislation and its implementation in order to ensure compliance
with international human rights law,
Recognizing also that the protection of human rights defenders can be fully achieved only in the context of a
holistic approach that includes the strengthening of democratic institutions, the fight against impunity, a reduction in
economic inequality and equal access to justice,
Welcoming the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration on
the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally
Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which confirmed the important contribution of human rights
defenders to the protection of human rights, development and peace, and taking note with appreciation of the report
of the Secretary-General on the efforts of the United Nations to promote the implementation of the Declaration,418
Stressing the importance of meaningful participation of human rights defenders in the implementation of the
Declaration, and reaffirming the right of everyone, individually and in association with others, to unhindered access
to and communication with international bodies, in particular the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms
in the field of human rights, including the Human Rights Council and its special procedures, the universal periodic
review mechanism and treaty bodies, as well as regional human rights mechanisms, in accordance with their
respective mandates, existing rules of procedure and modalities, without fear of reprisals,
Recalling its resolution 74/5 of 15 October 2019, by which it proclaimed 28 September as the International Day
for Universal Access to Information, and taking note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights entitled “Procedures and practices in respect of civil society engagement with
international and regional organizations”,419
Recognizing that, while the institutional measures for the protection of human rights defenders and the
promotion of their work within the United Nations, regional organizations and national systems have grown in number
since the adoption of the Declaration, they remain insufficient to address the ongoing human rights violations and
abuses against human rights defenders around the world, and that strengthened efforts are required for the effective
implementation of the Declaration,
Stressing the need for further action by States and non-State actors to promote a safe and enabling environment
for human rights defenders and their protection, taking into account their diverse situations and the diverse contexts
in which they operate,
1. Expresses grave concern at the situation of human rights defenders around the world, strongly condemns
the killing of and all other human rights violations or abuses against human rights defenders, including women,

_______________
418
419

A/73/230.
A/HRC/38/18.

845

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

environmental and indigenous human rights defenders, by State and non-State actors, and stresses that such acts may
violate international law and undermine sustainable development at the local, national, regional and international
levels;
2. Affirms the important role of human rights defenders in supporting States to realize the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development,417 including the pledge that no one will be left behind and to reach the furthest behind first;
3. Welcomes the work and takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the situation of human rights defenders presented to the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly, and
encourages all States to consider implementing recommendations contained in the reports and to cooperate with and
assist the Special Rapporteur;
4. Urges States to promote a safe and enabling environment, including through the implementation of
existing national legislation that is in compliance with international human rights law and, where necessary, through
the adoption and implementation of more comprehensive legislative and administrative measures, in which human
rights defenders can operate free from hindrance, reprisals and insecurity, ensuring, among other things, the right to
take part in the conduct of public affairs and in cultural life, the freedom to seek, receive and impart information and
equal access to justice, including to an effective remedy;
5. Condemns all acts of intimidation and reprisal, both online and offline, by State and non-State actors
against individuals, groups and organs of society, including against human rights defenders and their legal
representatives, associates and family members, who seek to cooperate, are cooperating or have cooperated with
subregional, regional and international bodies, including the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms, in
the field of human rights, and strongly calls upon all States to give effect to the right of everyone, individually and in
association with others, to unhindered access to and communication with international bodies, including the United
Nations, its special procedures, the universal periodic review mechanism and the treaty bodies, as well as regional
human rights mechanisms;
6. Continues to express particular concern about systemic and structural discrimination, violence and
harassment faced by women human rights defenders of all ages, including sexual and gender-based violence as well
as defamation and smear campaigns, both online and offline, and reiterates its strong call upon States to take
appropriate, robust and practical steps to protect women human rights defenders and to integrate a gender perspective
into their efforts to create a safe and enabling environment for the defence of human rights;
7. Recognizes that democracy and the rule of law are essential components for the creation of a safe and
enabling environment and the protection of human rights defenders, and urges States to take measures to strengthen
democratic institutions, safeguard civic space, uphold the rule of law and combat impunity;
8. Calls upon States to acknowledge, through public statements, policies, programmes or laws, the important
and legitimate role of human rights defenders in the promotion of all human rights, democracy and the rule of law as
essential components of ensuring their protection, including by respecting the independence of their organizations and
by avoiding the stigmatization of their work;
9. Reaffirms the utility and benefit of consultations and dialogue with human rights defenders related to
public policies and programmes, including for protection purposes, valuing the meaningful participation of human
rights defenders in the development of programming, policies and practice relevant to their work, encourages States
to hold meaningful consultations with human rights defenders on a regular basis, and further encourages States to
appoint focal points or to employ other relevant mechanisms for human rights defenders within the public
administration;
10. Calls upon all States to take all measures necessary to ensure the rights and safety of all persons, including
human rights defenders, who exercise, inter alia, the rights to freedom of opinion, expression, peaceful assembly and
association, which are essential for the promotion and protection of human rights;
11. Urges States to investigate, in a prompt, effective, independent and accountable manner, complaints and
allegations regarding threats or human rights violations and abuses perpetrated by State and non-State actors,
including against human rights defenders, their legal representatives, associates or family members, and to initiate,
when appropriate, proceedings against the perpetrators so as to ensure that impunity for such acts is eliminated and,
as far as possible, to report publicly on investigations and proceedings;

846

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Calls upon States to take concrete steps to prevent and put an end to arbitrary arrest and detention,
including of human rights defenders, and in this regard strongly urges the release of persons detained or imprisoned,
in violation of the obligations and commitments of States under international human rights law, for exercising their
human rights and fundamental freedoms, such as the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, including in relation to cooperation with the United Nations or other international mechanisms in the area
of human rights;
13. Also calls upon States to take appropriate measures for the prevention of all forms of violence,
intimidation, threats and attacks against human rights defenders on the Internet and through digital technologies, and
to protect human rights defenders, including women human rights defenders, in online spaces and to consider adopting
laws, policies and practices that protect them from defamation and hate speech while also affirming the rights to
freedom of expression and privacy;
14. Further calls upon States to develop and implement appropriate and effective protection initiatives for
human rights defenders at risk or in vulnerable situations, including through meaningful consultation with them and
based on comprehensive risk analysis, and also to ensure that these measures are holistic, respond to the protection
needs of individuals and the communities in which they live and function as an early warning to ensure that human
rights defenders, when threatened, have immediate access to authorities that are competent and adequately resourced
to provide effective protective measures;
15. Calls upon States and encourages non-State actors to ensure that those involved in the protection of human
rights defenders, their legal representatives, associates or family members are trained in human rights and the
protection-related needs of human rights defenders at risk;
16. Underlines the legitimate and valuable role of human rights defenders in mediation efforts and in
supporting victims in accessing effective remedies for violations and abuses of their human rights, including
economic, social and cultural rights, including for members of impoverished communities and communities in
vulnerable situations and for those belonging to minorities and indigenous peoples;
17. Also underlines the value of national human rights institutions, established and operating in accordance
with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the
Paris Principles),420 in the continued engagement with human rights defenders and in the monitoring of existing
legislation and consistently informing the State about its impact on the activities of human rights defenders, including
by making relevant and concrete recommendations;
18. Strongly encourages States to develop and put in place comprehensive, sustainable and gender-responsive
public policies and programmes that support and protect human rights defenders at all stages of their work, that ensure
effective coordination between relevant institutional actors, including coordination within national and local levels,
and address causes of attacks against defenders and barriers against the defence of rights, and that take into account,
inter alia, the diverse situations of human rights defenders and the contexts in which they operate, and the intersectional
dimensions of violations and abuses against women human rights defenders, indigenous peoples, children, persons
belonging to minorities and rural communities;
19. Recognizes the important contribution of the promotion and protection of the safety of human rights
defenders in the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals, including target 16.10, and calls upon States to
strengthen national disaggregated data collection, analysis and reporting on the number of verified cases of killing,
kidnapping, enforced disappearance, arbitrary detention, torture and other harmful acts against human rights
advocates, as reflected in Sustainable Development Goal indicator 16.10.1, and to do their utmost to make these data
available to the relevant entities;
20. Also recognizes the important and legitimate role of human rights defenders in identifying and raising
awareness of human rights impacts, the benefits and risks of development projects and business operations, including
in relation to workplace health, safety and rights, natural resource exploitation and environmental, land and
development issues, by expressing their views, concerns, support, criticism or dissent regarding government policy

_______________
420

Resolution 48/134, annex.

847

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

or action or business activities, and underlines the need for Governments to take the measures necessary to safeguard
space for such public dialogue and its participants;
21. Calls upon all States and encourages non-State actors to implement the Guiding Principles on Business
and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework,421 underscores
the responsibility of all business enterprises, both transnational and other, to respect human rights, including the rights
to life and to liberty and security of person of human rights defenders, and their exercise of the rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and association, and participation in the conduct of public affairs, and underscores
further the importance that business enterprises establish or participate in effective and accessible operational-level
grievance mechanisms for individuals and communities who may be adversely impacted;
22. Strongly reaffirms the urgent need to respect, protect, facilitate and promote the work of human rights
defenders promoting and defending economic, social and cultural rights, as a vital factor contributing towards the
realization of those rights, including as they relate to environmental, land and indigenous issues and business activity,
as well as development, including through corporate accountability;
23. Urges non-State actors, including transnational corporations and other business enterprises, to assume
their responsibility to respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons, including human rights
defenders, and underlines the need to ensure human rights due diligence and the accountability of, and the provision
of adequate remedies by, transnational corporations and other business enterprises, while also urging States to adopt
relevant policies and laws in this regard, including to hold all companies to account for involvement in threats or
attacks against human rights defenders;
24. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders,418 in which he called for the development of a more coherent and comprehensive approach
to support the Declaration by the United Nations, encourages the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, in consultation with the Special Rapporteur and other special procedures of the Human Rights
Council, to continue to compile and share information on best practices and challenges in this regard, requests all
concerned United Nations system entities and organizations, within their mandates, to provide all possible assistance
and support to the Special Rapporteur for the effective fulfilment of his mandate, including in the context of country
visits and through suggestions on ways and means of ensuring the protection of human rights defenders, and requests
the Special Rapporteur to continue to report annually on his activities to the General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council, in accordance with the mandate;
25. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
RESOLUTION 74/147
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)422

74/147. Terrorism and human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,423 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights424 and the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights424 and other relevant international human rights instruments,

_______________
421

A/HRC/17/31, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali,
Malta, Mexico, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Zambia.
423
Resolution 217 A (III).
424
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
422

848

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Commission on Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council concerning human rights and terrorism, the most recent of which are Assembly
resolutions 72/180 of 19 December 2017, 72/246 of 24 December 2017 and 73/174 of 17 December 2018, and
Human Rights Council resolutions 34/8 of 23 March 2017,425 35/34 of 23 June 2017,426 37/27 of 23 March 2018,427
40/16 of 22 March 2019428 and 42/18 of 26 September 2019,429
Emphasizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Reaffirming the obligation of States to respect all human rights and fundamental freedoms and the fundamental
importance of respecting the rule of law,
Reaffirming also its unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed,
regardless of their motivation, and of the financial, material or political support of terrorism as unjustifiable in
accordance with applicable international law,
Renewing its unwavering commitment to strengthening international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism in all their forms and manifestations, while stressing that
terrorism can only be defeated by a sustained and comprehensive approach involving the active participation and
collaboration of all States and international and regional organizations,
Reaffirming the primary responsibility of States to protect the population throughout their territory, and recalling
in this regard that all parties to armed conflict must comply fully with obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law related to the protection of civilians and medical personnel in armed conflict,
Recognizing that terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism have a detrimental effect on the full
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and impede the full enjoyment of political, civil, economic,
social and cultural rights, and that they pose a threat to the territorial integrity and security of States, the stability of
Governments, the rule of law and democracy and, ultimately, to the functioning of societies and international peace
and security,
Emphasizing that terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism cannot and should not be associated
with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group, and that tolerance, pluralism, inclusion and respect for
diversity, dialogue among civilizations and the enhancement of interfaith and intercultural understanding and respect
among people, including at the national, regional and global levels, while combating the escalation of hatred, are
among the most important elements in the promotion of cooperation and success in preventing and combating
terrorism, and welcoming the various initiatives to that end,
Reaffirming that States must ensure that any measure taken to counter terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism complies with international law, in particular international human rights law, international
refugee law and international humanitarian law,
Reaffirming also its commitment to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars,
as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 60/288 of 8 September 2006, which reaffirm, inter alia, respect
for human rights for all and the rule of law as being the fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism, and its sixth
review, as taken note of in General Assembly resolution 72/284 of 26 June 2018,
Reaffirming further that the promotion and the protection of human rights for all and the rule of law are essential
to the fight against terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism, and recognizing that effective counterterrorism measures and the protection of human rights are not conflicting goals but are complementary and mutually
reinforcing,

_______________
425

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
427
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
428
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
429
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
426

849

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing its grave concern at the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and at the threat it poses to all
States, including countries of origin, transit and destination, and encouraging all States to address this threat by
enhancing their cooperation and developing relevant measures to tackle this phenomenon, in accordance with their
obligations under international law, including international human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law,
Deploring attacks on religious places and shrines and cultural sites that violate international law, in particular
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, as applicable, including all deliberate destruction
of relics, monuments or religious sites,
Strongly condemning the recruitment and use of children to perpetrate terrorist attacks and all violations and
abuses committed by terrorist groups against children and women, including killing and maiming, abduction and rape
and other forms of sexual violence, and noting that such violations and abuses may amount to war crimes or crimes
against humanity,
Deeply deploring the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims and their families, and, while stressing the
need to promote and protect the rights of victims of terrorism, in particular women and children, reaffirming its
profound solidarity with them and stressing the importance of providing them with proper support and assistance
while respecting, inter alia, considerations regarding remembrance, dignity, respect, accountability, truth and justice,
in accordance with international law,
Expressing deep concern that acts of sexual and gender-based violence are known to be part of the strategic
objectives and ideology of certain terrorist groups and are used as an instrument to increase their power through
supporting financing and recruitment and through the destruction of communities,
Recognizing that countering terrorism requires a comprehensive approach and a multidimensional strategy to
tackle the factors underlying terrorism,
Recognizing also the difficulties faced by the international community in addressing the conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism and violent extremism, which can be conducive to terrorism, and urging Member States and
the United Nations system to take measures, pursuant to international law and while ensuring national ownership, to
address all drivers of violent extremism conducive to terrorism, both internal and external, in a balanced manner,
Conscious that there are a number of drivers underlying radicalization to terrorism, and that development based
on the principles of social justice, inclusion and equal opportunities can contribute to the prevention of terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism and to the promotion of inclusive, open and resilient societies, notably
through education, and affirming the determination of States to work towards conflict resolution, to confront
oppression, to eradicate poverty, to promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development, global prosperity,
good governance, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and the rule of law, to improve intercultural
understanding and to promote respect for all,
1. Strongly condemns all terrorist acts as criminal and unjustifiable, and expresses grave concern at their
detrimental effects on the enjoyment of all human rights;
2. Reaffirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with their
obligations under international law, in particular international human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law;
3. Expresses concern that terrorists and terrorist groups have targeted communities and individuals, as well
as Governments, including on the basis of religion or belief and/or ethnicity;
4. Stresses the responsibility of States to protect persons in their territory against such acts, in full compliance
with their obligations under international law, and in particular international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law;
5. Expresses serious concern at the violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms and of international
refugee law and international humanitarian law in the context of countering terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism;
850

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Reaffirms its commitment to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and a balanced and
integrated implementation of its four pillars, as adopted in its resolution 60/288, and at its sixth review, and recognizes
the need to redouble efforts for even attention paid to and even implementation of all the pillars of the strategy;
7. Also reaffirms its profound solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their families, acknowledges the
importance of protecting their rights and providing them with proper support, assistance and rehabilitation while
taking into account, when appropriate, considerations regarding remembrance, dignity, respect, justice and truth in
such a way that promotes accountability and ends impunity, and encourages the enhancement of international
cooperation and the exchange of expertise in that respect, in accordance with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations;
8. Stresses the importance of ensuring access to justice and accountability, and calls upon States to ensure
that any person who alleges that his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms have been violated by measures
taken or means employed to counter terrorism or violent extremism conducive to terrorism has access to justice, due
process and an effective remedy, and that victims of human rights violations and abuses receive adequate, effective
and prompt remedy and reparations, which should include, as appropriate, restitution, compensation, rehabilitation
and guarantees of non-repetition as a fundamental basis of any strategy to counter terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism;
9. Also stresses the importance of developing and maintaining effective, fair, humane, transparent and
accountable criminal justice systems in a manner that fully respects the rights to equality and non-discrimination in
the administration of justice, to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal, to a
review of detention and to the presumption of innocence and other fundamental judicial guarantees, such as due
process, in accordance with their obligations under international law, including international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and international refugee law;
10. Urges States to fully comply with their obligations under international law while countering terrorism, in
particular international human rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law, with regard to
the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
11. Also urges States to take all steps necessary to ensure the right of anyone arrested or detained on a criminal
charge to be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorized by law to exercise judicial power and the
entitlement to trial within a reasonable time or release;
12. Further urges States to safeguard the work of civil society by ensuring that counter-terrorism laws and
measures are consistent with and are applied in a manner that fully respects human rights, particularly the rights to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association;
13. Urges States to ensure that measures taken to counter terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism are not discriminatory, and not to resort to profiling based on stereotypes founded on ethnic, racial or
religious grounds or any other ground of discrimination prohibited by international law;
14. Also urges States to ensure, in accordance with their obligations under international law and national
regulations, and whenever international humanitarian law is applicable, that counter-terrorism legislation and
measures do not impede humanitarian and medical activities or engagement with all relevant actors as foreseen by
international humanitarian law;
15. Recognizes the important role of religious leaders and institutions, local communities and community
leaders in promoting tolerance and in preventing and countering terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism;
16. Also recognizes the important role of women in preventing and countering terrorism and violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, and requests States to consider, when appropriate, the impact of counter-terrorism
strategies on women’s and children’s human rights, and to seek consultations with their respective organizations when
developing strategies to counter terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism;
17. Urges States to ensure that gender equality and non-discrimination are taken into account when shaping,
reviewing and implementing all counter-terrorism measures and to promote the full and effective participation of
women in these processes;

851

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

18. Also urges States to take measures to ensure that counter-terrorism laws and implementing measures are
consistent with and are applied in a manner that fully respects the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights423 and the obligations of States under international human rights law, in particular the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,424 with a view to ensuring respect for the principles of legal certainty and
legality;
19. Strongly condemns terrorist acts and all acts of violence committed by terrorist groups, including
trafficking in persons, kidnapping and hostage-taking with demands for ransom and/or political concessions, and the
continued systematic and widespread abuses of human rights perpetrated by such groups, and calls upon all Member
States to prevent terrorists from benefiting from ransom payment and political concessions and to secure the safe
release of hostages, in accordance with applicable legal obligations, while noting the initiatives in this regard,
including the Algiers Memorandum on Good Practices on Preventing and Denying the Benefits of Kidnapping for
Ransom by Terrorists;
20. Urges States to do all they can, in accordance with their obligations under international law, to prevent any
political, material or financial support from reaching terrorist groups, to deny terrorists safe haven, freedom of
operation, movement and recruitment and to criminalize the wilful provision or collection by any means, directly or
indirectly, of funds by their nationals or in their territories with the intention that the funds be used, or with the
knowledge that they are to be used, by terrorist groups for any purpose, and to bring to justice or, where appropriate,
extradite the perpetrators of terrorist acts or any person who supports, facilitates or participates, or attempts to
participate, in the financing, planning or preparation of terrorist acts;
21. Calls upon States to refrain from providing support to entities or persons involved in terrorist acts,
including support in establishing propaganda platforms advocating hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, including through the Internet and other media, and emphasizes in this regard the
key importance of full respect for the right to freedom of opinion and expression as set out in the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
22. Urges States to adopt rehabilitation and reintegration strategies for returning foreign terrorist fighters, in
line with good practices, such as those set out in the Hague-Marrakech Memorandum on Good Practices for a More
Effective Response to the Foreign Terrorist Fighter Phenomenon of the Global Counterterrorism Forum, and to adopt
a comprehensive approach that includes, inter alia, the development of national centres for counsel and the prevention
of radicalization to violence, which can play an important role together with criminal justice responses;
23. Renews its commitment to strengthening international cooperation to prevent and counter terrorism in
accordance with international law, including the Charter, international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including through technical cooperation, capacity-building and the exchange of information and
intelligence on countering terrorism, and in that regard calls upon States and relevant regional and subregional
organizations, as appropriate, to continue to implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its
four pillars;
24. Strongly encourages relevant United Nations agencies, including those involved in supporting counterterrorism efforts, to take into account in their technical assistance with regard to counter-terrorism efforts, whenever
appropriate, the elements necessary for building national capacity in order to strengthen criminal justice systems and
the rule of law and to continue to facilitate the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
due process and the rule of law, while countering terrorism;
25. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism in the
performance of her mandated tasks and duties;
26. Urges States and the international community and encourages civil society to take measures, as
appropriate, including through education, awareness-raising, the media and human rights education and training, to
promote a culture of peace, justice and human development, ethnic, national and religious tolerance and respect for
all religions, religious values, beliefs and cultures and to effectively address the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism and that make individuals and groups more vulnerable to the effects of terrorism and to recruitment by
terrorists;

852

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

27. Emphasizes that mutual respect, tolerance, pluralism, inclusion and respect for diversity, dialogue among
civilizations and the enhancement of interfaith and intercultural understanding, and combating intolerance,
discrimination and hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence on the basis of religion or
belief, or any other basis, including at the national, regional or global levels, are among the most important elements
in promoting cooperation and success in preventing and combating terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism, and welcomes the various initiatives to that end;
28. Acknowledges that the active participation of civil society organizations can strengthen ongoing
governmental efforts to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism and to assess the
impact of terrorism on the enjoyment of all human rights, and calls upon States to ensure that measures to counter
terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism and to preserve national security do not hinder the work and
safety of such organizations and are in compliance with the obligations of States under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law;
29. Urges States to safeguard the right to privacy in accordance with international law, in particular
international human rights law, and to take measures to ensure that interference with or restriction of that right are not
arbitrary, are adequately regulated by law and are subject to effective oversight and appropriate redress, including
through judicial review or other means;
30. Calls upon Member States to remain alert to the use of information and communications technology for
terrorist purposes and to cooperate to prevent and counter violent extremist propaganda and incitement to violence on
the Internet and social media, including by developing effective counter-narratives, and to prevent terrorists from
recruiting and raising funds online for terrorist purposes, while respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
in compliance with their obligations under international law, and stresses the importance of cooperation with civil
society and the private sector in this endeavour;
31. Expresses its concern at the increasing use, in a globalized society, by terrorists and their supporters, of
information and communications technology, in particular the Internet and other media, to advocate, commit, incite,
recruit for, fund or plan terrorist acts, urges States to take appropriate preventive measures in this regard while acting
in full compliance with their obligations under international law, and reiterates that such technologies can be powerful
tools in countering the spread of terrorism, including by promoting tolerance, dialogue among peoples and peace;
32. Invites all treaty bodies, special procedure mandate holders, international and regional human rights
mechanisms and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, within their respective mandates, to pay
due attention to the negative impact of terrorism on the enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and
on alleged violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism, and to report regularly to the Human Rights Council;
33. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
to continue to contribute to the work of the Office of Counter-Terrorism through, inter alia, participation in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact;
34. Encourages the Security Council, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to strengthen, within their mandates, the links, cooperation and dialogue with
relevant human rights bodies, giving due regard to the promotion and protection of human rights and the rule of law
in their ongoing work relating to counter-terrorism;
35. Encourages relevant United Nations bodies and entities, in particular those participating in the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact and international, regional and subregional organizations,
which provide technical assistance upon request, to step up their efforts to ensure respect for international human
rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law, as well as the rule of law, as an element of
technical assistance, including in the adoption and implementation of legislative and other measures by States;
36. Calls upon international, regional and subregional organizations to strengthen information-sharing,
coordination and cooperation in promoting the protection of human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law
while countering terrorism;
853

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

37. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the
Human Rights Council and to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session.
RESOLUTION 74/148
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)430

74/148. Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the protection of migrants, the most recent of which is resolution 72/179
of 19 December 2017, and recalling also Human Rights Council resolutions 35/17 of 22 June 2017,431 36/5 of
28 September 2017432 and 41/7 of 11 July 2019,433
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,434 which proclaims that all human beings are born free
and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without
distinction of any kind, in particular as to race,
Reaffirming also that everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each
State and that everyone has the right to leave any country, including his or her own, and to return to his or her country,
Reiterating that everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law,
Recalling all relevant international instruments, particularly the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights435 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,435 the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,436 the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,437 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,438 the Convention on the Rights of the Child,439 the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination,440 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,441 the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations,442 the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families443 and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocols thereto,444 in particular the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and

_______________
430

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Germany,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Mali, Mexico, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Portugal, Seychelles, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and
Zimbabwe.
431
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. V, sect. A.
432
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
433
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. V, sect. A.
434
Resolution 217 A (III).
435
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
436
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
437
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
438
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
439
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
440
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
441
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
442
Ibid., vol. 596, No. 8638.
443
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
444
Ibid., vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.

854

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,445 and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,446 and in particular the relevant contributions of the
Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to the protection
of migrants,
Recalling also the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, adopted on 19 September 2016 at the
high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on addressing large movements of refugees and migrants,447
Recalling further the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, adopted at the
Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, held in
Marrakech, Morocco, on 10 and 11 December 2018, and endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 73/195
of 19 December 2018,
Recalling the provisions concerning migrants contained in the outcome documents of major United Nations
conferences and summits, including the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and
Its Impact on Development,448 the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development449 and the New Urban Agenda,450
Recalling also Commission on Population and Development resolutions 2006/2 of 10 May 2006451 and 2009/1
of 3 April 2009452 and its resolution 2013/1 of 26 April 2013 on new trends in migration: demographic aspects,453
Taking note of advisory opinion OC 16/99 of 1 October 1999 on the Right to Information on Consular
Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due Process of Law, advisory opinion OC 18/03 of
17 September 2003 on the Juridical Condition and Rights of Undocumented Migrants and advisory opinion OC 21/14
of 19 August 2014 on the Rights and Guarantees of Children in the Context of Migration and/or in Need of
International Protection, issued by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
Taking note also of the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 31 March 2004 in the case concerning
Avena and Other Mexican Nationals454 and the Judgment of the Court of 19 January 2009 regarding the request for
interpretation of the Avena Judgment,455 and recalling the obligations of States reaffirmed in both decisions,
Underlining the importance of the Human Rights Council in promoting respect for the protection of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all, including migrants,
Recognizing that women represent almost half of all international migrants, and in this regard recognizing
also that women migrant workers are important contributors to social and economic development in countries of
origin and destination, and underlining the value and dignity of their labour, including the labour of domestic
workers,
Recalling the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in its entirety, and recalling Sustainable
Development Goals 8 and 10, including the targets on the protection of labour rights and promotion of safe and secure
working environments for all workers, including migrant workers, in particular women migrants and those in
precarious employment, and on the facilitation of orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of
people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies, as noted in the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,

_______________
445

Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
447
Resolution 71/1.
448
Resolution 63/303, annex.
449
Resolution 70/1.
450
Resolution 71/256, annex.
451
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2006, Supplement No. 5 (E/2006/25), chap. I, sect. B.
452
Ibid., 2009, Supplement No. 5 (E/2009/25), chap. I, sect. B.
453
Ibid., 2013, Supplement No. 5 (E/2013/25), chap. I, sect. B.
454
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/59/4), chap. V, sect. A.23.
455
Ibid., Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/64/4), chap. V, sect. B.12.
446

855

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also its decision to convene the first official meeting of the International Migration Review Forum
under the auspices of the General Assembly in 2022, and that the forums shall be open to participation by all States
Members of the United Nations and all members of specialized agencies that have observer status with the
Assembly,
Noting the eleventh summit meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development, co-chaired by
Germany and Morocco and held in Marrakech from 5 to 7 December 2018, under the overarching theme “Honouring
international commitments to unlock the potential of all migrants for development”, and looking forward to the twelfth
summit meeting of the Global Forum, to be held in Quito, Ecuador, from 20 to 24 January 2020, under the theme
“Sustainable approaches to human mobility: upholding rights, strengthening State agency, and advancing
development through partnerships and collective action”,
Acknowledging the cultural and economic contributions made by migrants to their communities of origin and
destination and the need to identify appropriate means of maximizing development benefits, to respond to the
challenges that migration poses to countries of origin, transit and destination, to promote dignified, humane treatment
with applicable protections and access to basic services, and to strengthen mechanisms for international cooperation,
Emphasizing the multidimensional character of international migration, the importance of international, regional
and bilateral cooperation and dialogue in this regard, as appropriate, and the need to protect the human rights of all
migrants, particularly at a time when migration flows have increased in the globalized economy and take place in a
context of continued security concerns,
Acknowledging the complexity of migratory flows and that international migration movements also occur
within the same geographical regions, and in this context calling for a better understanding of migration patterns across
and within regions,
Deeply concerned at the large and growing number of migrants, especially women and children, including those
unaccompanied or separated from their parents, who place themselves in a vulnerable situation by crossing or
attempting to cross international borders, and recognizing the obligation of States to respect the human rights of those
migrants in accordance with their applicable international human rights obligations,
Recognizing the importance of coordinating international efforts to provide assistance and support to migrants
in vulnerable situations and, as appropriate, facilitate their voluntary and safe return to their countries of origin or
procedures for determining the need for international protection while respecting the principle of non-refoulement,
Bearing in mind the obligations of States under international law, as applicable, to exercise due diligence to
prevent crimes targeting migrants and to investigate and punish perpetrators, and that not doing so violates and impairs
or nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of victims,
Affirming that migrant smuggling and crimes against migrants, including trafficking in persons, continue to pose
a serious challenge and require a concerted international assessment and response and strengthened multilateral
cooperation among countries of origin, transit and destination for their eradication,
Bearing in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration, including those that refer to the orderly
management of migration, should promote holistic approaches that take into account the causes and consequences of
the phenomenon, as well as full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants,
Stressing the importance of all regulations and laws regarding irregular migration, at all levels of government,
being in accordance with the obligations of States under international law, including international human rights law,
Expressing concern at the increasing trend of xenophobia and hostility towards migrants in societies, which has
a negative impact on the fulfilment of human rights globally,
Stressing the obligation of States to protect the human rights of migrants regardless of their migration status,
including when implementing their specific migration and border security policies, and expressing its concern at
measures which, including in the context of policies aimed at reducing irregular migration, treat irregular migration
as a criminal rather than an administrative offence, where the effect of doing so is to deny migrants the full enjoyment
of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, and in this regard recalling that sanctions and the treatment given to
irregular migrants should be commensurate with their offences,
856

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Aware that, as criminals take advantage of migratory flows and attempt to circumvent restrictive immigration
policies and border controls, migrants become more vulnerable to, inter alia, kidnapping, extortion, forced labour,
sexual exploitation, physical assault, debt bondage and abandonment,
Recognizing the positive contributions of young migrants to countries of origin and destination, and in that
regard encouraging States to consider the specific circumstances and needs of young migrants,
Recognizing also the obligations of countries of origin, transit and destination under international human
rights law,
Underlining the importance for States, in cooperation with civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, workers’ organizations and the private sector, among other relevant stakeholders, to undertake
information campaigns aimed at clarifying opportunities, limitations, laws, risks and rights in the event of migration
in order to enable everyone to make informed decisions and to prevent anyone from utilizing irregular or dangerous
means to cross international borders,
1. Calls upon States to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of women and children, and to address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and a comprehensive and balanced
approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in promoting and
protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their vulnerability;
2. Expresses its concern about the impact of financial and economic crises, as well as natural disasters and
the effects of climate-related phenomena, on international migration and migrants, and in that regard urges
Governments to combat discriminatory treatment of migrants, in particular migrant workers and their families, and to
facilitate fair and ethical recruitment;
3. Calls upon Member States to develop coherent approaches to address the challenges of migration
movements in the context of sudden-onset and slow-onset natural disasters, including by taking into consideration
relevant recommendations from State-led consultative processes, such as the Agenda for the Protection of CrossBorder Displaced Persons in the Context of Disasters and Climate Change, and the Platform on Disaster
Displacement;
4. Reaffirms the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights434 and the obligations of States
under the International Covenants on Human Rights,435 and in this regard:
(a) Strongly condemns acts, manifestations and expressions of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance against migrants and the stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion or
belief, and urges States to apply and, where needed, to reinforce existing laws when hate crimes, xenophobic or
intolerant acts, manifestations or expressions against migrants occur, in order to eradicate impunity for those who
commit those acts and, where appropriate, to provide effective remedy to the victims;
(b) Encourages States to establish or, when appropriate, strengthen mechanisms which allow migrants to
report alleged cases of abuse by relevant authorities and employers without fear of reprisal, and which allow for such
complaints to be addressed fairly;
(c) Expresses concern about legislation adopted by some States that results in measures and practices that
may restrict the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants, and reaffirms that, when exercising their
sovereign right to enact and implement migratory and border security measures, States have the duty to comply with
their obligations under international law, including international human rights law, in order to ensure full respect for
the human rights of migrants;
(d) Calls upon States to ensure that their laws and policies, including in the areas of counter-terrorism and
combating transnational organized crime, such as trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, fully respect the
human rights of migrants;
(e) Calls upon States that have not done so to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families443 as a matter of
priority, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to promote and raise awareness of the Convention;
857

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(f) Takes note of the reports of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families on its twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth sessions456 and its twenty-ninth and thirtieth
sessions;457
5. Also reaffirms the duty of States to effectively promote and protect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants, especially those of women and children, regardless of their migration status, in conformity
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international instruments to which they are party, and
therefore:
(a) Calls upon all States to respect the human rights and inherent dignity of migrants, to put an end to arbitrary
arrest and detention and, bearing in mind the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,447 to review policies
that deny migrants the full enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, to pursue alternatives to
detention while assessments of migration status are under way and to take into account measures that have been
successfully implemented by some States;
(b) Encourages States to put in place, if they have not yet done so, appropriate systems and procedures in
order to ensure that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in all actions or decisions concerning
migrant children, regardless of their migration status, and, when applicable, to work towards ending the detention of
migrant children;
(c) Also encourages States to cooperate and to take appropriate measures, in full conformity with their
obligations under international human rights law, to prevent, combat and address the smuggling of migrants, including
strengthening laws, policies, information-sharing and joint operational functions, enhancing capacities and supporting
opportunities for migration in a well-managed, safe and dignified manner and strengthening legislative methods for
criminalizing acts of smuggling migrants, particularly women and children;
(d) Urges all States to adopt effective measures to prevent and punish any form of illegal deprivation of liberty
of migrants by individuals or groups;
(e) Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation of the human rights of migrants while
in transit, including in ports and airports and at borders and migration checkpoints, and to adequately train public
officials who work in those facilities and in border areas to treat migrants respectfully and in accordance with their
obligations under international human rights law;
(f) Underlines the right of migrants to return to their country of citizenship, and recalls that States must ensure
that their returning nationals are duly received;
(g) Calls upon States to analyse and implement, where appropriate, mechanisms for the safe and orderly
administration of returning migrants, with particular attention to the human rights of migrants, in accordance with
their obligations under international law;
(h) Also calls upon States to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law, acts of violation of the human rights
of migrants and their families, such as arbitrary detention, torture and violations of the right to life, including
extrajudicial executions, during their transit from the country of origin to the country of destination and vice versa,
including transit across national borders;
(i) Recognizes the particular vulnerability of migrants in transit situations, including through national borders,
and the need to ensure full respect for their human rights also in these circumstances;
(j) Also recognizes the importance of promoting respect for human rights in coordinated efforts of the
international community to assist and support migrants who are stranded or in vulnerable situations;
(k) Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to ensure full respect for and observance of the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations,442 in particular with regard to the right of all foreign nationals, regardless of their

_______________
456
457

858

Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 48 (A/73/48).
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 48 (A/74/48).

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

migration status, to communicate with a consular official of the sending State in case of arrest, imprisonment, custody
or detention, and the obligation of the receiving State to inform the foreign national without delay of his or her rights
under the Convention;
(l) Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and applicable international legal instruments
to which they are party, to enforce labour law effectively, including by addressing violations of such law, with regard
to migrant workers’ labour relations and working conditions, inter alia, those related to their remuneration and
conditions of health, safety at work and the right to freedom of association;
(m) Invites Member States to consider ratifying relevant conventions of the International Labour Organization,
including the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), on decent work for domestic workers;458
(n) Encourages Member States to promote faster, safer and cheaper remittances, with the aim of reducing the
average transaction cost to less than 3 per cent of the amount transferred by 2030, by further developing existing
conducive policy and regulatory environments that enable competition, regulation and innovation on the remittance
market and by providing gender-responsive programmes and instruments that enhance the financial inclusion of
migrants and their families;
(o) Recalls that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes that everyone has the right to an
effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted to him or her;
6.

Emphasizes the importance of protecting persons in vulnerable situations, and in this regard:

(a) Expresses its concern about the increase in the activities and profits of transnational and national organized
crime entities and others who profit from crimes against migrants, especially migrant women and children, without
regard for dangerous and inhumane conditions, and in flagrant violation of national laws and international law and
contrary to international standards;
(b) Calls upon States to cooperate internationally to save lives and prevent migrant deaths and injuries through
individual or joint search and rescue operations, and standardized collection and exchange of relevant information, as
well as to identify those who have died or gone missing, and to facilitate communication with affected families;
(c) Expresses its concern about the high level of impunity enjoyed by traffickers and their accomplices, as
well as other members of organized crime entities and, in this context, the denial of rights and justice to migrants who
have suffered from abuse;
(d) Calls upon States, within the framework of applicable international law, to take steps to ensure that their
national procedures at international borders include adequate safeguards to protect the dignity, safety and human rights
of all migrants;
(e) Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that allow migrants to integrate fully
into the host countries, facilitate family reunification and promote a harmonious, tolerant and respectful environment,
and encourages States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
(f) Calls upon States that have not already done so to provide for the protection of the human rights of women
migrant workers, to promote fair labour conditions and to ensure that all women, including care workers, are legally
protected against violence and exploitation;
(g) Encourages States to implement gender-sensitive policies and programmes for women migrant workers,
to provide safe and legal channels that recognize the skills and education of women migrant workers and, as
appropriate, to facilitate their productive employment, decent work and integration into the labour force, including in
the fields of education and science and technology;
(h) Encourages all States to develop international migration policies and programmes that include a gender
perspective, in order to adopt the measures necessary to better protect women and girls against dangers and abuse
during migration;

_______________
458

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2955, No. 51379.

859

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(i) Calls upon States to protect the human rights of migrant children, given their vulnerability, particularly
unaccompanied migrant children, ensuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in their
legislation, policies and practices, including on integration, return and family reunification;
(j) Encourages all States to prevent and eliminate discriminatory policies and legislation at all levels of
government that deny migrant children access to education and, while taking into account the best interests of the
child as a primary consideration, to foster the successful integration of migrant children into the educational system
and the removal of barriers to their education in host countries and countries of origin;
(k) Reminds all States that all persons, including migrants, should have access to lifelong learning
opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to take advantage of opportunities and to
participate fully in society;
(l) Urges States to ensure that repatriation mechanisms allow for the identification and special protection of
persons in vulnerable situations, including unaccompanied children and persons with disabilities, and take into
account, in conformity with their international obligations and commitments, the principle of the best interests of the
child, clarity of reception and care arrangements and family reunification;
(m) Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocols thereto,444 in particular the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,445 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime,446 to implement them fully, and calls upon States that have not done so to
consider ratifying or acceding to them as a matter of priority;
7. Encourages States to take into account the conclusions and recommendations of the study of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on challenges and best practices in the implementation
of the international framework for the protection of the rights of the child in the context of migration459 when designing
and implementing their migration policies;
8. Also encourages States to protect migrants from becoming victims of national and transnational organized
crime, including kidnapping, trafficking in persons and, in some instances, illicit smuggling of migrants, including
through the implementation of programmes and policies that prevent victimization and provide effective guarantees
and protections, as well as access to medical, psychosocial and legal assistance, where appropriate;
9. Encourages Member States that have not already done so to enact national legislation and to take further
effective measures to combat human trafficking and smuggling of migrants, recognizing that these crimes may
endanger the lives of migrants or subject them to harm, servitude, exploitation, debt bondage, slavery, sexual
exploitation or forced labour, and also encourages Member States to strengthen international cooperation to prevent,
investigate and combat such trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants and to identify and disrupt financial
flows related to these activities;
10. Stresses the importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation in the protection of the
human rights of migrants, through, inter alia, the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration,460 and
therefore:
(a) Requests all States, international organizations and relevant stakeholders to take into account in their
policies and initiatives on migration issues the global character of the migratory phenomenon and to give due
consideration to international, regional and bilateral cooperation in this field, including by undertaking dialogues on
migration that include countries of origin, transit and destination, as well as civil society, including migrants, with a
view to addressing, in a comprehensive manner, inter alia, its causes and consequences and the challenge of
undocumented or irregular migration, granting priority to the protection of the human rights of migrants;
(b) Encourages States to promote the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,449 including its target 10.7 on the facilitation of orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and
mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies;

_______________
459
460

860

A/HRC/15/29.
Resolution 73/195, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(c) Also encourages States to take the measures necessary to achieve policy coherence on migration at the
national, regional and international levels, including by ensuring coordinated child protection policies and systems
across borders that are in full compliance with international human rights law;
(d) Further encourages States to cooperate effectively in protecting witnesses in cases of smuggling of
migrants, regardless of their migration status;
(e) Encourages States to cooperate effectively in protecting witnesses and victims in cases of trafficking in
persons, regardless of their migration status;
(f) Calls upon the United Nations system and other relevant international organizations and multilateral
institutions to enhance their cooperation in the development of methodologies for the collection and processing of
statistical data on international migration and the situation of migrants in countries of origin, transit and destination
and to assist Member States in their capacity-building efforts in this regard;
(g) Urges all States, in line with relevant obligations under international human rights law, to combat all forms
of discrimination, such as expressions, acts and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, violence, xenophobia
and related intolerance against all migrants, while at the same time acknowledging the need to promote an open and
evidence-based public discourse on migration and migrants, in partnership with all parts of society, that generates a
more realistic, humane and constructive perception in this regard, and to protect freedom of expression in accordance
with international law, recognizing that an open and free debate contributes to a comprehensive understanding of all
aspects of migration;
(h) Encourages States to include, as appropriate, information on the implementation of their international
obligations related to the human rights of migrants in their national reports to the universal periodic review mechanism
of the Human Rights Council;
11. Welcomes the consideration afforded to the issues of migration, development and human rights in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development;
12. Reaffirms the commitments of the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, and urges Member
States and the United Nations system to work cooperatively to follow up on and apply the Declaration, in accordance
with national legal systems;
13. Encourages States, relevant international organizations, civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, and the private sector to continue and to enhance their dialogue in relevant international meetings with
a view to strengthening and making more inclusive public policies aimed at promoting and respecting human rights,
including those of migrants;
14. Requests Governments and international organizations to take appropriate measures to give due
consideration to the Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development, held on
3 and 4 October 2013;461
15. Recognizes the importance of the contribution of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Chair of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the human rights of migrants, as well as other
key actors, to the discussion on international migration;
16. Invites the Chair of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families to present an oral report on the work of the Committee and to engage in an interactive dialogue with
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”,
as a way to enhance communication between the Assembly and the Committee;
17. Invites the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants to submit his report to the General
Assembly and to engage in an interactive dialogue at its seventy-fifth session, under the item entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”;

_______________
461

Resolution 68/4.

861

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

18. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the human rights of migrants;462
19. Also takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants to the General
Assembly at its seventy-third and seventy-fourth sessions;463
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council at their
seventy-sixth and forty-fourth sessions, respectively, a comprehensive report entitled “Human rights of migrants”,
covering all aspects of the implementation of the present resolution;
21. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
RESOLUTION 74/149
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 188 to 2, with no abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)464
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: None

74/149. The right to food
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations and its importance for the promotion and protection of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming also previous resolutions and decisions on the right to food adopted within the framework of the
United Nations,

_______________
462

A/74/271.
A/73/178/Rev.1 and A/74/191.
464
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Austria,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chad, China, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe.
463

862

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,465 which provides that everyone has the right to a
standard of living adequate for her or his health and well-being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the
Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition,466 the United Nations Millennium Declaration,467 in particular Millennium
Development Goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by 2015, and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,468 in particular the Sustainable Development Goals on ending hunger, achieving food security and
improved nutrition and promoting sustainable agriculture and on ending poverty in all its forms everywhere,
Recognizing that achieving the Sustainable Development Goals can help to ensure the end of hunger in all its
forms by 2030 and to achieve food security,
Recalling the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,469 in which
the fundamental right of every person to be free from hunger is recognized,
Bearing in mind the importance of the Rome Declaration on World Food Security, the World Food Summit Plan
of Action and the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002,470
Reaffirming the importance of the recommendations contained in the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the
Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the
Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004,471
Acknowledging that the right to food has been recognized as the right of every individual, alone or in community
with others, to have physical and economic access at all times to sufficient, adequate, nutritious food, in conformity
with, inter alia, the culture, beliefs, traditions, dietary habits and preferences of individuals, that is produced and
consumed sustainably, thereby preserving access to food for future generations,
Reaffirming the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food Security contained in the Declaration of the
World Summit on Food Security, adopted in Rome on 16 November 2009,472
Recalling the proclamation by the General Assembly at its seventy-second session of 2019–2028 as the United
Nations Decade of Family Farming and the close links between family farming, the promotion and conservation of
historical, cultural and natural heritage, traditional customs and culture, halting the loss of biodiversity and the
improvement of the living conditions of people living in rural areas,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that they must
be treated globally, in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming also that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and economic environment, at both the
national and the international levels, is the essential foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to food
security, improved nutrition and poverty eradication,
Reiterating, as set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security, the Declaration of the World Food
Summit and the Rome Declaration on Nutrition,473 that food should not be used as an instrument of political or
economic pressure, and reaffirming in this regard the importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well
as the necessity of refraining from unilateral measures that are not in accordance with international law and the Charter
and that endanger food and nutrition security,
Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its resources and capacities to achieve its
individual goals in implementing the recommendations contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security

_______________
465

Resolution 217 A (III).
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
467
Resolution 55/2.
468
Resolution 70/1.
469
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
470
A/57/499, annex.
471
E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.
472
See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
473
World Health Organization, document EB136/8, annex I.
466

863

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and the World Food Summit Plan of Action, as well as in the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for
Action,474 and, at the same time, cooperate regionally and internationally in order to organize collective solutions to
global issues of food and nutrition security in a world of increasingly interlinked institutions, societies and economies
where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities are essential,
Recognizing that, despite the efforts made and the fact that some positive results have been achieved, the
problems of hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition have a global dimension, that there has not been sufficient
progress in reducing hunger and that these problems are increasing dramatically in some regions in the absence of
urgent, determined and concerted action,
Recognizing also the importance of traditional sustainable agricultural practices, including traditional seed
supply systems, as well as access to credit and other financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health care, social
services, education, training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable technologies, including efficient irrigation, the
reuse of treated wastewater and water harvesting and storage for indigenous peoples and others living in rural areas,
Recognizing further the complex character of food insecurity and its likely recurrence owing to a combination
of several major factors, such as the effects of the global financial and economic crisis, environmental degradation,
desertification and the adverse impacts of climate change, as well as poverty, natural disasters, armed conflicts,
drought, volatility in commodity prices and the lack in many countries of the appropriate technology, investment and
capacity-building necessary to confront its impact, particularly in developing countries, including the least developed
countries and small island developing States, and the need for coherence and collaboration between international
institutions at the global level,
Noting with great concern that millions of people are facing famine or the immediate risk of famine or are
experiencing severe food insecurity in several regions of the world, and noting also that poverty, armed conflicts,
drought and the volatility of commodity prices are among the factors causing or exacerbating famine and severe food
insecurity and that additional efforts, including international support, to respond, prevent and prepare for increasing
global food insecurity are urgently needed,
Stressing the obligation of all States and parties to an armed conflict to protect civilians, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, and calling upon Member States, the United Nations and other relevant organizations
to take further steps to provide a coordinated emergency response to the food and nutrition needs of affected
populations, while aiming to ensure that such steps are supportive of national strategies and programmes aimed at
improving food security and nutrition,
Reaffirming that starvation of civilians as a method of combat is prohibited under international humanitarian
law and that it is therefore prohibited to attack, destroy, remove or render useless, for that purpose, objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population, such as foodstuffs, agricultural areas for the production of
foodstuffs, crops, livestock, drinking water installations and supplies and irrigation works,
Resolved to act to ensure that the promotion, protection and fulfilment of all human rights and the human rights
perspective are taken into account at the national, regional and international levels in measures to address the
realization of the right to food,
Stressing the possible benefits of international trade to improve food and nutrition availability,
Stressing also that improving access to productive resources and investment in rural development is essential
for eradicating hunger and poverty, in particular in developing countries, through, inter alia, the promotion of
investments in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order to reduce vulnerability
to droughts and tackle water scarcity, as well as in programmes, practices and policies to scale up sustainable
agroecological approaches,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters, diseases and pest infestations, as well
as the negative impact of climate change, and their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted in substantial
loss of life and livelihood and threatened agricultural production and food and nutrition security, in particular in
developing countries,

_______________
474

864

Ibid., annex II.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Concerned that the adverse impacts of climate change and natural disasters are harming agricultural
productivity, food production and cropping patterns, thus contributing to food availability shortfalls, and that such
impacts are expected to increase with future climate change,
Expressing its deep concern over the negative effects of armed conflicts on the enjoyment of the right to food,
Emphasizing that a multisectoral approach that integrates nutrition across all sectors, including agriculture,
health, water and sanitation, social protection and education, as well as a gender perspective, is critical to achieving
global food security and improved nutrition and the realization of the right to food,
Recalling the endorsement of the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security475 by the Committee on World Food Security at its
thirty-eighth session, held on 11 May 2012, and by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations at its 144th session,
Recalling also the Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems,476 which were
endorsed by the Committee on World Food Security at its forty-first session, held from 13 to 18 October 2014,
Stressing the importance of the Second International Conference on Nutrition, hosted by the World Health
Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Rome from 19 to 21 November
2014, and of its outcome documents, the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action,
Stressing also the need to increase official development assistance devoted to sustainable agriculture and
nutrition,
Recognizing that small and medium-sized farmers in developing countries need to receive technical, technology
transfer and capacity-building support,
Recognizing also the importance of the protection and preservation of agrobiodiversity in guaranteeing food
security and nutrition and the right to food for all,
Noting the cultural values of dietary and eating habits in different cultures, and recognizing that food plays an
important role in defining the identity of individuals and communities and is a cultural component that describes and
gives value to a territory and its inhabitants,
Recognizing the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as the key United Nations
agency for rural and agricultural development and its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to achieve the
full realization of the right to food, including through its provision of technical assistance to developing countries in
support of the implementation of national priority frameworks,
Recognizing also the role of the Committee on World Food Security as an inclusive international and
intergovernmental platform for a broad range of committed stakeholders to work together in a coordinated manner
and in support of country-led processes towards the elimination of hunger and ensuring food security and nutrition
for all human beings,
Noting with appreciation the announcement by the Secretary-General, on 16 October 2019, of his intention to
convene a world food systems summit in 2021,
Acknowledging the contribution of parliamentarians nationally and regionally to the reduction of hunger and
malnutrition and ultimately to the realization of the right to food, and in this regard recognizing the convening of the
first Global Parliamentary Summit against Hunger and Malnutrition, held in Madrid on 29 and 30 October 2018,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The
future we want”, and recalling the commitment therein to work together to promote sustained and inclusive economic
growth, social development and environmental protection and thereby to benefit all, endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012,

_______________
475
476

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 144/9 (C 2013/20), appendix D.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document C 2015/20, appendix D.

865

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030477 and its guiding principles,
which, inter alia, recognize the importance of promoting regular disaster preparedness and response and recovery
exercises, with a view to ensuring rapid and effective response to disasters and related displacement, including access
to essential food and non-food relief supplies, as appropriate to local needs, as well as of fostering collaboration across
global and regional mechanisms and institutions for the implementation and coherence of instruments and tools
relevant to disaster risk reduction, such as for climate change adaptation, biodiversity, sustainable development,
poverty eradication, environment, agriculture, health, food and nutrition and others, as appropriate,
Recalling further the proclamation at its seventieth session of 2016–2025 as the United Nations Decade of
Action on Nutrition, and stressing the opportunity the Decade represents to bring together initiatives and efforts to
eradicate hunger and prevent all forms of malnutrition,
Acknowledging the work done by the High-level Task Force on Global Food and Nutrition Security established
by the Secretary-General, and supporting the Secretary-General in his continuing efforts in this regard, including
continued engagement with Member States and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right
to food,
1. Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human dignity and therefore requires the
adoption of urgent measures at the national, regional and international levels for its elimination;
2. Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food, consistent with
the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully
develop and maintain his or her physical and mental capacities;
3. Considers it intolerable that, as estimated by the United Nations Children’s Fund, up to 45 per cent of the
children who die every year before the age of 5 die from undernutrition and hunger-related illness, at least one in three
children under the age of 5 is undernourished or overweight and one in two suffers from hidden hunger, undermining
the capacity of millions of children to grow and develop to their full potential, and that, as estimated by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, more than 820 million people in the world are still hungry today,
underscoring the immense challenge of achieving the zero hunger target by 2030;
4. Expresses its concern at the fact that the effects created by the world food crisis still continue to have
serious consequences for the poorest and most vulnerable people, particularly in developing countries, which have
been further aggravated by the impacts of the world financial and economic crisis, and at the particular effects of the
crisis on many net food-importing countries, especially the least developed countries;
5. Expresses its deep concern that, according to the report of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations entitled The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2019: Safeguarding against Economic
Slowdowns and Downturns, the number of hungry people in the world is growing, the vast majority of hungry people
live in developing countries and 2 billion people in the world experience moderate or severe food insecurity;
6. Also expresses its deep concern that, while women contribute more than 50 per cent of the food produced
worldwide, they also account for 70 per cent of the world’s hungry, that women and girls are disproportionately
affected by hunger, food insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender inequality and discrimination, that in
many countries girls are twice as likely as boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases, and that
it is estimated that almost twice as many women as men suffer from malnutrition;
7. Encourages all States to mainstream a gender perspective in food security programmes and to take action
to address de jure and de facto gender inequality and discrimination against women, in particular when they contribute
to the malnutrition of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and equal realization of the right to food
and that women have equal access to resources, including income, land and water and their ownership and agricultural
inputs, as well as full and equal access to health care, education, science and technology, to enable them to feed
themselves and their families, and in this regard stresses the need to empower women and strengthen their role in
decision-making;

_______________
477

866

Resolution 69/283, annex II.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

8. Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right to food to continue to
mainstream a gender perspective in the fulfilment of her mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and all other United Nations bodies and mechanisms addressing the right to food
and food insecurity and malnutrition to continue to integrate a gender perspective into their relevant policies,
programmes and activities;
9. Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and nutritious food are inclusive of and
accessible to persons with disabilities;
10. Stresses that the primary responsibility of States is to promote and protect the right to food and that the
international community should provide, through a coordinated response and upon request, international cooperation
in support of national and regional efforts by providing the assistance necessary to increase food production and access
to food, including through agricultural development assistance, the transfer of technology, food crop rehabilitation
assistance and food aid, ensuring food security, with special attention to the specific needs of women and girls, and
promoting innovation, support for the development of adapted technologies, research on rural advisory services and
support for access to financing services, and ensure support for the establishment of secure land tenure systems;
11. Calls upon all States and, if appropriate, relevant international organizations to take measures and support
programmes that are aimed at combating undernutrition in mothers, in particular during pregnancy and breastfeeding,
and in children, and the irreversible effects of chronic undernutrition in early childhood, in particular from birth to the
age of 2 years;
12. Also calls upon all States and, where appropriate, relevant international organizations to implement
policies and programmes to reduce and eliminate preventable mortality and morbidity, as a result of malnutrition, of
children under 5 years of age, and in this regard urges States to disseminate the technical guidance prepared by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in collaboration with the World Health
Organization,478 and to apply it, as appropriate, in the design, implementation, evaluation and monitoring of laws,
policies, programmes, budgets and mechanisms for remedy and redress aimed at eliminating preventable mortality
and morbidity of children under 5 years of age;
13. Encourages all States to take steps, with a view to progressively achieving the full realization of the right
to food, including steps to promote the conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to
enjoy fully the right to food, and to create and adopt national plans to combat hunger;
14. Recognizes the advances made through South-South cooperation in developing countries and regions
in connection with food security and the development of agricultural production for the full realization of the right
to food;
15. Stresses that improving access to productive resources and responsible public investment in rural
development, taking into consideration the Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems,476
as endorsed by the Committee on World Food Security, is essential for eradicating hunger and poverty, in particular
in developing countries, including through the promotion of investment, including private investment, in appropriate
small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order to reduce vulnerability to droughts and to tackle
water scarcity;
16. Recognizes the critical contribution made by the fisheries sector to the realization of the right to food and
to food security and the contribution of small-scale fishers to the local food security of coastal communities;
17. Also recognizes that 70 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas, where nearly half a billion family
farmers are located, and that these people are especially vulnerable to food insecurity, given the increasing cost of
inputs and the fall in farm incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is an increasing
challenge for poor producers; that sustainable and gender-sensitive agricultural policies are important tools for
promoting land and agrarian reform, rural credit and insurance, technical assistance and other associated measures to
achieve food security and rural development; and that support by States for small farmers, fishing communities and

_______________
478

A/HRC/27/31; see also Human Rights Council resolution 33/11 (see Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session,
Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1 and A/71/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II).

867

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

local enterprises, including through the facilitation of access for their products to national and international markets
and empowerment of small producers, particularly women, in value chains, is a key element for food security and the
provision of the right to food;
18. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including through national efforts supported by
international partnerships to stop desertification and land degradation and through investments and public policies
that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this regard calls for the full implementation of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa;479
19. Urges States that have not yet done so to favourably consider becoming parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity480 and to consider becoming parties to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for
Food and Agriculture481 as a matter of priority;
20. Recognizes the important role of indigenous peoples and their traditional knowledge and seed supply
systems, as well as the important role of new technologies, in the conservation of biodiversity and in aiming to ensure
food security and improved nutrition;
21. Recalls the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,482 acknowledges that many
indigenous organizations and representatives of indigenous peoples have expressed in different forums their deep
concerns over the obstacles and challenges they face in achieving the full enjoyment of the right to food, and calls
upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the disproportionately high level of hunger and
malnutrition among indigenous peoples and the continuous discrimination against them;
22. Also recalls the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as
the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held on 22 and 23 September 2014,483 and the commitment to
developing, in conjunction with the indigenous peoples concerned and where appropriate, policies, programmes and
resources to support indigenous peoples’ occupations, traditional subsistence activities, economies, livelihoods, food
security and nutrition;
23. Notes the need to further examine various concepts, such as “food sovereignty”, and their relation to food
security and the right to food, bearing in mind the need to avoid any negative impact on the enjoyment of the right to
food for all people at all times;
24. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international organizations, within their respective
mandates, to take fully into account the need to promote the effective realization of the right to food for all;
25. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment, as well as international assistance, upon the
request of and in cooperation with the affected countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to
food, and in particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their homes and land
because of hunger or humanitarian emergencies affecting their enjoyment of the right to food;
26. Takes note with appreciation of the growing movement, in different regions of the world, towards the
adoption of framework laws, national strategies and measures in support of the full realization of the right to food
for all;
27. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the allocation and utilization of technical and
financial resources from all sources, including external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce national
actions to implement sustainable food security policies;

_______________
479

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
481
Ibid., vol. 2400, No. 43345.
482
Resolution 61/295, annex.
483
Resolution 69/2.
480

868

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

28. Calls for a successful, development-oriented outcome of the trade negotiations of the World Trade
Organization, in particular on the remaining issues of the Doha Development Round, as a contribution to the creation
of international conditions permitting the full realization of the right to food;
29. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their international policies of a political and
economic nature, including international trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to food in other
countries;
30. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action against Hunger and Poverty, and
recommends the continuation of efforts aimed at identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against
hunger and poverty, as well as non-communicable diseases;
31. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in 1996 to halve the number of persons
who are undernourished are not being fulfilled, while recognizing the efforts of Member States in this regard, and
once again invites all international financial and development institutions, as well as the relevant United Nations
agencies and funds, to give priority to and provide the funding necessary to realize the right to food, as set out in the
Rome Declaration on World Food Security, and to achieve the aims of Goal 2 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development468 and other food and nutrition-related targets;
32. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the goal that all people at all times will have
access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy
life, is part of a comprehensive effort to improve public health, alongside the response to the spread of HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria and other communicable diseases;
33. Urges States to give priority in their development strategies and expenditures to the realization of the right
to food;
34. Stresses the importance of international cooperation and development assistance as an effective
contribution to the sustainable expansion and improvement of agriculture and, in particular, its environmental
sustainability, food production, breeding projects on diversity of crops and livestock and institutional innovations such
as community seed banks, farmer field schools and seed fairs, and to the provision of humanitarian food assistance in
activities related to emergency situations for the realization of the right to food and the achievement of sustainable
food security, while recognizing that each country has the primary responsibility for ensuring the implementation of
national programmes and strategies in this regard;
35. Also stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights should consider implementing that agreement in a manner that is supportive of food
security;
36. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders to support
national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to the food crises currently occurring across different regions, and
expresses its deep concern that funding shortfalls are forcing the World Food Programme to cut operations across
different regions;
37. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations, humanitarian and development organizations and other
relevant actors to urgently and effectively respond to, prevent and prepare for rising global food insecurity affecting
millions of people, especially those who are facing famine or the immediate risk of famine, including by enhancing
humanitarian and development cooperation and providing urgent funding to respond to the needs of the affected
population, and calls upon Member States and parties to armed conflicts to respect international humanitarian law and
ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access;
38. Calls upon States to heed the urgent United Nations humanitarian appeal to assist countries facing drought,
starvation and famine with emergency aid and urgent funding;
39. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, to continue to promote policies and projects that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that
partners respect the right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support strategies of Member States
aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to avoid any actions that could have a negative impact on its realization;

869

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

40. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur,484 which focuses on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a potentially transformative tool to advance the realization of the
right to food;
41. Recognizes the importance of giving due consideration to the adverse impacts of climate change and to
the full realization of the right to food, recalls the Paris Agreement, adopted at the twenty-first session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Paris from
30 November to 13 December 2015,485 and also recalls the holding of the twenty-second session of the Conference
of the Parties in Marrakech, Morocco, from 7 to 18 November 2016;
42. Also recognizes the impacts of climate change and of the El Niño phenomenon on agricultural production
and food security around the world and the importance of designing and implementing actions to reduce its effects,
in particular on vulnerable populations, such as rural women, bearing in mind the role that they play in supporting
their households and communities in achieving food and nutrition security, generating income and improving rural
livelihoods and overall well-being;
43. Reiterates its support for the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, and requests the
Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide all the human
and financial resources necessary for its effective fulfilment;
44. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in promoting
the right to adequate food, in particular its general comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food (article 11 of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights),486 in which the Committee affirmed, inter alia,
that the right to adequate food is indivisibly linked to the inherent dignity of the human person, indispensable for the
fulfilment of other human rights enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights and inseparable from social
justice, requiring the adoption of appropriate economic, environmental and social policies, at both the national and
the international levels, oriented to the eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of all human rights for all;
45. Recalls general comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on
the right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the Covenant),487 in which the Committee noted, inter alia, the importance of
ensuring sustainable access to water resources for human consumption and agriculture in realization of the right to
adequate food;
46. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate
Food in the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations in November 2004,471 represent a useful tool to promote the realization of the right to food for all,
contribute to the achievement of food security and thus provide an additional instrument in the attainment of
internationally agreed development goals and to support national Governments in the implementation of food security
and nutrition policies, programmes and legal frameworks;
47. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in her task, to supply all
necessary information requested by her and to give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of
the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable her to fulfil her mandate more effectively;
48. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session an interim
report on the implementation of the present resolution and to continue her work, including by examining the emerging
issues with regard to the realization of the right to food that are within her mandate;
49. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, treaty bodies, civil
society actors and non-governmental organizations, as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur in the fulfilment of her mandate through, inter alia, the submission of comments and suggestions on ways
and means of realizing the right to food;

_______________
484

A/74/164.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
486
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and corrigendum (E/2000/22 and E/2000/22/Corr.1),
annex V.
487
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.
485

870

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

50. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its seventy-fifth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/150
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 128 to 53, with 8 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)488
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Armenia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Liberia, Mexico, Peru

74/150. Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order,
including resolution 73/169 of 17 December 2018, and Human Rights Council resolutions 18/6 of 29 September
2011,489 33/3 of 29 September 2016,490 36/4 of 28 September 2017,491 39/4 of 27 September 2018492 and 42/8 of
26 September 2019,493
Reaffirming the commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote universal respect for, and
observance and protection of, all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, other instruments relating to human rights and international law,
Affirming that the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion and protection of all human rights
should continue to be carried out in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and international
law, as set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter, and with full respect for, inter alia, sovereignty, territorial integrity,

_______________
488

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam
and Zimbabwe.
489
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and
A/66/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
490
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1 and A/71/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
491
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
492
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
493
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.

871

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

political independence, the non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations and non-intervention in
matters that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State,
Recalling the Preamble to the Charter, in particular the determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small,
Reaffirming that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights and freedoms set forth
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights494 can be fully realized,
Reaffirming also the determination expressed in the Preamble to the Charter to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties
and other sources of international law can be maintained, to promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom, to practise tolerance and good-neighbourliness and to employ international machinery for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Stressing that the responsibility for managing worldwide economic and social issues, as well as threats to
international peace and security, must be shared among the nations of the world and should be exercised multilaterally,
and that in this regard the central role must be played by the United Nations, as the most universal and representative
organization in the world,
Concerned about the continued abuse by Member States of the extraterritorial application of their national
legislation in a manner that affects the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons under
their jurisdiction and the full enjoyment of human rights,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of all peoples for an
international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter, including promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and respect for the principle of equal rights and self‑determination of
peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law, pluralism, development, better standards of living and
solidarity,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights is essential for the
full achievement of the purposes of the United Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human
rights,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims that all human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction
of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to
determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of
their lives,
Recognizing that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based on the principle of cooperation
and genuine dialogue and aimed at strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their human rights
obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Emphasizing that democracy is not only a political concept, but that it also has economic and social dimensions,
Recognizing that democracy, respect for all human rights, including the right to development, transparent and
accountable governance and administration in all sectors of society and effective participation by civil society are
an essential part of the necessary foundations for the realization of social and people-centred sustainable
development,
Noting with concern that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance may be aggravated
by, inter alia, inequitable distribution of wealth, marginalization and social exclusion,

_______________
494

872

Resolution 217 A (III).

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations could contribute greatly to the
enhancement of international cooperation at all levels,
Underlining the fact that it is imperative for the international community to ensure that globalization becomes
a positive force for all the world’s people and that only through broad and sustained efforts, based on our common
humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable,
Deeply concerned that the current global economic, financial, energy and food crises, resulting from a
combination of several major factors, including macroeconomic and other factors, such as environmental degradation,
desertification and global climate change, natural disasters and the lack of financial resources and the technology
necessary to confront their negative impact in developing countries, particularly in the least developed countries and
small island developing States, represent a global scenario that is threatening the adequate enjoyment of all human
rights and widening the gap between developed and developing countries,
Recognizing that a democratic and equitable order requires the reform of international financial institutions, in
order to widen and strengthen the level of participation of developing countries in the international decision-making
process, and a more transparent and open financial system, as well as adequate measures against illicit financial flows,
such as tax fraud, tax evasion, illegal capital flight, money-laundering and the proceeds of corruption, and for
improving tax transparency worldwide,
Stressing that efforts to make globalization fully inclusive and equitable must include policies and measures at
the global level that correspond to the needs of developing countries and countries with economies in transition and
are formulated and implemented with their effective participation,
Stressing also the need for adequate financing of, technology transfer to and capacity-building in developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing
States, including to support their efforts to adapt to climate change,
Having listened to the peoples of the world, and recognizing their aspirations to justice, to equality of opportunity
for all, to the enjoyment of their human rights, including the right to development, to live in peace and freedom and
to equal participation without discrimination in economic, social, cultural, civil and political life,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 on institution-building of the Council and 5/2 on the Code of
Conduct for Special Procedures Mandate Holders of the Council of 18 June 2007,495 and stressing that all mandate
holders shall discharge their duties in accordance with those resolutions and the annexes thereto,
Emphasizing the importance of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development496 for the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order,
Resolved to take all measures within its power to secure a democratic and equitable international order,
1.

Affirms that everyone is entitled to a democratic and equitable international order;

2. Also affirms that a democratic and equitable international order fosters the full realization of all human
rights for all;
3. Takes note of the report of the Independent Expert of the Human Rights Council on the promotion of a
democratic and equitable international order;497
4. Calls upon all Member States to fulfil their commitment expressed in Durban, South Africa, during the
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to maximize the
benefits of globalization through, inter alia, the strengthening and enhancement of international cooperation to
increase equality of opportunities for trade, economic growth and sustainable development, global communications
through the use of new technologies and increased intercultural exchange through the preservation and promotion of

_______________
495

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
Resolution 70/1.
497
See A/74/245.
496

873

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

cultural diversity,498 and reiterates that only through broad and sustained efforts to create a shared future based upon
our common humanity and all its diversity can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable;
5. Declares that democracy includes respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms and is a
universal value based on the freely expressed will of people to determine their own political, economic, social and
cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives, and reaffirms the need for universal adherence
to and implementation of the rule of law at both the national and international levels;
6. Affirms that a democratic and equitable international order requires, inter alia, the realization of the
following:
(a) The right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they can freely determine their political
status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development;
(b)

The right of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources;

(c)

The right of every human person and all peoples to development;

(d)

The right of all peoples to peace;

(e) The right to an international economic order based on equal participation in the decision-making process,
interdependence, mutual interest, solidarity and cooperation among all States;
(f)

International solidarity, as a right of peoples and individuals;

(g) The promotion and consolidation of transparent, democratic, just and accountable international institutions
in all areas of cooperation, in particular through the implementation of the principle of full and equal participation in
their respective decision-making mechanisms;
(h)
making;

The right to equitable participation of all, without any discrimination, in domestic and global decision-

(i) The principle of equitable regional and gender-balanced representation in the composition of the staff of
the United Nations system;
(j) The promotion of a free, just, effective and balanced international information and communications order
based on international cooperation for the establishment of a new equilibrium and greater reciprocity in the
international flow of information, in particular correcting the inequalities in the flow of information to and from
developing countries;
(k) Respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all, since this enhances cultural pluralism,
contributes to a wider exchange of knowledge and understanding of cultural backgrounds, advances the application
and enjoyment of universally accepted human rights across the world and fosters stable, friendly relations among
peoples and nations worldwide;
(l) The right of every person and all peoples to a healthy environment and to enhanced international
cooperation that responds effectively to the needs for assistance of national efforts to adapt to climate change,
particularly in developing countries, and that promotes the fulfilment of international agreements in the field of
mitigation;
(m) The promotion of equitable access to benefits from the international distribution of wealth through
enhanced international cooperation, in particular in international economic, commercial and financial relations;
(n) The enjoyment by everyone of ownership of the common heritage of humankind in connection to the
public right of access to culture;

_______________
498

874

See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF.189/12/Corr.1, chap. I.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(o) The shared responsibility of the nations of the world for managing worldwide economic and social
development, as well as threats to international peace and security, which should be exercised multilaterally;
7. Stresses the importance of preserving the rich and diverse nature of the international community of nations
and peoples, as well as respect for national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds, in the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights;
8. Also stresses that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with
the same emphasis, and reaffirms that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various
historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their political,
economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all;
9. Reaffirms, among other principles, the sovereign equality of States, non‑intervention and non-interference
in internal affairs;
10. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, social justice,
equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and
universal human rights and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
11. Reaffirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security and, to that end, should do their utmost to achieve general and complete disarmament under
effective international control, as well as to ensure that the resources released by effective disarmament measures are
used for comprehensive development, in particular that of the developing countries;
12. Underlines that attempts to overthrow legitimate Governments by force disrupt the democratic and
constitutional order, the legitimate exercise of power and the full enjoyment of human rights, and reaffirms that every
State has an inalienable right to choose its political, economic, social and cultural system, without interference in any
form by other States;
13. Reaffirms the need to continue working urgently for the establishment of a new international economic
order based on equity, sovereign equality, interdependence, common interest and cooperation among all States,
irrespective of their economic and social systems, which shall correct inequalities and redress existing injustices, make
it possible to eliminate the widening gap between the developed and the developing countries and ensure steadily
accelerating economic and social development and peace and justice for present and future generations, in accordance
with relevant previous General Assembly resolutions, programmes of action and major conferences and summits in
the economic, social and related areas;
14. Also reaffirms that the international community should devise ways and means to remove the current
obstacles and meet the challenges to the full realization of all human rights and to prevent the continuation of human
rights violations resulting therefrom throughout the world;
15. Urges States to continue their efforts, through enhanced international cooperation, towards the promotion
of a democratic and equitable international order;
16. Affirms that a democratic and equitable international order, as prescribed in the Charter of the United
Nations, cannot be achieved only through the deregulation of trade, markets and financial services;
17. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue
to provide all the human and financial resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the
Independent Expert;
18. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Independent Expert in his task, to supply all
necessary information requested by him and to consider responding favourably to the requests of the Independent
Expert to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more effectively;
19. Requests the Human Rights Council, the human rights treaty bodies, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the special mechanisms extended by the Council and the Human Rights
Council Advisory Committee to pay due attention, within their respective mandates, to the present resolution and to
make contributions towards its implementation;
875

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

20. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to build upon the issue of the promotion of a democratic
and equitable international order;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, United
Nations organs, bodies and components, intergovernmental organizations, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions,
and non-governmental organizations and to disseminate it on the widest possible basis;
22. Requests the Independent Expert to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, and invites him to undertake research into the impact of financial and
economic policies pursued by international organizations and other institutions on a democratic and equitable
international order;
23. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its seventy-fifth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/151
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)499

74/151. Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of
international cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that among the purposes of the United Nations are those of developing friendly relations among
nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and taking other appropriate
measures to strengthen universal peace, as well as achieving international cooperation in solving international
problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Desirous of achieving further progress in international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that such international cooperation should be based on the principles embodied in international
law, especially the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,500 the
International Covenants on Human Rights501 and other relevant instruments,
Deeply convinced that United Nations action in the field of human rights should be based not only on a profound
understanding of the broad range of problems existing in all societies but also on full respect for the political, economic
and social realities of each of them, in strict compliance with the purposes and principles of the Charter and for the
basic purpose of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through
international cooperation,
Recalling its previous resolutions in this regard,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring the universality, objectivity and non‑selectivity of the consideration of
human rights issues, as affirmed in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,502 and the elimination of double standards,

_______________
499

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi, Cameroon, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Senegal, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam.
500
Resolution 217 A (III).
501
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
502
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

876

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also the importance of the objectivity, independence, impartiality and discretion of the special
rapporteurs and representatives on thematic issues and on countries, as well as of the members of the working groups,
in carrying out their mandates,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development503 calls for a revitalized Global Partnership for
Sustainable Development, and emphasizing the importance of international cooperation in realizing the Agenda,
including the Sustainable Development Goals,
Underlining the obligation that Governments have to promote and protect human rights and to carry out the
responsibilities that they have undertaken under international law, especially the Charter, as well as various
international instruments in the field of human rights,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;504

2. Reiterates that, by virtue of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, all peoples have the right freely to determine, without external interference, their
political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development, and that every State has the duty to
respect that right within the provisions of the Charter, including respect for territorial integrity;
3. Reaffirms that it is a purpose of the United Nations and the task of all Member States, in cooperation with
the Organization, to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and to remain
vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur;
4. Calls upon all Member States to base their activities for the promotion and protection of human rights,
including the development of further international cooperation in this field, on the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,500 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,501
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights501 and other relevant international instruments, and to refrain
from activities that are inconsistent with that international framework;
5. Considers that international cooperation in this field should make an effective and practical contribution
to the urgent task of preventing mass and flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and to
the strengthening of international peace and security;
6. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all, as a legitimate concern of the world community, should be guided by the principles of non-selectivity,
impartiality and objectivity and should not be used for political ends;
7. Requests all human rights bodies within the United Nations system, as well as the special rapporteurs and
representatives, independent experts and working groups, to take duly into account the contents of the present
resolution in carrying out their mandates;
8. Expresses its conviction that an unbiased and fair approach to human rights issues contributes to the
promotion of international cooperation as well as to the effective promotion, protection and realization of human rights
and fundamental freedoms;
9. Stresses the continuing need for impartial and objective information on the political, economic and social
situations and events of all countries, and in this context highlights the role of the media in raising public awareness
of issues of public interest;
10. Invites Member States to consider adopting, as appropriate, within the framework of their respective legal
systems and in accordance with their obligations under international law, especially the Charter, and international
human rights instruments, the measures that they may deem appropriate to achieve further progress in international
cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;

_______________
503
504

Resolution 70/1.
A/74/351.

877

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

11. Requests the Human Rights Council to continue taking duly into account the present resolution and to
consider further proposals for the strengthening of United Nations action in the field of human rights through the
promotion of international cooperation and the importance of the principles of non-selectivity, impartiality and
objectivity, including in the context of the universal periodic review;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to present further practical proposals and ideas that would contribute to the strengthening of United
Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of international cooperation based on the principles
of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity, and to submit a comprehensive report on the question to the General
Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
13. Decides to consider the matter at its seventy-sixth session under the item entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/152
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 138 to 23, with 26 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)505
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Japan, Latvia,
Lithuania, Netherlands, Poland, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Andorra, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovenia

74/152. The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses, in particular, the determination to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom and, to that end, to employ international mechanisms for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,506 as well as the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights507 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,507
Recalling also the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and
social fields,

_______________
505

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: China, Cuba (on behalf of the States that are
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018) and El Salvador.
506
Resolution 217 A (III).
507
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

878

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986, which confirmed that the right to development is an inalienable human right
and that equality of opportunity for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who make up
nations, and that the individual is the central subject and beneficiary of development,
Emphasizing the urgent need to make the right to development a reality for everyone,
Stressing the importance of the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna in 1993, and that the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action508 reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and inalienable
right and an integral part of fundamental human rights and the individual as the central subject and beneficiary of
development,
Reaffirming the objective of making the right to development a reality for everyone, as set out in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted by the General Assembly on 8 September 2000,509
Recognizing the importance of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,510 reaffirming
that the Declaration on the Right to Development informed the 2030 Agenda, along with other relevant international
instruments, and underlining the fact that the Sustainable Development Goals can be realized only through a credible,
effective and universal commitment to the means of implementation by all stakeholders,
Recognizing also the successful conclusion of the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable
Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016, that recognizes that the New Urban
Agenda511 is grounded in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, international human rights treaties, the
Millennium Declaration and the 2005 World Summit Outcome512 and is informed by other instruments such as the
Declaration on the Right to Development,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The
future we want”,513
Reaffirming the universality, indivisibility, interrelatedness, interdependence and mutually reinforcing nature of
all civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights, including the right to development,
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples and its outcome document,514
Deeply concerned that the majority of indigenous peoples in the world live in conditions of poverty, and
recognizing the critical need to address the negative impact of poverty and inequity on indigenous peoples by ensuring
their full and effective inclusion in development and poverty eradication programmes,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to
determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their
lives, and in that context noting that the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the
national and international levels should be universal and conducted without conditions attached and that the
international community should support the strengthening and promotion of democracy, development and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in the entire world,
Recognizing that inequality is a major obstacle to the realization of the right to development within and across
countries,
Taking note of the commitment declared by a number of specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations system and other international organizations to make the right to development a reality for all, and in

_______________
508

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution 55/2.
510
Resolution 70/1.
511
Resolution 71/256, annex.
512
Resolution 60/1.
513
Resolution 66/288, annex.
514
Resolution 69/2.
509

879

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

this regard urging all relevant bodies of the United Nations system and other international organizations to mainstream
the right to development into their objectives, policies, programmes and operational activities, as well as into
development and development-related processes, including the follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries,
Recalling the outcomes adopted at the Tenth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization, held in
Nairobi from 15 to 19 December 2015,
Calling for a successful, development-oriented outcome of the trade negotiations of the World Trade
Organization, in particular on the remaining issues of the Doha Development Round, as a contribution to the creation
of international conditions permitting the full realization of the right to development,
Recalling the outcome of the fourteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
held in Nairobi from 17 to 22 July 2016, on the theme “From decision to action: moving towards an inclusive and
equitable global economic environment for trade and development”,515
Recalling also all its previous resolutions on the subject, the most recent of which was resolution 73/166 of
17 December 2018, as well as Human Rights Council resolutions and those of the Commission on Human Rights on
the right to development, in particular Commission resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998516 on the urgent need to make
further progress towards the realization of the right to development,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolution 35/21 of 22 June 2017 on the contribution of development
to the enjoyment of all human rights,517
Recalling the Eighteenth Summit of Heads of State and Government of Non‑Aligned Countries, held in Baku
on 25 and 26 October 2019, and the previous summits and conferences at which the States members of the Movement
of Non‑Aligned Countries stressed the need to operationalize the right to development as a priority, including through
the elaboration of a convention on the right to development by the relevant machinery, taking into account the
recommendations of relevant initiatives,
Reiterating its continuing support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development518 as a development
framework for Africa,
Deeply concerned about the negative impacts of the global economic and financial crises on the realization of
the right to development,
Recognizing that, while development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, the lack of development may
not be invoked to justify the abridgement of internationally recognized human rights,
Recognizing also that Member States should cooperate with one another in ensuring development and
eliminating obstacles to development, that the international community should promote effective international
cooperation, in particular to revitalize a global partnership for development, for the realization of the right to
development and the elimination of obstacles to development and that lasting progress towards the implementation
of the right to development requires effective development policies at the national level, as well as equitable economic
relations and a favourable economic environment at the international level,
Recognizing further that poverty is an affront to human dignity,
Recognizing that extreme poverty and hunger are among the greatest global threats and require the collective
commitment of the international community for their eradication, pursuant to Millennium Development Goal 1 and
Sustainable Development Goals 1 and 2, and therefore calling upon the international community, including the
Human Rights Council, to contribute towards achieving that goal,

_______________
515

See TD/519, TD/519/Add.1, TD/519/Add.2 and TD/519/Add.2/Corr.1.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A.
517
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. V, sect. A.
518
A/57/304, annex.
516

880

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing also that historical injustices, inter alia, have contributed to the poverty, underdevelopment,
marginalization, social exclusion, economic disparity, instability and insecurity that affect many people in different
parts of the world, in particular in developing countries,
Recognizing further that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is
one of the critical elements in the promotion and realization of the right to development and is the greatest global
challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, which requires a multifaceted and
integrated approach, and committed to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social
and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner,
Emphasizing that all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, are universal,
indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Emphasizing also that the right to development is vital for the full realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and should be central to its implementation,
Encouraging relevant bodies of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, including the
specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, relevant international organizations,
including the World Trade Organization, and relevant stakeholders, including civil society organizations, to give due
consideration to the right to development in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and to cooperate with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the fulfilment of her mandate
with regard to the implementation of the right to development,
1. Takes note of the consolidated report of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights concerning the promotion and realization of the right to development;519
2. Acknowledges the need to strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the right to
development at the international level while urging all States to undertake at the national level the necessary policy
formulation and to institute the measures required for the implementation of the right to development as an integral
part of all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Emphasizes the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006
establishing the Human Rights Council, and in this regard calls upon the Council to implement the agreement to
continue to act to ensure that its agenda promotes and advances sustainable development, including the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development,510 which seeks to build on the Millennium Development Goals and complete what they
did not achieve, and also in this regard to lead the raising of the right to development, as set out in paragraphs 5 and
10 of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,508 to the same level as and on a par with all other human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
4. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Working Group on the Right to Development,520 and
recognizes the need for renewed efforts with a view to overcoming the existing political impasse within the Working
Group and to fulfil at the earliest its mandate as established by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution
1998/72516 and the Human Rights Council in its resolution 4/4 of 30 March 2007;521
5. Stresses the importance of the core principles contained in the conclusions of the Working Group at its
third session522 that are congruent with the purpose of international human rights instruments, such as equality,
non-discrimination, accountability, participation and international cooperation, as critical to mainstreaming the right
to development at the national and international levels, and underlines the importance of the principles of equity and
transparency;

_______________
519

A/HRC/42/29.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53/Add.1), chap. I.
521
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. III, sect. A.
522
See E/CN.4/2002/28/Rev.1, sect. VIII.A.
520

881

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group on its twentieth
session;523
7. Notes the presentation to the Working Group at its nineteenth session of the set of standards for the
implementation of the right to development prepared by the Chair-Rapporteur,524 which is a useful basis for further
deliberations on the implementation and realization of the right to development;
8. Calls upon Member States to contribute to the efforts of the Working Group, including, inter alia, on the
elaboration of a draft legally binding instrument on the right to development on the basis of the draft prepared by the
Chair-Rapporteur, as decided by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 42/23 of 27 September 2019;525
9. Stresses that it is important that the Chair-Rapporteur and the Working Group, in the discharge of their
mandates, take into account the need:
(a) To promote the democratization of the system of international governance in order to increase the effective
participation of developing countries in international decision-making;
(b) To also promote effective partnerships such as the New Partnership for Africa’s Development518 and other
similar initiatives with the developing countries, particularly the least developed countries, for the purpose of the
realization of their right to development, including the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals;
(c) To strive for greater acceptance, operationalization and realization of the right to development at the
international level, while urging all States to undertake at the national level the necessary policy formulation and to
institute the measures required for the implementation of the right to development as an integral part of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and also while urging all States to expand and deepen mutually beneficial
cooperation in ensuring development and eliminating obstacles to development in the context of promoting effective
international cooperation for the realization of the right to development, bearing in mind that lasting progress towards
the implementation of the right to development requires effective development policies at the national level and a
favourable economic environment at the international level;
(d)
priority;

To consider ways and means to continue to ensure the operationalization of the right to development as a

(e) To mainstream the right to development into the policies and operational activities of the specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, as well as in the policies and strategies of the
international financial and multilateral trading systems, bearing in mind in this regard that the core principles of the
international economic, commercial and financial spheres, such as equity, non‑discrimination, transparency,
accountability, participation and international cooperation, including effective partnerships for development, are
indispensable in achieving the right to development and preventing discriminatory treatment arising from political or
other non-economic considerations in addressing the issues of concern to the developing countries;
10. Encourages the Human Rights Council to continue to consider how to ensure follow-up to the work of
the former Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights on the right to development, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Commission on
Human Rights and in compliance with decisions to be taken by the Council;
11. Takes note with appreciation of the decision of the Human Rights Council in its resolution 42/23 to
establish a subsidiary expert mechanism to provide the Council with thematic expertise on the right to development
in searching for, identifying and sharing best practices with Member States and to promote the implementation of the
right to development worldwide;

_______________
523

A/HRC/42/35 and A/HRC/42/35/Corr.1.
A/HRC/WG.2/17/2.
525
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
524

882

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
the right to development,526 in which the Special Rapporteur explores the explicit link between the right to
development and disaster risk reduction and its practical implications;
13. Stresses that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South
cooperation and hence should not result in a reduction of North-South cooperation or hamper progress in fulfilling
existing official development assistance commitments, and encourages Member States and other relevant
stakeholders to incorporate the right to development into the design, financing and implementation of cooperation
processes;
14. Urges Member States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to provide the Special Rapporteur
on the right to development with all the assistance and support necessary for the fulfilment of his mandate;
15. Reaffirms the commitment to implement the goals and targets set out in all the outcome documents of the
major United Nations conferences and summits and their review processes, in particular those relating to the
realization of the right to development, recognizing that the realization of the right to development is critical to
achieving the objectives, goals and targets set out in those outcome documents;
16. Also reaffirms that the realization of the right to development is essential to the implementation of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, which regards all human rights as universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated, places the human person at the centre of development and recognizes that, while development
facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, a lack of development may not be invoked to justify the abridgement of
internationally recognized human rights;
17. Further reaffirms that development contributes significantly to the enjoyment of all human rights by all,
and calls upon all countries to realize people-centred development of the people, by the people and for the people;
18. Calls upon all States to spare no effort in promoting the right to development, in particular while
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as it is conducive to the overall enjoyment of human
rights;
19. Stresses that the primary responsibility for the promotion and protection of all human rights lies with the
State, and reaffirms that States have the primary responsibility for their own economic and social development and
that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
20. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to create national and international conditions favourable to
the realization of the right to development, as well as their commitment to cooperate with one another to that end;
21. Expresses concern about the increasing cases of human rights violations and abuses by some transnational
corporations and other business enterprises, underlines the need to ensure that appropriate protection, justice and
remedies are provided to the victims of human rights violations and abuses resulting from their activities, and
underscores the fact that these entities must contribute to the means of implementation for the realization of the right
to development;
22. Reaffirms the need for an international environment that is conducive to the realization of the right to
development;
23. Emphasizes the critical importance of identifying and analysing obstacles impeding the full realization of
the right to development at both the national and international levels;
24. Reaffirms that, while globalization offers both opportunities and challenges, the process of globalization
remains deficient in achieving the objectives of integrating all countries into a globalized world, stresses the need for
policies and measures at the national and global levels to respond to the challenges and opportunities of globalization
if this process is to be made fully inclusive and equitable, and recognizes that globalization has brought disparities

_______________
526

A/74/163.

883

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

between and within countries and that issues such as trade and trade liberalization, the transfer of technology,
infrastructure development and market access should be managed effectively in order to mitigate the challenges of
poverty and underdevelopment and to make the right to development a reality for everyone;
25. Recognizes that, despite continuous efforts on the part of the international community, the gap between
developed and developing countries remains unacceptably wide, that most of the developing countries continue to
face difficulties in participating in the globalization process and that many risk being marginalized and effectively
excluded from its benefits;
26. Expresses its deep concern, in this regard, about the negative impact on the realization of the right to
development owing to the further aggravation of the economic and social situation, in particular of developing
countries, as a result of the effects of international energy, food and financial crises, as well as the increasing challenges
posed by global climate change and the loss of biodiversity, which have increased vulnerabilities and inequalities and
have adversely affected development gains, in particular in developing countries;
27. Encourages Member States to give particular consideration to the right to development in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and emphasizes that the 2030 Agenda promotes
the respect for all human rights, including the right to development;
28. Recalls the commitment in the United Nations Millennium Declaration509 of halving the number of
people living in poverty by 2015, notes with concern that some developing countries have failed to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, and in this regard invites Member States and the international community to take
proactive measures aimed at creating a conducive environment to contribute to the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular increasing international cooperation, including
partnership and commitment, between developed and developing countries towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals;
29. Urges developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete efforts towards meeting the targets
of 0.7 per cent of their gross national product for official development assistance to developing countries and 0.15 to
0.2 per cent of their gross national product to the least developed countries, and encourages developing countries to
build on the progress achieved in ensuring that official development assistance is used effectively to help to meet
development goals and targets;
30. Recognizes the need to address market access for developing countries, including in the sectors of
agriculture, services and non-agricultural products, in particular those of interest to developing countries;
31. Calls once again for the implementation of a desirable pace of meaningful trade liberalization, including
in areas under negotiation in the World Trade Organization, the implementation of commitments on implementationrelated issues and concerns, a review of special and differential treatment provisions, with a view to strengthening
them and making them more precise, effective and operational, the avoidance of new forms of protectionism, and
capacity-building and technical assistance for developing countries as important issues in making progress towards
the effective implementation of the right to development;
32. Recognizes the important link between the international economic, commercial and financial spheres and
the realization of the right to development, stresses in this regard the need for good governance and for broadening
the base of decision-making at the international level on issues of development concern and the need to fill
organizational gaps, as well as to strengthen the United Nations system and other multilateral institutions, and also
stresses the need to broaden and strengthen the participation of developing countries and countries with economies in
transition in international economic decision-making and norm-setting;
33. Also recognizes that good governance and the rule of law at the national level assist all States in the
promotion and protection of human rights, including the right to development, and agrees on the value of the ongoing
efforts being made by States to identify and strengthen good governance practices, including transparent, responsible,
accountable and participatory government, that are responsive and appropriate to their needs and aspirations, including
in the context of agreed partnership approaches to development, capacity-building and technical assistance;
34. Further recognizes the important role and the rights of women and the application of a gender perspective
as a cross-cutting issue in the process of realizing the right to development, and notes in particular the positive
884

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

relationship between the education of women and their equal participation in the civil, cultural, economic, political
and social activities of the community and the promotion of the right to development;
35. Stresses the need for the integration of the rights of children, girls and boys alike, in all policies and
programmes and for ensuring the promotion and protection of those rights, especially in areas relating to health,
education and the full development of their capacities;
36. Recalls the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast Track to Accelerating the Fight against
HIV and to Ending the AIDS Epidemic by 2030, adopted on 8 June 2016 at the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on HIV and AIDS,527 and underscores the importance of enhanced international cooperation to support the
efforts of Member States to achieve health goals, including the target of ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030,
implement universal access to health-care services and address health challenges;
37. Also recalls the political declaration of the third high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases528 and the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the fight against tuberculosis,529 both adopted on 10 October 2018, with their particular focus
on development and other challenges and social and economic determinants and impacts, particularly for developing
countries;
38. Welcomes the political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage entitled
“Universal health coverage: moving together to build a healthier world”, as adopted in its resolution 74/2 of
10 October 2019, in which it was reaffirmed that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of the
social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development and the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development;
39. Recalls the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,530 which entered into force on 3 May
2008, and General Assembly resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, and, while recognizing persons with disabilities as agents and beneficiaries
of development, stresses the need to take into consideration the rights of persons with disabilities and the importance
of international cooperation in support of national efforts in the realization of the right to development;
40. Stresses its commitment to indigenous peoples in the process of the realization of the right to development,
reaffirms the commitment to promote their rights in the areas of education, employment, vocational training and
retraining, housing, sanitation, health and social security, in accordance with recognized international human rights
obligations and taking into account, as appropriate, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 61/295 of 13 September 2007, and in this regard recalls
the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, held
in 2014;
41. Recognizes the need for strong partnerships with civil society organizations and the private sector in
pursuit of poverty eradication and development, as well as for corporate social responsibility;
42. Emphasizes the urgent need to take concrete and effective measures to prevent, combat and criminalize
all forms of corruption at all levels, to prevent, detect and deter in a more effective manner international transfers
of illicitly acquired assets and to strengthen international cooperation in asset recovery, consistent with the
principles of the United Nations Convention against Corruption,531 particularly chapter V thereof, stresses the
importance of a genuine political commitment on the part of all Governments through a firm legal framework, and
in this context urges States to sign and ratify the Convention as soon as possible and States parties to implement it
effectively;

_______________
527

Resolution 70/266, annex.
Resolution 73/2.
529
Resolution 73/3.
530
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
531
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
528

885

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

43. Also emphasizes the need to strengthen further the activities of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the promotion and realization of the right to development, including by ensuring
the effective use of the financial and human resources necessary to fulfil its mandate, and calls upon the SecretaryGeneral to provide the Office with the necessary resources;
44. Reaffirms the request to the High Commissioner, in mainstreaming the right to development, to effectively
undertake activities aimed at strengthening the global partnership for development among Member States,
development agencies and the international development, financial and trade institutions and to reflect those activities
in detail in her next report to the Human Rights Council;
45. Calls upon the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to mainstream
the right to development into their operational programmes and objectives, and stresses the need for the international
financial and multilateral trading systems to mainstream the right to development into their policies and objectives;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, United
Nations organs and bodies, the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system,
international development and financial institutions, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-governmental
organizations;
47. Encourages relevant bodies of the United Nations system, within their respective mandates, including the
specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, relevant international organizations,
including the World Trade Organization, and relevant stakeholders, including civil society organizations, to give due
consideration to the right to development in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to
contribute further to the work of the Working Group on the Right to Development and the Special Rapporteur on the
right to development and to cooperate with the High Commissioner in the fulfilment of her mandate with regard to
the implementation of the right to development;
48. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session and
an interim report to the Human Rights Council on the implementation of the present resolution, including efforts
undertaken at the national, regional and international levels in the promotion and realization of the right to
development, and invites the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group and the Special Rapporteur to present an oral
report and to engage in an interactive dialogue with the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/153
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)532

74/153. Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as well as relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,533 for enhancing genuine cooperation
among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recalling its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which the General Assembly adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and peoplecentred set of universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals,

_______________
532

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: China, Cuba (on behalf of the States that are
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018), El Salvador, Palau and Russian Federation.
533
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

886

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also its adoption of the United Nations Millennium Declaration on 8 September 2000,534 its resolution
72/169 of 19 December 2017, Human Rights Council resolution 38/3 of 5 July 2018535 and the resolutions of the
Commission on Human Rights on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights,
Recalling further the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review Conference,
held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009, and the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action,536 and their role in the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights is essential for the
full achievement of the purposes of the United Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human
rights,
Recognizing also that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based on the principle of
cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their
human rights obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Underlining that cooperation is not just a matter of relations of good-neighbourliness, coexistence or reciprocity,
but rather of a willingness to look beyond mutual interests in order to advance the general interest,
Stressing the importance of international cooperation for improving the living conditions of all in every country,
including, in particular, in developing countries,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the field of human rights could
contribute greatly to the enhancement of international cooperation in this field,
Reiterating the important role that genuine human rights dialogue can play in the enhancement of cooperation
in the field of human rights at the bilateral, regional and international levels,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation and genuine dialogue contributes to the effective
functioning of the international human rights system,
Emphasizing that human rights dialogue should be constructive and based on the principles of universality,
indivisibility, objectivity, non-selectivity, non‑politicization, mutual respect and equal treatment, with the aim of
facilitating mutual understanding and strengthening constructive cooperation, including through capacity-building
and technical cooperation between States,
Emphasizing also the need for further progress in the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation, transparency and confidence-building
are important elements in all activities for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the adoption of resolution 2000/22 of 18 August 2000, on the promotion of dialogue on human rights
issues, by the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-second session,537
1. Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the responsibility of all Member States
to promote, protect and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international
cooperation;
2. Recognizes that, in addition to their separate responsibilities to their individual societies, States have a
collective responsibility to uphold the principles of human dignity, equality and equity at the global level;

_______________
534

Resolution 55/2.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. VI, sect. A.
536
Resolution 66/3.
537
See E/CN.4/2001/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/46, chap. II, sect. A.
535

887

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Reaffirms that dialogue among cultures and civilizations facilitates the promotion of a culture of tolerance
and respect for diversity, and welcomes in this regard the holding of conferences and meetings at the national, regional
and international levels on dialogue among civilizations;
4. Also reaffirms the duty of States to cooperate with one another in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations in the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
including with respect to the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and all forms of religious intolerance;
5. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, justice,
equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity and
universal human rights and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
6. Reaffirms the importance of the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion and
protection of human rights and for the achievement of the objectives of the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
7. Considers that international cooperation in the field of human rights, in conformity with the purposes and
principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations and international law, should make an effective and practical
contribution to the urgent task of preventing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
8. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
should be guided by the principles of universality, non-selectivity, cooperation and genuine dialogue, objectivity and
transparency, in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter;
9. Emphasizes the importance of the universal periodic review as a mechanism based on cooperation and
constructive dialogue with the objective of, inter alia, improving the situation of human rights on the ground and
promoting the fulfilment of the human rights obligations and commitments undertaken by States;
10. Also emphasizes the need for a cooperative and constructive approach on the part of all stakeholders to
resolving human rights issues in international forums;
11. Further emphasizes the role of international cooperation in support of national efforts and in increasing
the capacities of Member States in the field of human rights through, inter alia, the enhancement of their cooperation
with human rights mechanisms, including through the provision of technical assistance, upon the request of and in
accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned;
12. Calls upon Member States, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations to continue to
carry out a constructive dialogue and consultations for the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and encourages non-governmental organizations to
contribute actively to this endeavour;
13. Urges States to take measures necessary to enhance bilateral, regional and international cooperation aimed
at addressing the adverse impact of consecutive and compounded global crises, such as financial and economic crises,
food crises, climate change and natural disasters, on the full enjoyment of human rights;
14. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and procedures to continue to pay
attention to the importance of mutual cooperation, understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and
protection of all human rights;
15. Encourages all Member States and the United Nations system to explore and foster complementarities
among North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation aiming at the enhancement of international cooperation
in the field of human rights;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, to consult States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations on ways and means, as well as
on obstacles and challenges and possible proposals to overcome them, for the enhancement of international
cooperation and genuine dialogue in the United Nations human rights machinery, including the Human Rights
Council;
17. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-fifth session.

888

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/154
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 135 to 55, with no abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)538
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: None

74/154. Human rights and unilateral coercive measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on this subject, the most recent of which was resolution 73/167 of
17 December 2018, and Human Rights Council decision 18/120 of 30 September 2011539 and resolutions 24/14 of
27 September 2013,540 27/21 of 26 September 2014,541 30/2 of 1 October 2015,542 36/10 of 28 September 2017,543
37/21 of 23 March 2018544 and 40/3 of 21 March 2019,545 as well as previous resolutions of the Council and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Reaffirming the pertinent principles and provisions contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, in particular
article 32 thereof, in which it declared that no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other
type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign
rights,

_______________
538

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: China, Cuba (on behalf of the States that are
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018) and Russian Federation.
539
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and
A/66/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. III.
540
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
541
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1, A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2),
chap. IV, sect. A.
542
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), chap. III.
543
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
544
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53) chap. IV, sect. A.
545
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53) chap. IV, sect. A.

889

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 52/120
of 12 December 1997546 and 55/110 of 4 December 2000,547
Stressing that unilateral coercive measures and legislation are contrary to international law, international
humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among
States,
Recognizing the universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated character of all human rights, and in this
regard reaffirming the right to development as an integral part of all human rights,
Recalling the Final Document of the Sixteenth Ministerial Conference and Commemorative Meeting of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011,548 the Final Document of the
Seventeenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held on Margarita Island,
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, from 13 to 18 September 2016, and the documents adopted at previous summits
and conferences, in which States members of the Movement agreed to oppose and condemn unilateral coercive
measures and their continued application, persevere with efforts to effectively reverse them, urge other States to do
likewise, as called for by the General Assembly and other organs of the United Nations, and request States applying
those measures or laws to revoke them fully and immediately,
Recalling also that, at the World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, States
were called upon to refrain from any unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter that
creates obstacles to trade relations among States and impedes the full realization of all human rights549 and also
severely threatens the freedom of trade,
Bearing in mind all the references to this question in the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development,
adopted by the World Summit for Social Development on 12 March 1995,550 the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995,551 the Quito Declaration on
Sustainable Cities and Human Settlements for All and the Quito implementation plan for the New Urban Agenda,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III) on
20 October 2016,552 and in the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying
any unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing
countries,
Expressing concern about the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on international relations, trade,
investment and cooperation,
Expressing grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children is adversely affected by unilateral
measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations among States,
impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder the well-being of the population in the
affected countries, with particular consequences for women, children, including adolescents, the elderly and persons
with disabilities,

_______________
546

A/53/293 and A/53/293/Add.1.
A/56/207 and A/56/207/Add.1.
548
A/65/896-S/2011/407, annex I.
549
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
550
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8),
chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
551
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
552
Resolution 71/256, annex.
547

890

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Deeply concerned that, despite the recommendations adopted on this question by the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council, the Commission on Human Rights and recent major United Nations conferences, and
contrary to general international law and the Charter, unilateral coercive measures continue to be promulgated and
implemented, with all their negative implications for the social humanitarian activities and economic and social
development of developing countries, including their extraterritorial effects, thereby creating additional obstacles to
the full enjoyment of all human rights by peoples and individuals under the jurisdiction of other States,
Bearing in mind all the extraterritorial effects of any unilateral legislative, administrative and economic
measures, policies and practices of a coercive nature against the development process and the enhancement of human
rights in developing countries, which create obstacles to the full realization of all human rights,
Reaffirming that unilateral coercive measures are a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration on
the Right to Development553 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Recalling article 1, paragraph 2, common to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights554 and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,554 which provides, inter alia, that in no case may a
people be deprived of its own means of subsistence,
Noting the continuing efforts of the open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human
Rights Council, and reaffirming in particular its criteria, according to which unilateral coercive measures are one of
the obstacles to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
1. Urges all States to cease adopting or implementing any unilateral measures not in accordance with
international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles
governing peaceful relations among States, in particular those of a coercive nature, with all their extraterritorial effects,
which create obstacles to trade relations among States, thus impeding the full realization of the rights set forth in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights555 and other international human rights instruments, in particular the right of
individuals and peoples to development;
2. Strongly urges States to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral economic, financial or
trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that impede the full achievement of
sustainable economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
3. Condemns the inclusion of Member States in unilateral lists under false pretexts, which are contrary to
international law and the Charter, including false allegations of terrorism sponsorship, considering such lists as
instruments for political or economic pressure against Member States, particularly developing countries;
4. Urges all States not to adopt any unilateral measures not in accordance with international law and the
Charter that impede the full achievement of economic and social development by the population of the affected
countries, in particular children and women, that hinder their well-being and that create obstacles to the full enjoyment
of their human rights, including the right of everyone to a standard of living adequate for his or her health and wellbeing and his or her right to food, medical care and education and the necessary social services, as well as to ensure
that food and medicine are not used as tools for political pressure;
5. Strongly objects to the extraterritorial nature of those measures which, in addition, threaten the sovereignty
of States, and in this context calls upon all Member States neither to recognize those measures nor to apply them, as
well as to take administrative or legislative measures, as appropriate, to counteract the extraterritorial applications or
effects of unilateral coercive measures;
6. Condemns the continuing unilateral application and enforcement by certain Powers of unilateral coercive
measures, and rejects those measures, with all their extraterritorial effects, as being tools for political or economic
pressure against any country, in particular against developing countries, adopted with a view to preventing those
countries from exercising their right to decide, of their own free will, their own political, economic and social systems,

_______________
553

Resolution 41/128, annex.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
555
Resolution 217 A (III).
554

891

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and because of the negative effects of those measures on the realization of all the human rights of vast sectors of their
populations, in particular children, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities;
7. Expresses grave concern that, in some countries, the situation of children is adversely affected by
unilateral measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter that create obstacles to trade relations
among States, impede the full realization of social and economic development and hinder the well-being of the
population in the affected countries, with particular consequences for women, children, including adolescents, the
elderly and persons with disabilities;
8. Reaffirms that essential goods such as food and medicines should not be used as tools for political coercion
and that under no circumstances should people be deprived of their own means of subsistence and development;
9. Calls upon Member States that have initiated such measures to abide by the principles of international
law, the Charter, the declarations of the United Nations and world conferences and relevant resolutions and to commit
themselves to their obligations and responsibilities arising from the international human rights instruments to which
they are parties by revoking such measures at the earliest possible time;
10. Reaffirms, in this context, the right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they freely
determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development;
11. Recalls that, according to the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the annex
to General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, and the relevant principles and provisions
contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, proclaimed by the Assembly in its resolution
3281 (XXIX), in particular article 32 thereof, no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any
other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its
sovereign rights and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
12. Rejects all attempts to introduce unilateral coercive measures, and urges the Human Rights Council to
take fully into account the negative impact of those measures, including through the enactment and extraterritorial
application of national laws that are not in conformity with international law, in its task concerning the implementation
of the right to development;
13. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in discharging her functions relating
to the promotion, realization and protection of the right to development and bearing in mind the continuing impact of
unilateral coercive measures on the population of developing countries, to give priority to the present resolution in her
annual report to the General Assembly;
14. Underlines the fact that unilateral coercive measures are one of the major obstacles to the implementation
of the Declaration on the Right to Development553 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,556 and in this
regard calls upon all States to avoid the unilateral imposition of economic coercive measures and the extraterritorial
application of national laws that run counter to the principles of free trade and hamper the development of developing
countries, as recognized by the open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development of the Human Rights
Council;
15. Recognizes that, in the Declaration of Principles adopted at the first phase of the World Summit on the
Information Society, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003,557 States were strongly urged to avoid and refrain
from any unilateral measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations in building
the information society;
16. Reaffirms paragraph 30 of the outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the
post-2015 development agenda, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,
in which States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral economic, financial or

_______________
556
557

892

Resolution 70/1.
A/C.2/59/3, annex, chap. I, sect. A.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full
achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries;
17. Recalls the decision of the Human Rights Council, in its resolution 27/21,541 to appoint a Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, and welcomes
the work done in delivering his mandate;
18. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the negative impact of
unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights;558
19. Recalls the decision taken by the Human Rights Council, in its resolution 36/10,543 to extend, for a period
of three years, the mandate of the Special Rapporteur as set out in Council resolution 27/21;
20. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to provide
all the human and financial resources necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur,
and also requests them, in discharging their functions in relation to the promotion and protection of human rights, to
pay due attention and to give urgent consideration to the present resolution;
21. Recalls that the Human Rights Council took note of the research-based progress report of its Advisory
Committee containing recommendations on mechanisms to assess the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures
on the enjoyment of human rights and to promote accountability;559
22. Takes note of the contribution of the first biennial panel discussion on the issue of unilateral coercive
measures and human rights organized by the Human Rights Council in 2015 to increase awareness of the negative
impact that unilateral coercive measures have on the enjoyment of human rights in the targeted and non‑targeted
countries, and invites the Council to follow up on the discussion at the fourth panel discussion, in 2021;
23. Invites the Human Rights Council and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to continue paying attention to and explore ways to address the negative impact of the application of unilateral
coercive measures;
24. Reiterates its support for the invitation of the Human Rights Council to all special rapporteurs and existing
thematic mechanisms of the Council in the field of economic, social and cultural rights to pay due attention, within
the scope of their respective mandates, to the negative impact and consequences of unilateral coercive measures;
25. Takes note with interest of the proposals contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur on the negative
impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, and requests the Special Rapporteur to
include in his report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session more information on the process regarding
the discussions of his proposals at the Human Rights Council;
26. Reaffirms the request of the Human Rights Council that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights organize a workshop on the impact of the application of unilateral coercive
measures on the enjoyment of human rights by the affected populations, in particular their socioeconomic impact on
women and children, in the States targeted;
27. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and on the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the full
enjoyment of human rights;
28. Invites Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the fulfilment of his mandate
through, inter alia, the submission of comments and suggestions on the implications and negative effects of unilateral
coercive measures on the full enjoyment of human rights;
29. Decides to examine the question on a priority basis at its seventy-fifth session under the sub-item entitled
“Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.

_______________
558
559

A/74/165.
A/HRC/28/74.

893

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/155
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 134 to 52, with 1 abstention,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)560
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining: Brazil

74/155. Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights
treaty bodies
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on this question,
Reaffirming the importance of the goal of universal ratification of the United Nations human rights instruments,
Welcoming the significant increase in the number of ratifications of United Nations human rights instruments
and the movement of some treaties towards universal ratification,
Reiterating the importance of the effective functioning of the treaty bodies established pursuant to United
Nations human rights instruments for the full and effective implementation of those instruments,
Recognizing that the equitable geographical distribution of membership is an essential requirement for the
effective functioning of the treaty bodies,
Recalling that, with regard to the election of the members of the human rights treaty bodies, the General
Assembly and the former Commission on Human Rights recognized the importance of giving consideration in their
membership to equitable geographical distribution, gender balance and representation of the principal legal systems
and of bearing in mind that the members shall be elected and shall serve in their personal capacity, and shall be of
high moral character, acknowledged impartiality and recognized competence in the field of human rights,
Reaffirming the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds, as well as of different political, economic and legal systems,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,561

_______________
560

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: China, Cuba (on behalf of the States that are
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018) and Russian Federation.
561
A/74/227.

894

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing that the United Nations pursues multilingualism as a means of promoting, protecting and
preserving diversity of languages and cultures globally and that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity
and international understanding,
Recalling that the General Assembly and the former Commission on Human Rights encouraged States parties
to United Nations human rights treaties, individually and through meetings of States parties, to consider how to give
better effect, inter alia, to the principle of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of treaty bodies,
Expressing its concern at the regional imbalance in the current composition of the membership of the human
rights treaty bodies in favour in particular of representatives of members from Western European and other States, as
indicated and highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General,
Reaffirming the importance of increasing efforts to address that imbalance,
Convinced that the goal of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of human rights treaty bodies
is perfectly compatible and can be fully realized and achieved in harmony with the need to achieve gender balance
and the representation of the principal legal systems in those bodies and the high moral character, acknowledged
impartiality and recognized competence in the field of human rights of their members,
1. Reiterates that the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments should take into account,
in their nomination of members to the human rights treaty bodies, that these committees shall be composed of persons
of high moral character and recognized competence in the field of human rights, consideration being given to the
usefulness of the participation of persons having legal experience and to equal representation of women and men, and
that members shall serve in their personal capacity, and also reiterates that, in the elections to the human rights treaty
bodies, strong consideration shall be given to equitable geographical distribution of membership and to the
representation of the different forms of civilization and of the principal legal systems;
2. Urges the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments, including the bureau members,
to include this matter in the agenda of each meeting and/or conference of States parties to those instruments in order
to initiate a debate on ways and means to ensure equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human
rights treaty bodies, based on previous recommendations of the former Commission on Human Rights and the
Economic and Social Council and the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Encourages the States parties to the United Nations human rights instruments to consider and adopt
concrete actions, inter alia, the possible establishment of quotas by geographical region for membership of the treaty
bodies, thereby ensuring the paramount objective of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of those
human rights bodies;
4. Recommends, when considering the possible allocation of seats on each treaty body on a regional basis,
the introduction of flexible procedures that encompass the following criteria:
(a) Each of the five regional groups established by the General Assembly is allocated seats on each treaty
body in equivalent proportion to the number of States parties to the instrument in that group;
(b) There must be provision for periodic revisions of the allocation of seats in order to reflect relative changes
in the level of treaty ratification in each regional group;
(c) Automatic periodic revisions should be envisaged in order to avoid amending the text of the instrument
when the quotas are revised;
5. Stresses that the process needed to achieve the goal of equitable geographical distribution in the
membership of human rights treaty bodies can contribute to raising awareness of the importance of gender balance,
the representation of the principal legal systems and the principle that the members of the treaty bodies shall be elected
and shall serve in their personal capacity, and shall be of high moral character, acknowledged impartiality and
recognized competence in the field of human rights;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a comprehensive updated report in
this regard, including information on any steps taken by States parties at meetings or conferences of States parties to
address the matter of equitable geographical distribution in the membership of the human rights treaty bodies, as well
as concrete recommendations on the implementation of the present resolution;
895

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-sixth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/156
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)562

74/156. National human rights institutions
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, as well as those of the Human Rights Council and the Commission on
Human Rights on national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, including most recently
Council resolution 39/17 of 28 September 2018563 and General Assembly resolution 72/181 of 19 December 2017,
as well as the previous resolutions on the role of the Ombudsman, mediator institutions and other national human
rights institutions564 in the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling also the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights (the Paris Principles),565 welcoming the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Principles, and
noting with appreciation the establishment of the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions,
Recalling further the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on
Human Rights on 25 June 1993,566 which reaffirmed the important and constructive role played by national human
rights institutions, in particular in their advisory capacity to the competent authorities and their role in preventing and
remedying human rights violations, in disseminating information on human rights and in education in human rights,
Reaffirming the importance of, and welcoming the rapidly growing interest throughout the world in, establishing
and strengthening independent and pluralistic national human rights institutions in accordance with the Paris
Principles,
Reaffirming also the important role that such national institutions play and will continue to play in promoting
and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, strengthening participation, in particular of civil society
organizations, promoting the rule of law and contributing to the prevention of human rights violations and abuses,
Encouraging greater efforts to investigate and respond to increasing reports of cases of reprisal against national
human rights institutions, their members and staff and those who cooperate or seek to cooperate with them,
Recognizing the role that national human rights institutions can play in preventing and addressing cases of
reprisal as part of supporting the cooperation between States and the United Nations in the promotion of human rights,
including by contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to recommendations made by international human
rights mechanisms,

_______________
562

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and Zimbabwe.
563
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
564
“National human rights institutions” and “national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights” are used synonymously.
565
Resolution 48/134, annex.
566
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

896

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note of the Belgrade principles on the relationship between national human rights institutions and
parliaments,567
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations, in particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in assisting the development of independent and effective national human rights
institutions, guided by the Paris Principles, and recognizing also in this regard the potential for strengthened and
complementary cooperation among the United Nations, the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions
and its regional coordinating networks and those national institutions in the promotion and protection of human
rights,
Recalling the programme of action adopted by national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights at their meeting held in Vienna in June 1993 during the World Conference on Human Rights, in which it was
recommended that United Nations activities and programmes should be reinforced to meet the requests for assistance
from States wishing to establish or strengthen their national institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights568 and on the activities of the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions
in accrediting national institutions in compliance with the principles relating to the status of institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights (Paris Principles),569
Welcoming efforts to strengthen United Nations system-wide coordination in support of national human rights
institutions and their networks, including the establishment of the tripartite partnership between the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the High Commissioner and the Global Alliance of National Human Rights
Institutions, and recognizing the potential for further cooperation in this regard between the United Nations
mechanisms and processes and with national human rights institutions,
Welcoming also the strengthening in all regions of regional cooperation among national human rights
institutions, and welcoming further the continuing work of the Network of African National Human Rights
Institutions, the Network of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in the Americas,
the Asia-Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions and the European Network of National Human Rights
Institutions,
Welcoming further the contribution of the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions to the
strengthening of cooperation among existing national human rights institutions in all regions and the enhancement of
the engagement of national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles with relevant United Nations
mechanisms and processes,
Welcoming the progress made to date by Member States and all other stakeholders, including the Global Alliance
of National Human Rights Institutions and its regional coordinating networks and relevant United Nations
mechanisms and processes, in the implementation of resolution 72/181,
Welcoming also that the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing is implementing its decision 7/1 of
12 December 2016, entitled “Modalities of participation of national human rights institutions in the work of the Openended Working Group on Ageing”,570 and that it invites national human rights institutions fully compliant with the
Paris Principles to participate in its work in their own capacity,
Noting with appreciation the opportunities afforded to national human rights institutions to contribute to the
Conference of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and to the Commission on
the Status of Women, and noting in this regard the efforts to further enhance the participation of national human rights
institutions compliant with the Paris Principles at the sessions of the Commission, in compliance with the rules of
procedure of the Economic and Social Council,

_______________
567

A/HRC/20/9, annex.
A/HRC/39/20.
569
A/HRC/39/21.
570
See A/AC.278/2016/2, para. 10.
568

897

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming in this regard the decision of the Commission on the Status of Women to encourage the secretariat
to continue its consideration of how to enhance the participation, including at the sixty-fourth session of the
Commission, of national human rights institutions that are fully compliant with the Paris Principles, where they exist,
in compliance with the rules of procedure of the Economic and Social Council,571
Recalling the invitation to national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles to register with
the Secretariat in order to participate in the international migration review forums, including the informal interactive
multi‑stakeholder hearings, and inviting the institutions, as well as the Global Alliance of National Human Rights
Institutions and its regional networks, to submit inputs prior to the forums,
Welcoming the continued contribution of national human rights institutions to the work of the United Nations
human rights treaty bodies, as well as the efforts of the treaty bodies, within their respective mandates and in
accordance with the treaties establishing these mechanisms, to promote the effective and enhanced participation by
national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles at all relevant stages of their work, and noting
with appreciation the ongoing efforts of the treaty bodies, including by the continued consideration of a common
treaty body approach to the engagement of the treaty bodies with national human rights institutions at all relevant
stages of their work,
Taking note of the Marrakech Declaration adopted at the thirteenth International Conference of National Human
Rights Institutions,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;572

2. Reaffirms the importance of the development of effective, independent and pluralistic national institutions
for the promotion and protection of human rights, in accordance with the principles relating to the status of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles);565
3. Recognizes the role of independent national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights
in working together with Governments to ensure full respect for human rights at the national level, including by
contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to the recommendations resulting from the international human
rights mechanisms;
4. Welcomes the increasingly important role of national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights in supporting cooperation between their Governments and the United Nations in the promotion and
protection of human rights;
5. Underlines the value of national human rights institutions, established and operating in accordance with
the Paris Principles, in the continued monitoring of existing legislation and in consistently informing the State about
the impact of such legislation on the activities of human rights defenders, including by making relevant and concrete
recommendations;
6. Recognizes the role that national human rights institutions can play in preventing and addressing cases of
reprisals as part of supporting the cooperation between their Governments and the United Nations in the promotion
of human rights, including by contributing to follow-up actions, as appropriate, to recommendations made by
international human rights mechanisms, and in that regard takes note of the Marrakech Declaration adopted at the
thirteenth International Conference of National Human Rights Institutions;
7. Also recognizes that, in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,566 it is the right
of each State to choose the framework for national institutions that is best suited to its particular needs at the national
level in order to promote human rights in accordance with international human rights standards;
8. Encourages all Member States to establish effective, independent and pluralistic national institutions
or, where they already exist, to strengthen them for the promotion and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, as outlined in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, and welcomes the

_______________
571
572

898

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2019, Supplement No. 7 (E/2019/27), chap. I, sect. A.
A/74/226.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

growing number of States establishing national human rights institutions in line with the Paris Principles, including
as one of the means for accelerating and guaranteeing progress for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;573
9. Encourages national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights established by Member
States to continue to play an active role in preventing and combating all violations of human rights as enumerated in
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and relevant international human rights instruments;
10. Stresses that national human rights institutions and their respective members and staff should not face any
form of reprisal or intimidation, including political pressure, physical intimidation, harassment or unjustifiable
budgetary limitations, as a result of activities undertaken in accordance with their respective mandates, including when
taking up individual cases or when reporting on serious or systematic violations in their countries, and calls upon
States to promptly and thoroughly investigate cases of alleged reprisal or intimidation against members or staff of
national human rights institutions or against individuals who cooperate or seek to cooperate with them and to bring
perpetrators to justice;
11. Recognizes the role played by national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights in the
Human Rights Council, including its universal periodic review mechanism, in both preparation and follow-up, and
the special procedures, in accordance with Council resolutions 5/1 and 5/2 of 18 June 2007574 and Commission on
Human Rights resolution 2005/74 of 20 April 2005,575 and in the human rights treaty bodies, as well as the
strengthening of opportunities for such participation stipulated in the outcome of the review of the work and
functioning of the Council annexed to Council resolution 16/21 of 25 March 2011576 and adopted in General
Assembly resolution 65/281 of 17 June 2011;
12. Welcomes the contribution of national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles to the
work of the United Nations, including of the Commission on the Status of Women, the Conference of States Parties
to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing and the
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the
human rights treaty body system;
13. Encourages national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles to continue to
participate in and to contribute to deliberations in all relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes in accordance
with their respective mandates, including the discussions on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
14. Encourages all relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes, in accordance with their respective
mandates, including the Commission on the Status of Women, the Conference of States Parties to the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, including the high-level political forum on sustainable development and related global and
regional preparatory processes as well as the Sustainable Development Goals Summit, to further enhance the
participation of national human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles and to allow for their
contribution to these United Nations mechanisms and processes, bearing in mind the relevant provisions dealing with
their participation contained in General Assembly resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, Human Rights Council
resolutions 5/1, 5/2 and 16/21 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 2005/74;
15. Encourages all other relevant United Nations forums and meetings, in accordance with their respective
mandates, existing rules of procedure and modalities, to provide for the engagement of national human rights
institutions compliant with the Paris Principles and to allow for their contribution to these forums and meetings;

_______________
573

Resolution 70/1.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
575
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23, E/2005/23/Corr.1 and
E/2005/23/Corr.2), chap. II, sect. A.
576
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
574

899

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

16. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, within their respective mandates and in accordance with the treaties
establishing these mechanisms, to provide for ways to ensure the effective and enhanced participation by national
human rights institutions compliant with the Paris Principles at all relevant stages of their work;
17. Encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms and relevant United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes to work, within their respective mandates, with Member States and national institutions in the
promotion and protection of human rights with respect to, inter alia, projects in the area of good governance and the
rule of law, welcomes in this regard the efforts made by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
develop partnerships in support of national institutions, including the tripartite partnership between the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the High Commissioner and the Global Alliance of National Human Rights
Institutions, and in this respect encourages all United Nations human rights mechanisms and relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes to enhance their interaction with national human rights institutions, including by
facilitating their access to relevant information and documentation;
18. Stresses the importance of the financial and administrative independence and stability of national human
rights institutions, notes with satisfaction the efforts of those States that have provided their national institutions with
more autonomy and independence, including by giving them an investigative role or enhancing such a role, and
encourages other Governments to consider taking similar steps;
19. Underlines the importance of the autonomy and independence of ombudsman institutions, encourages
increased cooperation between national human rights institutions and regional and international associations of
ombudsmen, and encourages ombudsman institutions to actively draw on the standards enumerated in international
instruments and the Paris Principles to strengthen their independence and increase their capacity to act as national
human rights protection mechanisms;
20. Commends the high priority given by the Office of the High Commissioner to work on national human
rights institutions, encourages the High Commissioner, in view of the expanded activities relating to national
institutions, to ensure that appropriate arrangements are made and budgetary resources provided to continue and
further extend activities in support of national institutions, and invites States to contribute additional voluntary funds
to that end;
21. Welcomes the important role played by the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions, in close
cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner, in assisting, when requested, in the establishment of, and in
strengthening the compliance of, national human rights institutions with the Paris Principles, in assessing the
conformity of national human rights institutions with the Paris Principles and in providing technical assistance to
strengthen national human rights institutions, upon request, with a view to enhancing the compliance of national
human rights institutions with the Paris Principles, and calls upon Member States and other stakeholders, including
United Nations agencies, to follow up on the recommendations of the Subcommittee on Accreditation of the Global
Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions, with a view to enabling national human rights institutions to fully
comply with the Paris Principles in both law and practice;
22. Encourages national institutions, including ombudsman and mediator institutions, to seek accreditation
status through the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions;
23. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate steps to promote the exchange of information and
experience concerning the establishment and effective operation of national human rights institutions and to support
the work of the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions and its regional coordinating networks in this
regard, including through support for the relevant technical assistance programmes of the Office of the High
Commissioner;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide support to national human rights institutions
compliant with the Paris Principles, as they engage with relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes, with full
respect for their respective mandates, and with a view to enabling their most effective contributions, in order to further
the implementation of international human rights obligations and commitments;
25. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to give high priority to requests from Member States for
assistance in the establishment and strengthening of national human rights institutions in line with the Paris Principles,
including as one of the means of accelerating and guaranteeing progress in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
900

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

for Sustainable Development, and encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions in this regard;
26. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to encourage national human rights institutions to interact
with and advocate independent participation in all relevant United Nations mechanisms and processes, in accordance
with their respective mandates, existing rules of procedure and modalities;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the assistance necessary for holding international
and regional meetings of national institutions, including meetings of the Global Alliance of National Human Rights
Institutions, in cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States and national human rights
institutions, to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session on the implementation of the present
resolution, including on best practices among national human rights institutions.
RESOLUTION 74/157
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)577

74/157. The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,578 and recalling relevant international human rights
treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights579 and the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,580 as well as the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949581
and the Additional Protocols thereto,582
Recalling its previous resolutions on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity, including resolution
68/163 of 18 December 2013, in which it proclaimed 2 November as the International Day to End Impunity for
Crimes against Journalists, and resolutions 69/185 of 18 December 2014, 70/162 of 17 December 2015 and 72/175
of 19 December 2017,
Welcoming the latest report of the Secretary-General on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity, the
current situation and the actions undertaken so far in relation thereto,583
Taking note with appreciation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity, endorsed by the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on 12 April 2012, in

_______________
577

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen and Zambia.
578
Resolution 217 A (III).
579
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
580
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
581
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
582
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
583
A/74/314.

901

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

which United Nations agencies, funds and programmes were invited to work with Member States towards a free and
safe environment for journalists and media workers in both conflict and non‑conflict situations, with a view to
strengthening peace, democracy and development worldwide,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 21/12 of 27 September 2012,584 27/5 of 25 September 2014,585
33/2 of 29 September 2016586 and 39/6 of 27 September 2018587 on the safety of journalists, 32/13 of 1 July 2016
on the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet,588 34/7 of 23 March 2017 on the right
to privacy in the digital age589 and 27/12 of 25 September 2014 on the World Programme for Human Rights
Education,585 Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006 and
2222 (2015) of 27 May 2015 and Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/2 of 6 June 2019 on mainstreaming
a gender perspective into all policies and programmes in the United Nations system,
Taking note with appreciation of the Global Report 2017/2018 of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, entitled World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development, as well as the
2017 edition of the Safety Guide for Journalists: A Handbook for Reporters in High-Risk Environments,
Recalling all other relevant reports of the Secretary-General, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and special procedures of the Human Rights Council on the safety of journalists, as
well as the most recent report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security,590
Commending the role and the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization with regard to the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity,
including their collaboration to strengthen implementation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, and their facilitation of the commemoration of the International Day to End
Impunity for Crimes against Journalists on 2 November, in consultation with relevant entities within the United
Nations system, Governments and relevant stakeholders, and taking note of the outcome of the multi-stakeholder
consultation on strengthening the implementation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity,
Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development591 and the commitments therein to,
inter alia, build peaceful and inclusive societies, protect human rights and promote gender equality for sustainable
development so that no one is left behind, including by ensuring public access to information and protecting
fundamental freedoms, in accordance with national legislation and international agreements, and therefore
recognizing the important contribution of the promotion and protection of the safety of journalists in this regard,
Mindful that the right to freedom of opinion and expression is a human right guaranteed to all, in accordance
with article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, and that it constitutes one of the essential foundations of a democratic society and one of the basic conditions
for its progress and development,
Acknowledging that journalism is continuously evolving to include input from media institutions, private
individuals and a range of organizations that seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, online as
well as offline, in the exercise of freedom of opinion and expression, in accordance with article 19 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, thereby contributing to the shaping of public debate,

_______________
584

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1, A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2),
chap. IV, sect. A.
586
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1 and A/71/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
587
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
588
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. V, sect. A.
589
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
590
S/2019/800.
591
Resolution 70/1.
585

902

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the importance of freedom of expression and of free, independent, plural and diverse media and
access to information, online as well as offline, in building inclusive and peaceful knowledge societies
and democracies and in fostering intercultural dialogue, peace and good governance, as well as understanding and
cooperation,
Recognizing also the importance of public trust in and the credibility of journalism, in particular the challenges
of maintaining media professionalism in an environment where new forms of media are constantly evolving and
where targeted disinformation and smear campaigns to discredit the work of journalists are increasing,
Recognizing further that the work of journalists often puts them and their family members at specific risk of
intimidation, threats, harassment and violence, which often deters journalists from continuing their work or
encourages self-censorship, consequently depriving society of important information,
Noting the good practices of different countries aimed at the protection of journalists, as well as, inter alia, those
designed for the protection of human rights defenders, that can, where applicable, be relevant to the protection of
journalists,
Urging States to do their utmost to prevent violence, intimidation, threats and attacks against journalists and
media workers, including by supporting capacity-building, training and awareness-raising in the judiciary and among
law enforcement officers and military and security personnel, as well as among media organizations, journalists and
civil society, regarding States’ international human rights and international humanitarian law obligations and
commitments relating to the safety of journalists,
Recognizing the efforts by States to review and, where necessary, amend laws, policies and practices that limit
the ability of journalists to perform their work independently and without undue interference and to bring them fully
in line with their obligations under international law,
Emphasizing the role of international cooperation in support of national efforts to prevent attacks and violence
against journalists and in raising the capacities of States in the field of human rights, including in preventing attacks
and violence against journalists, including through the provision of technical assistance, upon the request of and in
accordance with the priorities set by the States concerned,
Recognizing that the number of people whose lives are influenced by the way information is presented is
significant and that journalism influences public opinion,
Recognizing also the crucial role of journalists and media workers in the context of elections, including
informing the public about candidates, their platforms and ongoing debates, and expressing serious concern that
attacks against journalists and media workers increase during election periods,
Alarmed at instances in which political leaders, public officials and/or authorities denigrate, intimidate or
threaten the media, including individual journalists, which increases the risk of threats and violence against journalists
and undermines public trust in the credibility of journalism,
Bearing in mind that impunity for attacks against journalists remains one of the greatest challenges to the safety
of journalists and that ensuring accountability for crimes committed against journalists is a key element in preventing
future attacks,
Recalling in this regard that journalists, media professionals and associated personnel engaged in dangerous
professional missions in areas of armed conflict shall be considered as civilians and shall be respected and protected
as such, provided that they take no action adversely affecting their status as civilians,
Recognizing the important role that national human rights institutions, where they exist, can play in promoting
and protecting human rights, including the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and in addressing human rights
violations and abuses against journalists through monitoring, educating and awareness-raising activities, as well as
through the examination of complaints, and recognizing further that national mechanisms for reporting and follow-up
can contribute to the prevention of human rights violations and abuses against journalists,
Deeply concerned by all human rights violations and abuses committed in relation to the safety of journalists
and media workers, including killing, torture, enforced disappearance, arbitrary arrest and arbitrary detention,
expulsion, intimidation, harassment, online and offline threats and other forms of violence,
903

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing deep concern at the increased number of journalists and media workers who have been killed,
tortured, arrested, detained, harassed and intimidated in recent years as a direct result of their profession,
Expressing deep concern also at the growing threat to the safety of journalists posed by non-State actors,
including terrorist groups and criminal organizations,
Deeply concerned by the specific risks faced by women journalists in relation to their work, in non-conflict as
well as in armed conflict situations, where they continue to be targeted at alarming rates, underlining in this context
the importance of taking a gender-sensitive approach when considering measures to address the safety of journalists
and media workers, including in the online sphere, in particular to effectively tackle gender-based discrimination,
violence, abuse and harassment, including sexual harassment, threats and intimidation, as well as inequality and
gender-based stereotypes, to enable women to enter and remain in journalism on terms of equality and
non-discrimination while ensuring their greatest possible safety, and to ensure that the experiences and concerns of
women journalists are effectively addressed and gender stereotypes in the media are adequately tackled,
Acknowledging the particular risks with regard to the safety of journalists in the digital age, including the
particular vulnerability of journalists to becoming targets of unlawful or arbitrary surveillance or interception of
communications, in violation of their rights to privacy and to freedom of expression,
Recognizing that national legal frameworks consistent with States’ international human rights obligations and
commitments are an essential condition for a safe and enabling environment for journalists, and expressing deep
concern about the misuse of national laws, policies and practices to hinder or limit the ability of journalists to perform
their work independently and without undue interference,
Stressing the need for greater emphasis on prevention measures and the creation of enabling legal frameworks
for freedom of expression to ensure a safe and enabling environment for journalists and media workers,
1. Condemns unequivocally all attacks and violence against journalists and media workers, such as torture,
extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrest and arbitrary detention, expulsion, intimidation, threats
and online and offline harassment, including through attacks on, or the forced closure of, their offices and media
outlets, in both conflict and non-conflict situations;
2. Also condemns unequivocally the specific attacks on women journalists and media workers in relation to
their work, such as gender-based discrimination and violence, including online and offline sexual harassment,
intimidation and incitement to hatred against women journalists, and calls upon States to tackle these issues as part of
broader efforts to promote and protect the human rights of women, eliminate gender inequality and tackle genderbased stereotypes in society;
3. Strongly condemns the prevailing impunity for attacks and violence against journalists, and expresses
concern that the vast majority of these crimes go unpunished, which in turn contributes to the recurrence of these
crimes;
4. Calls upon States to develop and implement effectively legal frameworks and measures for the protection
of journalists and media workers and for combating impunity, taking into consideration the gender dimensions thereof,
including, where appropriate, through the creation and strengthening of special investigative units or independent
commissions, the appointment of a specialized prosecutor and the adoption of specific protocols and methods of
investigation and prosecution;
5. Urges the immediate and unconditional release of journalists and media workers who have been arbitrarily
arrested, arbitrarily detained or taken hostage or who have become victims of enforced disappearances;
6. Calls upon all States to pay attention to the safety of journalists covering events in which persons are
exercising their rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression, taking into account their specific role,
exposure and vulnerability;
7. Encourages States to take the opportunity of the proclamation of 2 November as the International Day to
End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists to raise awareness regarding the issue of the safety of journalists and to
launch concrete initiatives in this regard;
8. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in consultation with
relevant entities of the United Nations system, and mindful of the provisions of the annex to Economic and Social
904

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980, to continue to facilitate the implementation of the International Day in
collaboration with Governments and relevant stakeholders;
9. Urges Member States to do their utmost to prevent violence, threats and attacks targeting journalists and
media workers, to ensure accountability through the conduct of impartial, speedy, thorough, independent and effective
investigations into all alleged violence, threats and attacks against journalists and media workers, including sexual
and gender-based violence against women journalists and media workers in armed conflict and non-conflict situations,
falling within their jurisdiction, to bring perpetrators, including those who command, conspire to commit, aid and abet
or cover up such crimes, to justice, and to ensure that victims and their families have access to appropriate remedies;
10. Urges political leaders, public officials and/or authorities to refrain from denigrating, intimidating or
threatening the media, including individual journalists and media workers, specifically women, which thereby
undermines trust in the credibility of journalists as well as respect for the importance of independent journalism;
11. Calls upon States to create and maintain, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment for
journalists to perform their work independently and without undue interference, taking into account the gender
dimensions thereof, inter alia, by means of (a) legislative measures; (b) supporting the judiciary in considering training
and awareness-raising and supporting training and awareness-raising among law enforcement officers and military
personnel, as well as among journalists and civil society, regarding international human rights and international
humanitarian law obligations and commitments relating to the safety of journalists, including with a strong focus on
combating sexual and gender-based discrimination, and violence against women journalists, as well as the particularities
of online threats and harassment of women journalists; (c) regular monitoring and reporting of attacks against journalists;
(d) collecting and analysing concrete quantitative and qualitative data on online and offline attacks or violence against
journalists, that are disaggregated by, among other factors, sex; (e) publicly and systematically condemning online and
offline attacks, harassment and violence against journalists and media workers; (f) dedicating the resources necessary
to investigate and prosecute such attacks and to develop and implement gender-sensitive strategies for combating
impunity for attacks and violence against journalists, including by using, where appropriate, good practices such as
those identified in Human Rights Council resolution 33/2;586 and (g) putting in place safe gender-sensitive preventive
measures and investigative procedures, in order to encourage women journalists to report online and offline attacks
against them and provide adequate support, including psychosocial support, to victims and survivors;
12. Condemns unequivocally measures taken by States in violation of international human rights law aiming
to or that intentionally prevent or disrupt access to or the dissemination of information online and offline, aiming to
undermine the work of journalists in informing the public, including measures to unduly restrict, block or take down
media websites, such as denial of service attacks, and calls upon all States to cease and refrain from these measures,
which cause irreparable harm to efforts at building inclusive and peaceful knowledge societies and democracies;
13. Calls upon States to ensure that measures to combat terrorism and preserve national security or public
order are in compliance with their obligations under international law and do not arbitrarily or unduly hinder the work
and safety of journalists, including through arbitrary arrest or detention or the threat thereof;
14. Also calls upon States to ensure that defamation and libel laws are not misused, in particular through
excessive criminal sanctions, to illegitimately or arbitrarily censor journalists and interfere with their mission of
informing the public and, where necessary, to revise and repeal such laws, in compliance with States’ obligations
under international human rights law;
15. Emphasizes that, in the digital age, encryption and anonymity tools have become vital for many journalists
to freely exercise their work and their enjoyment of human rights, in particular their rights to freedom of expression
and to privacy, including to secure their communications and to protect the confidentiality of their sources, and calls
upon States not to interfere with the use of such technologies and to ensure that any restrictions thereon comply with
States’ obligations under international human rights law;
16. Also emphasizes the important role that media organizations can play in providing adequate safety, risk
awareness, digital security and self-protection training and guidance to journalists and media workers, together with
protective equipment;
17. Stresses the need to ensure better cooperation and coordination at the international and regional levels,
including through technical assistance and capacity-building, with regard to helping to improve the safety of
journalists at the national and local levels;

905

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

18. Calls upon States to cooperate with relevant United Nations entities, in particular the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as international and regional human rights mechanisms,
including the relevant special procedures of the Human Rights Council, and invites States to share information on a
voluntary basis on the status of investigations into attacks and violence against journalists, including in response to
requests by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization through the mechanism operated by
its International Programme for the Development of Communication;
19. Encourages States to continue to address the issue of the safety of journalists through the process of the
universal periodic review;
20. Encourages the Secretary-General to further intensify his efforts regarding the safety of journalists and
media workers, and invites the agencies, organizations, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to
actively exchange information and enhance cooperation, including through the network of focal points, as well as
accelerate gender mainstreaming in the implementation of the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, in cooperation with Member States and under the overall coordination of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
21. Recognizes the important contribution of the promotion and protection of the safety of journalists in the
realization of the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals,591 in particular target 16.10, and calls upon
States to strengthen national collection of disaggregated data, analysis and reporting on the number of verified cases
of killing, kidnapping, enforced disappearance, arbitrary detention, torture and other harmful acts against journalists
and associated media personnel, in accordance with Sustainable Development Goal indicator 16.10.1, and to do their
utmost to make these data available to the relevant entities, in particular the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to further assist in the implementation of the present resolution and to
report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session and to the Human Rights Council at its forty-ninth session
on the safety of journalists, with a special focus on the activities of the network of focal points in addressing the safety
of journalists and the issue of impunity and taking into account the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity and the follow-up thereto.
RESOLUTION 74/158
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)592

74/158. Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and genuine elections
and the promotion of democratization
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming that democracy is a universal value based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine
their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives,

_______________
592

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uzbekistan and Vanuatu.

906

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming also that, while democracies share common features, there is no single model of democracy and
that democracy does not belong to any country or region, and reaffirming further the necessity of due respect for
sovereignty and the right to self-determination,
Stressing that democracy, development and respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming that Member States are responsible for organizing, conducting and ensuring transparent, free and
fair electoral processes and that Member States, in the exercise of their sovereignty, may request international
organizations to provide advisory services or assistance for strengthening and developing their electoral institutions
and processes, including sending preliminary missions for that purpose,
Recognizing the importance of fair, periodic and genuine elections, including in new democracies and countries
undergoing democratization, in order to empower citizens to express their will and to promote a successful transition
to long-term sustainable democracies,
Recognizing also that Member States are responsible for ensuring transparent, free and fair elections, free of
intimidation, coercion and tampering with vote counts, and that all such acts are sanctioned accordingly,
Emphasizing that Member States are responsible for respecting the will of the voters as expressed through
genuine, periodic, free and fair elections, which shall be by universal and equal suffrage, and in this respect expressing
serious concern about the unconstitutional or unlawful disruption of representative governance and democratic
institutions and the unlawful removal of any democratically elected officials, whether by States or non-State actors,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in particular resolution 72/164 of 19 December 2017,
Recalling also all relevant Human Rights Council resolutions on the topic, including resolutions 19/11 of
22 March 2012,593 31/14 of 23 March 2016,594 31/37 of 24 March 2016,594 33/22 of 30 September 2016,595 34/41
of 24 March 2017596 and 39/11 of 28 September 2018,597
Reaffirming that United Nations electoral assistance and support for the promotion of democratization are
provided only at the specific request of the Member State concerned,
Noting with satisfaction that an increasing number of Member States are using elections as a peaceful means of
discerning the will of the people, which builds confidence in representational governance and contributes to greater
national peace and stability, and which may contribute to regional peace and stability,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted on 10 December 1948,598 in particular the
principle that the will of the people, as expressed through periodic and genuine elections, shall be the basis of
government authority, as well as the right of everyone to freely choose representatives through periodic and genuine
elections, which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting
procedures,
Reaffirming the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,599 the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,600 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination601 and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,602 and reaffirming also that

_______________
593

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and A/67/53/Corr.1),
chap. III, sect. A.
594
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
595
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1 and A/71/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
596
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
597
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
598
Resolution 217 A (III).
599
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
600
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
601
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
602
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.

907

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

no distinctions are permitted among citizens on any grounds, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or
other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status, or on the basis of disability, in the enjoyment of
the right to participate, directly or through freely chosen representatives, and to vote and to be elected in genuine
periodic elections, which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret ballot, guaranteeing the
free expression of the will of the electors,
Reaffirming also that the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national
and international levels should be universal and conducted without conditions attached and that the international
community should support the strengthening and promotion of democracy, development and respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in the entire world,603
Underscoring the important role that regional and subregional organizations play, in accordance with the
Charter, in the areas of peace and security, development and human rights,604 and recalling their commitments to
supporting the principles of free and fair elections,
Reaffirming that the full and effective participation and representation of women, on equal terms with men, at
all levels of decision-making is essential to the achievement of equality, social inclusion, sustainable development,
peace and democracy,
Stressing the importance, generally and in the context of promoting free and fair elections, of respect for the
freedoms of peaceful assembly and association and expression, including the freedom to seek, receive and impart
information, in accordance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and noting in particular
the fundamental importance of access to information and media freedom, including through accessible and
easy-to-understand formats for new information and communications technologies,
Recognizing the potential of online communication tools to promote freedom of expression and expand political
participation, as well as to empower persons who belong to underrepresented groups and those who are marginalized,
including but not limited to groups mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the role of the
United Nations in enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization,605 and urging States to create and maintain, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment
for journalists to perform their work independently and without undue interference,
Expressing deep concern that the spread of disinformation by both internal and external actors on traditional
and social media, as well as efforts to manipulate voting systems and the blocking of the Internet and social media in
the framework of elections, constitute an increasing problem for democracies around the world,
Recognizing that the spread of hate speech through online platforms can have a damaging impact on electoral
processes,
Noting that some countries are beginning to use online technology for balloting purposes, and reaffirming the
right to privacy, according to which no one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her
privacy, family, home or correspondence, and the right to the protection of the law against such interference, as set
out in article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, and that the same rights that people have offline must also be protected online,
Recognizing the need to strengthen democratic processes, electoral institutions and national capacity-building
in requesting countries, including the capacity to administer fair elections, promote voter education, the development
of electoral expertise and technology and the participation of women on equal terms with men, take all appropriate
measures to ensure the effective and full participation of all persons with disabilities on an equal basis with others,
increase citizen participation and provide civic education, including to youth, in requesting countries in order to
consolidate and regularize the achievements of previous elections and support subsequent elections,

_______________
603

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, para. 8.
Resolution 69/277, para. 2.
605
A/74/285.
604

908

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting the importance of ensuring orderly, open, fair and transparent democratic processes that protect the rights
to peaceful assembly, association and freedom of expression and opinion,
Noting also that the international community can contribute to the creation of conditions that could foster
stability and security throughout the pre-election, election and post-election periods in transitional and post-conflict
situations,
Reiterating that transparency is a fundamental basis for free and fair elections, which contribute to the
accountability of Governments to their citizens, which, in turn, is an underpinning of democratic societies,
Acknowledging, in this regard, the importance of national and international observation of elections for the
promotion of free and fair elections and its contribution to enhancing the integrity of election processes in requesting
countries, to promoting public confidence and electoral participation and to mitigating the potential for election-related
disturbances,
Acknowledging also that extending invitations regarding international electoral assistance and/or observation is
the sovereign right of Member States, and welcoming the decisions of those States that have requested such assistance
and/or observation,
Recalling its resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005, entitled “2005 World Summit Outcome”, in which it
welcomed the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Democracy Fund,
Welcoming the support provided by Member States to the electoral assistance activities of the United Nations,
inter alia, through the provision of electoral experts, including electoral commission staff, and observers, as well as
through contributions to the United Nations trust fund for electoral assistance, the democratic governance thematic
trust fund of the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Democracy Fund,
Recognizing that electoral assistance, particularly through appropriate, sustainable, accessible and cost-effective
electoral technology, can facilitate full access for persons with disabilities and supports the electoral processes of
developing countries,
Recognizing also the coordination challenges posed by the multiplicity of actors involved in electoral assistance
both within and outside the United Nations,
Welcoming the contributions made by international and regional organizations and also by non-governmental
organizations to enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization,
Recognizing the importance of the links that exist between development, peace, human rights, the rule of law,
democracy and good governance, including the holding of free and fair elections, and in this regard recalling the
adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,606
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing
the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of democratization;605
2. Commends the electoral assistance provided upon request to Member States by the United Nations, and
requests that such assistance continue on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the evolving needs and legislation
of requesting countries to develop, improve and refine their electoral institutions and processes, including by ensuring
full access to all stages of the electoral process for persons with disabilities, recognizing that the responsibility for
organizing free and fair elections lies with Governments;
3. Reaffirms that the electoral assistance provided by the United Nations should continue to be carried out in
an objective, impartial, neutral and independent manner;
4. Requests the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, in her role as United
Nations focal point for electoral assistance matters, to continue to regularly inform Member States about the requests
received and the nature of any assistance provided;

_______________
606

Resolution 70/1.

909

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Requests the United Nations to continue its efforts to ensure, before undertaking to provide electoral
assistance to a requesting State, that there is adequate time to organize and carry out an effective mission providing
such assistance, including the provision of long-term technical cooperation, that conditions exist to allow a free and
fair election and that the results of the mission will be reported comprehensively and consistently;
6. Notes the importance of adequate resources for the administration of efficient and transparent elections at
the national and local levels, and recommends that Member States provide adequate resources for those elections,
including by considering the possibility of establishing internal funding, where feasible;
7. Reaffirms the obligation of all States to take all appropriate measures to ensure that every citizen has the
effective right and opportunity to participate in elections on an equal basis;
8. Strongly condemns any manipulation of election processes, coercion and tampering with vote counts,
particularly when done by States, as well as by other actors, and calls upon all Member States to respect the rule of
law and the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons, including the right to vote and to be elected at
genuine periodic elections, which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret ballot,
guaranteeing the free expression of the will of the electors, thereby fostering conditions in which all citizens, regardless
of how they voted, whom they supported or whether their candidates prevailed, have the motivation and incentive, as
well as the right and opportunity, to continue to participate directly or through elected representatives in the conduct
of public affairs and their Government;
9. Calls upon all Member States to ensure that persons with disabilities can effectively and fully participate
in political and public life on an equal basis with others, directly or through freely chosen representatives, including
the right and opportunity for persons with disabilities to vote and to be elected;
10. Also calls upon all Member States to consider ways to increase the representation of youth in decisionmaking at all levels in local, national, regional and international institutions and mechanisms, to promote the
constructive political engagement of youth and to consider, explore and promote new avenues for the full, effective,
structured and sustained participation of youth and youth-led organizations in relevant decision-making processes;
11. Further calls upon all Member States to enhance the political participation of women, accelerate the
achievement of equality between men and women and, in all situations, promote and protect the human rights of
women with respect to voting in elections and public referendums and being eligible for election to publicly elected
bodies on equal terms with men;
12. Recommends that, throughout the timespan of the entire electoral cycle, including before and after
elections, as appropriate, on the basis of a needs assessment and in accordance with the evolving needs of requesting
Member States, bearing in mind sustainability and cost-effectiveness, the United Nations continue to provide technical
advice and other assistance to requesting States and electoral institutions in order to help to strengthen their democratic
processes, also bearing in mind that the relevant office may provide additional assistance in the form of mediation and
good offices, upon the request of Member States;
13. Notes with appreciation the additional efforts being made to enhance cooperation with other international,
governmental and non-governmental organizations in order to facilitate more comprehensive and needs-specific
responses to requests for electoral assistance, encourages those organizations to share knowledge and experience in
order to promote best practices in the assistance that they provide and in their reporting on electoral processes, and
expresses its appreciation to those Member States, regional organizations and non-governmental organizations that
have provided observers or technical experts in support of United Nations electoral assistance efforts;
14. Acknowledges the aim of harmonizing the methods and standards of the many intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations engaged in observing elections, and in this regard expresses appreciation for the
Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation and the Code of Conduct for International Election
Observers, which elaborate guidelines for international electoral observation;
15. Recalls the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations trust fund for electoral
assistance, and, bearing in mind that the fund is currently close to depletion, calls upon Member States to consider
contributing to the fund;
16. Encourages the Secretary-General, through the United Nations focal point for electoral assistance matters
and with the support of the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs of
910

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the Secretariat, to continue to respond to the evolving nature of requests for assistance and the growing need for
specific types of medium-term expert assistance aimed at supporting and strengthening the existing capacity of the
requesting Government, in particular by enhancing the capacity of national electoral institutions;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Electoral Assistance Division with adequate human and
financial resources to allow it to carry out its mandate, including to enhance the accessibility and diversity of the roster
of electoral experts and the electoral institutional memory of the Organization, and to continue to ensure that the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is able to respond, within its mandate and in close
coordination with the Division, to the numerous and increasingly complex and comprehensive requests from Member
States for advisory services;
18. Reiterates the need for ongoing comprehensive coordination, under the auspices of the United Nations
focal point for electoral assistance matters, between the Electoral Assistance Division, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Department of Peace Operations and the Department of Operational Support of the
Secretariat and the Office of the High Commissioner to ensure coordination and coherence and avoid duplication of
United Nations electoral assistance;
19. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to continue its democratic governance assistance
programmes in cooperation with other relevant organizations, in particular those that promote the strengthening of
democratic institutions and linkages between civil society and Governments;
20. Reiterates the role of civil society and the importance of its active engagement in the promotion of
democratization, and invites Member States to facilitate the full participation of civil society in electoral processes;
21. Also reiterates the importance of reinforced coordination within and outside the United Nations system,
and reaffirms the clear leadership role within the United Nations system of the United Nations focal point for
electoral assistance matters, including in ensuring system-wide coherence and consistency and in strengthening
the institutional memory and the development, dissemination and issuance of United Nations electoral assistance
policies;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, in particular on the status of requests from Member States for electoral
assistance, and on his efforts to enhance support by the Organization for the democratization process in Member
States.
RESOLUTION 74/159
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 136 to 55, with no abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)607
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,

_______________
607

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by China, and Cuba (on behalf of the States that are
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of
16 October 2018).

911

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: None

74/159. Human rights and cultural diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,608 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights609 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,609 as well as other pertinent human
rights instruments,
Recalling also its resolutions 54/160 of 17 December 1999, 55/91 of 4 December 2000, 57/204 of
18 December 2002, 58/167 of 22 December 2003, 60/167 of 16 December 2005, 62/155 of 18 December 2007,
64/174 of 18 December 2009, 66/154 of 19 December 2011, 68/159 of 18 December 2013, 70/156 of 17 December
2015 and 72/170 of 19 December 2017, and recalling further its resolutions 54/113 of 10 December 1999, 55/23 of
13 November 2000 and 60/4 of 20 October 2005 concerning the United Nations Year of Dialogue among
Civilizations,
Noting that numerous instruments within the United Nations system promote cultural diversity, as well as the
conservation and development of culture, in particular the Declaration of the Principles of International Culture
Cooperation proclaimed on 4 November 1966 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its fourteenth session,610
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,611
Recalling that, as stated in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, contained in the annex to its
resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, States have the duty to cooperate with one another, irrespective of the
differences in their political, economic and social systems, in the various spheres of international relations, in
the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and in the
elimination of all forms of racial discrimination and all forms of religious intolerance,
Recalling also the adoption, by its resolution 56/6 of 9 November 2001, of the Global Agenda for Dialogue
among Civilizations,
Recalling further the contribution of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, the Durban Review
Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009, and the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, held on
22 September 2011, to the promotion of respect for cultural diversity,
Recalling the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization,612 together with its Action Plan,613 adopted on 2 November 2001 by the General Conference
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirty-first session, in which member
States invited the United Nations system and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned

_______________
608

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
610
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Fourteenth Session, Paris,
1966, Resolutions.
611
A/74/212.
612
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-first Session, Paris,
15 October–3 November 2001, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. V, resolution 25, annex I.
613
Ibid., annex II.
609

912

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to cooperate with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the promotion of the
principles set forth in the Declaration and its Action Plan, with a view to enhancing the synergy of actions in favour
of cultural diversity,
Recalling also the Ministerial Meeting on Human Rights and Cultural Diversity of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Tehran on 3 and 4 September 2007,
Reaffirming that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with
the same emphasis, and that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical,
cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their political, economic
and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Expressing concern over the adverse impacts of lack of respect for and recognition of cultural diversity on
human rights, justice, friendship and the fundamental right to development,
Recognizing that cultural diversity and the pursuit of cultural development by all peoples and nations are a source
of mutual enrichment for the cultural life of humankind,
Recognizing also the contribution that diverse cultures have been making to the development and promotion of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Taking into account that a culture of peace actively fosters non-violence and respect for human rights and
strengthens solidarity among peoples and nations and dialogue between cultures,
Reaffirming that discriminatory treatment against different cultures and religions is detrimental to the principle
of the equality of human beings,
Recognizing that all cultures and civilizations share a common set of universal values,
Recognizing also that the promotion of the rights of indigenous people and their cultures and traditions will
contribute to the respect for and observance of cultural diversity among all peoples and nations,
Considering that tolerance of cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic diversities, as well as dialogue among and
within civilizations, is essential for peace, understanding and friendship among individuals and people of different
cultures and nations of the world, while manifestations of cultural prejudice, intolerance and xenophobia towards
different cultures and religions generate hatred, violence and extremism among peoples and nations throughout the
world,
Recognizing in each culture a dignity and value that deserve recognition, respect and preservation, and
convinced that, in their rich variety and diversity, and in the reciprocal influences that they exert on one another, all
cultures form part of the common heritage belonging to all humankind,
Convinced that the promotion of cultural pluralism and tolerance towards and dialogue among various cultures
and civilizations would contribute to the efforts of all peoples and nations to enrich their cultures and traditions by
engaging in a mutually beneficial exchange of knowledge and intellectual, moral and material achievements,
Acknowledging the diversity of the world, recognizing that all cultures and civilizations contribute to the
enrichment of humankind, acknowledging the importance of respect and understanding for religious and cultural
diversity throughout the world, and, in order to promote international peace and security, committing itself to
advancing human welfare, freedom and progress everywhere, as well as to encouraging tolerance, respect, dialogue
and cooperation among different cultures, civilizations and peoples,
1. Affirms the importance for all peoples and nations to hold, develop and preserve their cultural heritage and
traditions in a national and international atmosphere of peace, tolerance and mutual respect;
2. Emphasizes the important contribution of culture to development and the achievement of national
development objectives and internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development
Goals;
3. Recalls that, as expressed in the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity,612 no one may invoke
cultural diversity to infringe upon human rights guaranteed by international law, or to limit their scope;
913

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Also recalls the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,614 in which Member States
acknowledged the natural and cultural diversity of the world and recognized that all cultures and civilizations can
contribute to, and are crucial enablers of, sustainable development;
5. Recognizes the importance given to cultural diversity in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
including in Sustainable Development Goal 4, related to ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and
promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all;
6. Also recognizes the right of everyone to take part in cultural life and to enjoy the benefits of scientific
progress and its applications;
7. Affirms that the international community should strive to respond to the challenges and opportunities
posed by globalization in a manner that ensures respect for the cultural diversity of all;
8. Expresses its determination to prevent and mitigate cultural homogenization in the context of
globalization, through increased intercultural exchange guided by the promotion and protection of cultural
diversity;
9. Affirms that intercultural dialogue essentially enriches the common understanding of human rights and
that the benefits to be derived from the encouragement and development of international contacts and cooperation in
the cultural fields are important;
10. Recalls the recognition at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance of the necessity of respecting and maximizing the benefits of diversity within and among all
nations in working together to build a harmonious and productive future by putting into practice and promoting values
and principles such as justice, equality and non-discrimination, democracy, fairness and friendship, tolerance and
respect within and among communities and nations, in particular through public information and educational
programmes to raise awareness and understanding of the benefits of cultural diversity, including programmes in which
the public authorities work in partnership with international and non-governmental organizations and other sectors of
civil society;
11. Emphasizes that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations on the basis of equal dignity should
be enhanced, through supporting efforts made at the international level towards reducing confrontation, suppressing
xenophobia and promoting respect for diversity, and in that regard also emphasizes that States should oppose all
attempts at uniculturalism or the imposition of particular models of social or cultural systems and promote dialogue
among civilizations, a culture of peace and interfaith dialogue, which will contribute towards peace, security and
development;
12. Welcomes the activities of the Non-Aligned Movement Centre for Human Rights and Cultural Diversity
in Tehran, and acknowledges the important role that the Centre plays in the promotion of the universality of all human
rights, as well as their realization;
13. Recognizes that respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all enhances cultural pluralism,
contributing to a wider exchange of knowledge and understanding of cultural background, advancing the application
and enjoyment of universally accepted human rights throughout the world and fostering stable, friendly relations
among peoples and nations worldwide;
14. Emphasizes that the promotion of cultural pluralism and tolerance at the national, regional and
international levels is important for enhancing respect for cultural rights and cultural diversity;
15. Also emphasizes that tolerance and respect for diversity facilitate the universal promotion and protection
of human rights, including gender equality and the enjoyment of all human rights by all, and underlines the fact that
tolerance and respect for cultural diversity and the universal promotion and protection of human rights are mutually
supportive;
16. Urges all actors on the international scene to build an international order based on inclusion, justice,
equality and equity, human dignity, mutual understanding and promotion of and respect for cultural diversity

_______________
614

914

Resolution 70/1.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and universal human rights, and to reject all doctrines of exclusion based on racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
17. Calls upon States, relevant international organizations and non‑governmental organizations to support and
embark on intercultural initiatives on human rights in order to promote all human rights, thereby enriching their
universality;
18. Urges States to ensure that their political and legal systems reflect the multicultural diversity within their
societies and, where necessary, to improve democratic institutions so that they are more fully participatory and avoid
marginalization and exclusion of, and discrimination against, specific sectors of society;
19. Calls upon States, international organizations and United Nations agencies, and invites civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, to recognize and promote respect for cultural diversity for the purpose of
advancing the objectives of peace, development and universally accepted human rights;
20. Stresses the necessity of freely using the media and new information and communications technologies to
create the conditions for a renewed dialogue among cultures and civilizations;
21. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to bear in
mind fully the issues raised in the present resolution in the course of its activities for the promotion and protection of
human rights;
22. Also requests the Office of the High Commissioner, and invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to support initiatives aimed at promoting intercultural dialogue on human rights;
23. Urges relevant international organizations to conduct studies on how respect for cultural diversity
contributes to fostering international solidarity and cooperation among all nations;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution,
including efforts undertaken at the national, regional and international levels regarding the recognition and importance
of cultural diversity among all peoples and nations in the world and taking into account the views of Member States,
relevant United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations, and to submit the report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
25. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its seventy-sixth session under the sub-item entitled
“Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms” of the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/160
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)615

74/160. Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,

_______________
615

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Albania, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

915

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling that internally displaced persons are persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged to
flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a result of or in order to avoid the effects
of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural or human-made disasters,
and who have not crossed an internationally recognized State border,616
Deeply disturbed by the alarmingly high numbers of internally displaced persons throughout the world, for
reasons including violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, armed
conflict, persecution, violence and other reasons, including terrorism, as well as natural and human-made disasters,
who receive inadequate protection and assistance, and conscious of the serious challenges that this is creating for host
communities, national and local authorities and the international community,
Recalling the very large number of people who are displaced within national borders and the potential for such
persons to seek protection and assistance in other countries as refugees or migrants, and noting the need for reflection
on effective strategies to ensure adequate protection and assistance for internally displaced persons in this regard,
including the need for comprehensive and disaggregated data and other measures aimed at preventing and reducing
such displacements,
Reaffirming General Assembly resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 and the guiding principles contained
in the annex thereto, other relevant General Assembly and Economic and Social Council resolutions and agreed
conclusions of the Council, reaffirming also the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in
the provision of humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming further the need for all actors engaged in the provision of
humanitarian assistance in situations of complex emergencies and natural disasters to promote and fully respect these
principles,
Emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility to provide protection and assistance to internally
displaced persons within their jurisdiction, without discrimination, as well as to address the root causes of the
displacement problem and to support all durable solutions in appropriate cooperation with those displaced, their hosts,
civil society, local authorities, development actors, the private sector and the international community,
Expressing particular concern at the increased level of discrimination experienced by internally displaced
persons, including those who may be in particularly vulnerable situations, including women, children, older persons
and persons with disabilities, and emphasizing the need to ensure that their specific needs are met through the
provision of adequate protection and access to assistance,
Noting the need to address the root causes of displacement and for increased awareness within the international
community of the issue of internal displacement worldwide, including the situation of millions living in protracted
situations of displacement, many of them outside camp settings and in urban areas, and the urgency of providing
adequate humanitarian assistance and protection to internally displaced persons,
Recognizing that violations of international humanitarian law can cause displacement, and recalling that
displacement could be reduced if international humanitarian law was respected by all parties to armed conflict, in
particular the fundamental principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution, as well as the prohibition of forced
displacement of the civilian population, unless the security of the civilians involved or imperative military reasons so
demand,617
Expressing deep concern at the threat posed by landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices to internally displaced persons fleeing conflict, impeding, in certain instances, their voluntary return, local
integration and resettlement and the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance, and noting the urgency of providing
protection from landmines and other explosive remnants of war and supporting host communities and local
organizations,

_______________
616

See Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex), introduction, para. 2.
Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed
Conflicts (Protocol II) (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17513), arts. 13 and 17.
617

916

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing particular concern that many internally displaced children, in particular girls, lack access to
education in all phases of displacement owing to attacks against schools, damaged or destroyed school buildings,
insecurity, the prevalence of violence, including gender-based violence, in and around schools, loss of documentation,
language barriers and discrimination,
Expressing particular concern also that many internally displaced persons, including women, men, girls and
boys, do not receive the health care they require in all phases of displacement, including mental health care and
psychosocial support,
Recognizing the increase in the number, scale and frequency of disasters, including those related to the adverse
effects of climate change, which in certain instances may contribute to displacement and additional pressure on host
communities, encouraging the United Nations and all relevant actors to strengthen efforts in cooperation with national
Governments aimed at addressing the needs of persons displaced internally by natural disasters, including those
exacerbated by climate change, and noting in this regard the importance of sharing best practices to prevent and
prepare for such displacements,
Expressing concern that many millions of people are displaced each year by sudden- and slow-onset disasters,
recognizing that building resilience of nations and communities, including through preparedness, prevention, disaster
risk reduction and climate-change adaptation measures can reduce disaster displacement risk, including through
integrating disaster risk reduction strategies into national, regional and global development policies and programmes,
and in this regard recognizing also the important role of sustainable development in averting and reducing the risk of
loss and damage,
Recognizing that the vulnerability of internally displaced persons may increase when their host communities are
affected by disasters,
Conscious of the human rights, humanitarian and development dimensions, as well as the possible
peacebuilding and transitional justice dimensions, of internal displacement, including in protracted and repeated
temporary displacement situations, and the responsibilities of States, with the support of the international community,
to ensure the provision of protection and assistance, including by respecting and protecting the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all internally displaced persons, with a view to finding durable solutions,
Recognizing the important contributions made by national and local authorities and host communities to protect
and assist internally displaced persons, acknowledging that the hosting of large groups of internally displaced persons
can put pressure on those authorities and communities, and recognizing also the importance of adequately supporting
host communities, as well as local capacities, by addressing their needs,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights
on 25 June 1993,618 regarding the need to develop global strategies to address the problem of internal displacement,
and recalling also all relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
Recalling also General Assembly resolution 72/182 of 19 December 2017 and Human Rights Council
resolution 41/15 of 11 July 2019,619
Recognizing that internally displaced persons are to enjoy, in full equality and without discrimination, the same
rights and freedoms under international and domestic law as do other persons in their country, including the right to
freedom of movement and residence, and should be protected against arbitrary displacement,
Recalling the relevant norms of international law, which includes international human rights law, inter alia, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child,620 as well as international refugee law and international humanitarian law,

_______________
618

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. V, sect. A.
620
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
619

917

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

including the Geneva Conventions of 1949621 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 1977,622 as applicable, as a vital
legal framework for the protection of and assistance to civilians in armed conflict and under foreign occupation,
including internally displaced persons,
Recognizing that internally displaced persons, including women, children, older persons and persons with
disabilities, without identity documents, may be at risk of human rights violations and abuses, and may face difficulties
in the realization of their rights and in accessing services,
Recognizing also that the protection of internally displaced persons has been strengthened by identifying,
reaffirming and consolidating specific standards for their protection, in particular through the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement,623
Welcoming the increasing dissemination, promotion, application and integration into domestic laws and policies
of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement when dealing with situations of internal displacement,
Noting with appreciation the important role of national human rights institutions, during all phases of
displacement, in ensuring that all human rights issues of internally displaced persons are appropriately addressed,
Deploring practices of forced displacement and their negative consequences for the enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms by large groups of populations, and recalling the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court624 that define the deportation or forcible transfer of population as a crime against
humanity and the unlawful deportation, transfer or ordering of the displacement of the civilian population as war
crimes,
Recognizing the importance of the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally
Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention), which builds on the Protocol on the Protection of and Assistance
to Internally Displaced Persons and the Protocol on the Property Rights of Returning Persons, adopted by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, and which marks a significant step towards strengthening the
national and regional normative framework for the protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons in
Africa, and welcoming the holding of the first Conference of States Parties to the Convention in April 2017,
Noting the Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee,625 and taking note of the decision of the Policy Committee of the Secretary-General of 4 October 2011
endorsing the preliminary framework on ending displacement in the aftermath of conflict,
Underlining the necessity of safe and unhindered humanitarian access for the relevant United Nations agencies
and humanitarian organizations to internally displaced persons, including those residing in conflict areas, in
accordance with international law,
Recognizing that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development626 seeks to address the needs of the most
vulnerable, including internally displaced persons, and that addressing the needs of internally displaced persons can
help countries to achieve their overall development goals,
Noting the increasing number of internally displaced persons outside camps and in urban areas and the need to
meet their immediate and their long-term needs, and the needs of host families, and recognizing the importance of the
New Urban Agenda adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development
(Habitat III),627

_______________
621

Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
623
E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
624
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
625
A/HRC/13/21/Add.4.
626
Resolution 70/1.
627
Resolution 71/256, annex.
622

918

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note of the first World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May 2016, and
taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General on the outcome of the World Humanitarian Summit,628 which
contains, inter alia, recommendations to strengthen partnerships between Member States and humanitarian and
development actors to address the urgent and long-term needs of internally displaced persons,
Noting the need for finding durable solutions for internally displaced persons in their countries and addressing
possible obstacles in this regard, and recognizing that durable solutions include voluntary and sustainable return in
safety and with dignity, as well as voluntary local integration in the areas to which persons have been displaced or
voluntary settlement in another part of the country, without prejudice to the right of internally displaced persons to
leave their country or to seek asylum,
Emphasizing that all durable solutions for internally displaced persons should be approached from a
humanitarian and development perspective, involving the timely engagement of internally displaced persons and host
communities,
Mindful of the significant humanitarian and development assistance required to meet the needs of people in
protracted situations of internal displacement and of the large gap between needs and resources,
Recognizing the need to collect reliable, timely, longitudinal and disaggregated data, including data
disaggregated by sex, age, disability and location, on internally displaced persons and the impact of new and protracted
displacement on host communities in order to improve policy and programming, preventive measures on and response
to internal displacement and to promote the achievement of durable solutions, including, in this respect, the relevance
of the Global Internal Displacement Database maintained by the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre and the
technical support available from the inter-agency Joint Internally Displaced Person Profiling Service, and noting the
initiative of the United Nations Statistical Commission to develop international recommendations on internally
displaced persons statistics,
Expressing its appreciation to those Governments and intergovernmental, regional and non-governmental
organizations that have supported and facilitated the work of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
the human rights of internally displaced persons, and of her predecessors, the former representatives of the SecretaryGeneral on the human rights of internally displaced persons, and have helped, according to their roles and
responsibilities, to provide protection and assistance to internally displaced persons,
Welcoming the continuing cooperation between the Special Rapporteur and national Governments and the
relevant offices and agencies of the United Nations as well as with other international and regional organizations, and
encouraging further strengthening of this collaboration in order to promote better strategies for, protection of,
assistance to and durable solutions for internally displaced persons,
Acknowledging with appreciation the important and independent contribution of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement and other humanitarian agencies in protecting and assisting internally displaced persons,
in cooperation with national Governments and relevant international bodies,
Welcoming the priorities set by the Special Rapporteur as contained in the report to the Human Rights Council
at its thirty-fifth session629 and the two strategic objectives of supporting Governments in developing national
instruments and institutions on internal displacement and facilitating viable, durable solutions for internally displaced
persons, including through the engagement of development actors,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the main report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the human rights of internally displaced persons630 and the conclusions contained therein;
2. Commends the Special Rapporteur for the activities undertaken so far, for the catalytic role that she plays
in raising the level of awareness about the plight of internally displaced persons and for her ongoing efforts to address

_______________
628

A/71/353.
A/HRC/35/27.
630
A/HRC/41/40.
629

919

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

their development and other specific needs, including through the mainstreaming of the human rights of internally
displaced persons into all relevant parts of the United Nations system;
3. Encourages the Special Rapporteur, through continuous dialogue with Governments and all
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, to continue her analysis of the reasons for internal
displacement and to remain apprised of the needs and human rights of those who are displaced, including the needs of
those who may be in particularly vulnerable situations, including women, children, older persons and persons with
disabilities, the level of emergency preparedness and ways to strengthen protection and assistance, including by
enhancing the role of national human rights institutions, where appropriate, and the protection of internally displaced
persons, as well as durable solutions for internally displaced persons, including by addressing possible obstacles to the
exercise of housing, land and property rights for internally displaced persons, also encourages the Special Rapporteur,
with regard to the latter, to use, in her activities, the Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons of
the Inter‑Agency Standing Committee,625 and further encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue to advocate the
needs of host communities and promote comprehensive strategies, taking into account the primary responsibility of States
for the protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction;
4. Welcomes the initiatives undertaken by regional organizations, such as the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Organization of American States and the Council of Europe, to address
the protection, assistance and development needs of internally displaced persons and to find durable solutions for
them, and encourages regional organizations to strengthen their activities and their cooperation with the Special
Rapporteur;
5. Urges all Governments to continue to facilitate the activities of the Special Rapporteur, in particular
Governments with situations of internal displacement, and to respond favourably to requests from the Special
Rapporteur to enable her to continue and enhance dialogue with Governments in addressing situations of internal
displacement, and thanks those Governments that have already done so;
6. Invites Governments to give serious consideration, in dialogue with the Special Rapporteur, to the
recommendations and suggestions addressed to them, in accordance with her mandate, and to inform her of measures
taken thereon;
7. Welcomes the use of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement623 by the Special Rapporteur in her
dialogue with Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other relevant actors, and
requests her to continue her efforts to further their dissemination, promotion, application and integration into domestic
laws and policies and to provide support for efforts to promote capacity-building and the use of the Guiding Principles,
as well as the development of domestic legislation and policies;
8. Recognizes that Member States have the primary responsibility to promote durable solutions for their
internally displaced persons, as well as to respect, protect and fulfil their human rights, thus contributing to their
national, economic and social development processes, and encourages the international community, the United
Nations system, the Special Rapporteur, relevant international and regional organizations and donor countries to
continue to support international, regional and national efforts to meet the needs and fulfil the human rights of
internally displaced persons, including children, on the basis of solidarity, the principles of international cooperation
and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and to ensure that humanitarian assistance, early recovery and
development assistance efforts are appropriately funded;
9. Requests Member States to strengthen their efforts to ensure the protection of and better assistance to
internally displaced persons, in particular to address the challenges of protracted displacement, by adopting and
implementing gender-sensitive policies and strategies, in accordance with national and regional frameworks, while
recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as an important international framework for the
protection of internally displaced persons, encourages all relevant actors, in accordance with their mandates, to make
use of the Guiding Principles when dealing with situations of internal displacement, and in this regard recognizes the
central role of national and local authorities and institutions in addressing the specific needs of internally displaced
persons and in finding solutions to displacement through, inter alia, continued and enhanced international support,
upon request, for the capacity-building of States;
920

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Encourages States to ensure that internally displaced persons, including children, have access to a process
to obtain appropriate identification documents;
11. Notes the launch of the multi-stakeholder Plan of Action for Advancing Prevention, Protection and
Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons 2018–2020 (GP20) to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement;
12. Expresses its appreciation for the fact that an increasing number of States have adopted domestic
legislation and policies dealing with all stages of displacement, encourages States to continue to do so in an inclusive
and non‑discriminatory way, consistent with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, urges States to increase
their efforts to implement such domestic laws and policies, including through the identification of national focal points
within Governments for issues of internal displacement, in particular for setting national targets and indicators for
policy and programmes and for the allocation of budget resources, and encourages the international community and
national actors to provide financial support and cooperation to Governments, upon request, in this regard;
13. Calls upon Governments to provide protection and assistance, including reintegration and development
assistance, to internally displaced persons and to facilitate the efforts of the relevant United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations in this regard by allowing and facilitating safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
personnel and the delivery of supplies and equipment to internally displaced persons, in accordance with international
law, by maintaining the civilian and humanitarian character of camps and settlements for internally displaced persons,
where they exist, and by taking the steps necessary to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel so that
they may efficiently perform their task of assisting internally displaced persons;
14. Expresses particular concern about the full range of threats, violations and abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law experienced by many internally displaced persons, including women and
children, who are particularly vulnerable or specifically targeted especially for sexual and gender-based violence
and sexual exploitation and abuse, trafficking in persons in all its forms,631 forced recruitment and abduction,
encourages the continued commitment of the Special Rapporteur to promote action to address their particular
assistance and protection needs, and calls upon States, in cooperation with international agencies and other
stakeholders, to provide protection and assistance to internally displaced persons who are victims of the abovementioned threats, violations and abuses, as well as other groups of internally displaced persons with special needs,
such as severely traumatized individuals, older persons and persons with disabilities, taking into account all relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
15. Encourages the international community to provide technical cooperation to States affected by
displacement, upon their request, including for the training of staff members of institutions in charge of registration
and development of national laws and policies on internal displacement and issues related to land and property
restitution and compensation;
16. Emphasizes the central role of the Emergency Relief Coordinator in the coordination of the protection of
and assistance to internally displaced persons, inter alia, through the inter-agency cluster system, welcomes continued
initiatives to ensure better protection, assistance and development strategies for internally displaced persons, as well
as better coordination of activities regarding them, and emphasizes the need to strengthen the capacities of national
and local authorities, host communities, local organizations, United Nations organizations and other relevant actors to
meet the immense humanitarian challenges of internal displacement;
17. Notes with appreciation the increased attention paid to the issue of internally displaced persons in
humanitarian response plans, and encourages further efforts in this regard;
18. Emphasizes the importance of communication and consultation with internally displaced persons and host
communities by Governments and other relevant actors, in accordance with their specific mandates, during all phases
of displacement, as well as the participation of internally displaced persons, where appropriate, in policies,

_______________
631

As defined in article 3 of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237,
No. 39574).

921

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

programmes and activities pertaining to them, taking into account the primary responsibility of States for the
protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction;
19. Calls upon States, in cooperation with international agencies and other stakeholders, to provide for and
support, in particular, the full and meaningful participation of internally displaced women at all levels of decisionmaking processes and in all activities that have a direct impact on their lives, in all aspects of internal displacement,
including the promotion and protection of human rights, the prevention of human rights violations and the design and
implementation of durable solutions, peace processes, peacebuilding, transitional justice, post-conflict reconstruction
and development;
20. Encourages all relevant United Nations organizations and humanitarian assistance, human rights and
development organizations to enhance their collaboration and coordination through the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee and United Nations country teams in countries with situations of internal displacement and to provide all
possible assistance and support to the Special Rapporteur, and requests the continued participation of the Special
Rapporteur in the work of the Inter‑Agency Standing Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
21. Encourages the Inter-Agency Standing Committee to enhance coordination, effectiveness, efficiency and
predictability in preventing, responding to and finding solutions to internal displacement;
22. Expresses deep concern at the insufficient funding levels of humanitarian appeals, and in this respect urges
all relevant actors to provide the relevant United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations with sufficient and
predictable resources to ensure adequate support for those who are forcibly displaced;
23. Calls upon all parties to armed conflict to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, and international human rights law, as applicable, with a view to preventing forced displacement and promoting
the protection of civilians, and calls upon Governments to take measures to respect and protect the human rights of
all internally displaced persons, without distinction of any kind, in accordance with their applicable obligations under
international law;
24. Calls upon States, in cooperation with all other relevant actors, including humanitarian and development
agencies and donors, to ensure the right to a quality education, including primary and secondary education, for
internally displaced children, without discrimination of any kind, as well as to support existing schools to enable them
to include internally displaced persons, calls upon all parties to armed conflict to respect the civilian character of
schools and other educational institutions and to refrain from undertaking actions that could adversely affect the
protection of these buildings against direct attacks, and strongly condemns all attacks, as well as threats of attack,
against schools, in contravention of international humanitarian law;
25. Highlights the need for States, with the support of relevant partners, including humanitarian and
development agencies and donors, as appropriate, to address the physical and mental health needs of internally
displaced persons, which may include assistance, health care and psychosocial and other counselling services;
26. Stresses the obligation, in accordance with international humanitarian law and national laws and
regulations, as applicable, to respect and protect medical personnel, as well as humanitarian personnel exclusively
engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities,
in all circumstances, in this regard notes the role of domestic legal frameworks and other appropriate measures in
promoting the safety and protection of such personnel, urges States and all parties to armed conflict to develop and
integrate effective measures to prevent and address violence against such personnel, their means of transport and
equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities, and strongly urges States to conduct full, prompt, impartial
and effective investigations within their jurisdiction of violations of international humanitarian law related to the
protection of the wounded and sick, including internally displaced persons, medical personnel and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and
other medical facilities in armed conflict, and, where appropriate, to take action against those responsible in
accordance with domestic and international law, with a view to reinforcing preventive measures, ensuring
accountability and addressing the grievances of victims, including internally displaced persons;
27. Recognizes the adverse effects of climate change as contributors to environmental degradation and
extreme weather events, which may, among other factors, contribute to human displacement, and in this regard notes
922

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the adoption of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 in March 2015,632 the Paris Agreement
adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in December 2015633 and relevant
initiatives related to internal displacement, such as the Nansen Initiative, and their follow-up processes, and
encourages the Special Rapporteur, in close collaboration with States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to continue to explore the human rights implications and dimensions of disaster-induced internal
displacement, with a view to supporting Member States in their efforts to build local resilience and capacity to prevent
and prepare for displacement or to provide assistance through well-planned recovery programmes that support
internally displaced persons and their hosts and provide protection to those who are forced to flee;
28. Affirms the need for the effective implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015–2030 to integrate, as appropriate, post-disaster reconstruction and recovery, including the principle of “build
back better”, into the economic and social sustainable development of affected areas, as well as temporary settlements
where displaced persons live, to promote periodic disaster preparedness and response exercises in recovery and
resettlement efforts, with a view to ensuring a rapid and effective response to disasters and related displacement, and
to promote transboundary cooperation to build resilience and reduce disaster risk, including displacement risk,
including by establishing or improving early warning systems, including heatwave early warning, connected to
longer-term risk management systems and supported by public awareness campaigns, recognizing that early action
following quality forecasts can reduce the impact of extreme weather events;
29. Recognizes that internal displacement is not only a humanitarian but also a development challenge, and in
some cases can also be a peacebuilding challenge, and calls upon States to provide durable solutions and address
possible obstacles in this regard and to include the needs, vulnerabilities and capacities of internally displaced persons
and host communities in their national development plans;
30. Encourages closer cooperation between development and humanitarian actors, in accordance with their
respective mandates, towards collective results over multiple years, with the aim of reducing the needs and
vulnerabilities of internally displaced persons, in support of national priorities, while fully respecting the importance
of humanitarian principles for humanitarian action;
31. Also encourages strengthened international cooperation, in particular between humanitarian and
development actors, including through the provision of resources, coherent multi-year planning that addresses
protracted displacement and expertise to assist affected countries, in particular developing countries, in their national
efforts and policies related to assistance, protection, resilience-building and rehabilitation for internally displaced
persons and host communities, as appropriate, and the integration of the human rights and needs of internally
displaced persons into both rural and urban development strategies, as well as the participation of both internally
displaced persons and host communities in the design and implementation of those strategies;
32. Calls upon the United Nations to work closely with Member States and other relevant actors, including
local governments, civil society and the private sector, in furtherance of the New Urban Agenda627 in order to promote
more effective emergency preparedness and response in urban areas, and notes the importance of addressing, as
appropriate, the particular needs and vulnerabilities of internally displaced persons in urban settings and of supporting
host cities, in the spirit of international cooperation, including by ensuring equal access to income-earning
opportunities and preventing arbitrary forced evictions;
33. Encourages Member States, humanitarian agencies, donors, development actors and other providers of
development assistance to continue to work together, in close cooperation with the Special Rapporteur, to provide a
more predictable response to the needs of internally displaced persons, including long-term development assistance
for the implementation of durable solutions, with a view to reducing internal displacement;
34. Encourages Governments, United Nations agencies and other stakeholders to promote an inclusive
approach to durable solutions that addresses the needs of internally displaced persons and their host communities,
including the promotion of opportunities to fully harness the human potential of the displaced populations by
promoting self-sufficiency through income-generating activities and sustainable livelihood opportunities;

_______________
632
633

Resolution 69/283, annex II.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.

923

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

35. Urges all countries to integrate the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development626 into their respective
national policies and development frameworks, as appropriate, and recalls that the 2030 Agenda seeks to address the
needs of the most vulnerable, including internally displaced persons;
36. Notes the importance of taking the human rights and the specific protection and assistance needs of
internally displaced persons into consideration, when appropriate, in peace processes, and emphasizes that durable
solutions for internally displaced persons, including through voluntary return, sustainable reintegration, rehabilitation
and reconciliation processes and their active participation, as appropriate, in the peace process are necessary elements
of effective peacebuilding;
37. Welcomes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in this regard, and continues to urge the Commission
to intensify its efforts, within its mandate, in cooperation with national and transitional Governments and in
consultation with the relevant United Nations entities, to incorporate the rights and the specific needs of internally
displaced persons, including their voluntary return in safety and with dignity, reintegration and rehabilitation, as well
as related land and property issues, when advising on or proposing country-specific peacebuilding strategies for postconflict situations in cases under consideration;
38. Also welcomes the dedication by the African Union of 2019 to, inter alia, mark the tenth anniversary of
the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala
Convention), encourages African States to mark the tenth anniversary of the Kampala Convention in 2019 by signing
and ratifying the Convention, if they have not done so, and encourages other regional mechanisms to develop their
own regional normative frameworks for the protection of internally displaced persons, such as renewed commitments
towards ratification and implementation of the Kampala Convention made in March 2019 by parliamentarians and
national experts on internal displacement of the Economic Community of West African States participating in a
regional exchange held under the auspices of the Plan of Action for Advancing Prevention, Protection and Solutions
for Internally Displaced Persons 2018–2020 (GP20) to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Kampala
Convention;
39. Encourages Member States, members of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, United Nations
humanitarian coordinators and country teams to contribute to the provision of reliable data on internal displacement
situations, with the cooperation of the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre and the technical support and
assistance of the Joint Internally Displaced Person Profiling Service, and to provide financial resources, as appropriate,
in these respects;
40. Recalls the need to reflect on effective strategies to ensure adequate protection and assistance for internally
displaced persons and to prevent and reduce such displacement, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General
to work with Member States and the United Nations system to explore ways to better address the long-term needs of
internally displaced persons, support communities that host them and improve the lives of the many millions of
internally displaced persons;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Special Rapporteur, from within existing
resources, with all assistance necessary to strengthen and carry out her mandate effectively, and encourages the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in close cooperation with the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Organization for Migration and all other
relevant United Nations offices and agencies and related organizations, to continue to support and cooperate with the
Special Rapporteur;
42. Encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue to seek the contributions of States, relevant organizations
and institutions in order to create a more stable basis for her work;
43. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth and seventy-sixth
sessions a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
44. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons at its seventy-sixth session.
924

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/161
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)634

74/161. International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 61/177 of 20 December 2006, by which it adopted and opened for signature,
ratification and accession the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance,
Recalling its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a body of principles for all States,
Recalling also all its other resolutions on the matter, including resolutions 70/160 of 17 December 2015 and
72/183 of 19 December 2017, as well as relevant resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council, including
resolution 36/6 of 28 September 2017,635
Recalling further its resolution 68/165 of 18 December 2013 on the right to the truth, as well as Human Rights
Council resolution 36/7 of 28 September 2017 on the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation
and guarantees of non-recurrence,635
Recalling its resolution 73/162 of 17 December 2018 on the human rights treaty body system,
Recalling also that no one shall be subjected to enforced disappearance,
Recalling further that no exceptional circumstance whatsoever may be invoked as a justification for enforced
disappearance,
Recalling that no one shall be held in secret detention,
Deeply concerned, in particular, by the increase in enforced or involuntary disappearances in various regions of
the world, including arrest, detention and abduction, when these are part of or amount to enforced disappearances,
and by the growing number of reports concerning harassment, ill-treatment and intimidation of witnesses of
disappearance or relatives of persons who have disappeared,
Recalling that the Convention sets out the right of victims to know the truth regarding the circumstances of the
enforced disappearance, the progress and results of the investigation and the fate of the disappeared person, and sets
forth State party obligations to take appropriate measures in this regard,
Recalling also that the Convention defines the victim of enforced disappearance as the disappeared person and
any individual who has suffered harm as the direct result of an enforced disappearance,
Acknowledging that the widespread or systematic practice of enforced disappearance is recognized in the
Convention as a crime against humanity, as defined in applicable international law,
Stressing the importance of the work of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances,

_______________
634

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
635
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.

925

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Calling upon States that have not provided substantive replies concerning claims of enforced disappearances in
their countries to do so, and to give due consideration to relevant recommendations concerning this issue made by the
Working Group in its reports,
Encouraging the Working Group, in accordance with its working methods, to continue to provide the States
concerned with relevant and detailed information concerning allegations of enforced disappearances in order to
facilitate a prompt and substantive response to such communications without prejudice to the need for the States
concerned to cooperate with the Working Group,
Recalling the high-level meeting of the General Assembly held on 17 February 2017 to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Convention, which provided an opportunity to review the positive impact of the
Convention and to discuss ways and best practices to prevent enforced disappearances and to combat impunity by,
inter alia, promoting the universal ratification of the Convention,
Recalling with appreciation the launch by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of an
international campaign for the universal ratification of the Convention,
Acknowledging the valuable work of the International Committee of the Red Cross in promoting compliance
with international humanitarian law in this field,
1. Recognizes the importance of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance,636 the ratification and the implementation of which is a significant contribution to ending
impunity and to promoting and protecting all human rights for all;
2. Welcomes the fact that 98 States have signed the Convention and 62 have ratified or acceded to it, and
calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention as a matter of
priority, as well as to consider the option provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention regarding the Committee
on Enforced Disappearances;
3.

Also welcomes the most recent reports of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention;637

4. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to increase
their intensive efforts to assist States in becoming parties to the Convention, including by supporting the actions of
States to ratify the Convention, providing technical and capacity-building assistance to States and civil society and
raising awareness about the Convention, with a view to achieving universal adherence;
5. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to continue to make efforts to
disseminate information on the Convention, to promote understanding of it and to assist States parties in implementing
their obligations under this instrument, especially in the context of the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of
the Working Group in 2020;
6. Recalls with appreciation the first Conference of the States Parties to the Convention, held in Geneva on
19 December 2016, and convened in accordance with article 27 of the Convention, and the decision adopted by
consensus that the Committee would continue to monitor the Convention in accordance with its mandate;638
7. Takes note with appreciation of the fifth meeting of the States parties to the Convention, held in New
York on 25 June 2019, and its discussion of substantive matters related to the Convention, and encourages all States
parties to the Convention to continue to include such a discussion in the agenda of the meeting of the States parties;
8. Welcomes the work achieved by the Committee, and encourages all States parties to the Convention to
submit their reports, to support and promote the work of the Committee and to implement its recommendations;

_______________
636

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
A/72/280 and A/74/213.
638
See CED/CSP/2016/4.
637

926

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

9. Takes note of the guiding principles for the search for disappeared persons adopted by the Committee at
its sixteenth session and developed in dialogue and broad consultations with Member States and other relevant
stakeholders;639
10. Recognizes the importance of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance640 as a body of principles for all States that is designed to punish enforced disappearances, to prevent
their commission and to help victims of such acts and their families to seek fair, prompt and adequate reparation;
11. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Working Group and the Committee, within the
framework of their respective mandates, and encourages further cooperation in the future;
12. Takes note with interest of all the general comments of the Working Group, including the comments on
children641 and women642 affected by enforced disappearances, and recognizes in this regard that enforced
disappearances have special consequences for women and vulnerable groups, especially children, as they most often
bear the serious economic hardships that usually accompany such disappearances and, when subjected to enforced
disappearances themselves, may become particularly vulnerable to sexual and other forms of violence;
13. Takes note of the need to document cases concerning enforced or involuntary disappearances allegedly
perpetrated by non-State actors, as decided by the Working Group;
14. Welcomes the fact that the Committee held its annual meeting with the Working Group, as an opportunity
to take stock of the activities of the two parallel organs, which are complementary and reinforce each other within the
framework of their respective mandates;
15. Invites the Chair of the Committee and the Chair of the Working Group to address and engage in an
interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth and seventy-sixth sessions under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the status of the Convention and the implementation of the present resolution;
17. Decides to give its full consideration to the subject matter at its seventy-sixth session.
RESOLUTION 74/162
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)643

74/162. Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/105 of 4 December 2000 concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights,

_______________
639

See CED/C/7.
Resolution 47/133.
641
A/HRC/WGEID/98/1 and A/HRC/WGEID/98/1/Corr.1.
642
A/HRC/WGEID/98/2.
643
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Economic Community of Central
African States), Canada, Comoros, Costa Rica, Egypt, Eritrea, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Mali, Malta, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Romania, Slovenia, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia, Uganda, United States
of America, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia and Zimbabwe.
640

927

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also its resolutions 55/34 B of 20 November 2000 and 55/233 of 23 December 2000, section III of
its resolution 55/234 of 23 December 2000 and its resolution 56/253 of 24 December 2001,
Recalling further its resolutions 58/176 of 22 December 2003, 59/183 of 20 December 2004, 60/151 of
16 December 2005, 61/158 of 19 December 2006, 62/221 of 22 December 2007, 63/177 of 18 December 2008,
64/165 of 18 December 2009, 66/162 of 19 December 2011, 68/174 of 18 December 2013, 70/167 of 17 December
2015 and 72/187 of 19 December 2017 on the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central
Africa,
Recalling that the World Conference on Human Rights recommended that more resources be made available
for the strengthening of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights under the programme
of technical cooperation in the field of human rights of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights,644
Recalling also the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,645
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,646
Noting the holding of the forty-fifth, forty-sixth, forty-seventh and forty-eighth ministerial meetings of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, in Kigali from 4 to
8 December 2017, in Brazzaville from 29 May to 1 June 2018, in N’Djamena from 3 to 7 December 2018 and in
Kinshasa from 27 to 31 May 2019,
Taking note of the launch of a far-reaching organizational change initiative in the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights with a view to better integrating work at Headquarters and in the field,647
Noting the security and humanitarian situation in the subregion, and in particular the challenges created by
indiscriminate attacks and massive abuses of human rights by terrorist groups, including Boko Haram, against the
civilian population in many countries of the Central African subregion and in the Lake Chad basin countries,
Noting also that the effective presence of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the countries covered and continued dialogue with the authorities have generated an increased number of
requests for assistance from States,646
Mindful of the vastness and diversity of the needs in the field of human rights within the subregion, and taking
into account the need for sufficient funding of the Centre to fully realize its significant function and crucial role in the
subregion,
1. Welcomes the activities of the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa at
Yaoundé;
2.

Notes with satisfaction the support provided for the establishment of the Centre by the host country;

3. Also notes with satisfaction the increasing activities of the Centre and the improved cooperation between
the Centre and the States members of the Economic Community of Central African States, and in this regard
encourages the Centre, in delivering and reporting its activities, to give equal consideration to all of the countries
covered and to all human rights, including civil and political as well as economic, social and cultural rights;
4. Encourages the Centre to take into account the requested activities, needs and demands of the countries
of the subregion in the implementation of the strategic thematic priorities of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights;

_______________
644

See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 36, addendum (A/56/36/Add.1).
646
A/74/460.
647
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 36 (A/70/36), chap. III.
645

928

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Notes with satisfaction the engagement of the Centre in the area of human rights in development and in
the economic sphere, through advocacy and the provision of guidance to States, private sector companies and
businesses in the subregion, with a view to strengthening commitments to protect and/or respect human rights, and
encourages the Centre to increase its support in this field;
6. Encourages the Centre to strengthen its cooperation and invest in relations with subregional organizations
and bodies, including the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa and the United Nations country teams of the subregion;
7. Encourages the Regional Representative and Director of the Centre to continue to hold regular briefings
for the ambassadors of Central African States based in Geneva and Yaoundé, as well as in countries of the subregion
during visits of the Regional Representative, with the aim of exchanging information on the activities of the Centre
and charting its direction;
8. Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to ensure the full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly648 in order to provide sufficient
funds and human resources for the missions of the Centre;
9. Requests the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner, taking note of the organizational change
initiative in the Office of the High Commissioner, to continue to provide additional funds and human resources,
including human resources from within the subregion, within the existing resources of the Office to enable the Centre
to respond positively and effectively to the growing needs in the promotion and protection of human rights and in
developing a culture of democracy and the rule of law in the Central African subregion;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/163
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 187 to 1, with 2 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)649
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining: Iran (Islamic Republic of), Palau

_______________
648

Resolutions 61/158, 62/221, 63/177, 64/165 and 72/187.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Canada, El Salvador, Fiji, Ghana, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Sudan,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United States of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
649

929

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

74/163. United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia
and the Arab Region
The General Assembly,
Guided by the fundamental and universal principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,650
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993,651 which reiterated the need to consider
the possibility of establishing regional and subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights
where they do not already exist,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/127 of 16 December 1977 and 51/102 of 12 December 1996 and all its
subsequent resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling further its resolutions 60/153 of 16 December 2005, 67/162 of 20 December 2012, 68/241 of
27 December 2013, 69/171 of 18 December 2014, 70/171 of 17 December 2015 and 72/166 of 19 December 2017
on the United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March 1993652 and all its subsequent
resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Reaffirming that regional cooperation plays a fundamental role in promoting and protecting human rights and
should reinforce universal human rights, as contained in international human rights instruments, and their protection,
Recognizing that the Centre has made noticeable progress in the promotion of human rights and advocacy in
the region and will continue to strengthen its effectiveness and efficiency in responding to ongoing and emerging
needs and will enhance its capacity-building and technical assistance, in particular in countries in conflict and postconflict countries,
Mindful of the vastness and the diversity of the needs in the field of human rights within South-West Asia and
the Arab region, and taking into account the need for appropriate and sustainable funding of the Centre to fully realize
its significant function and crucial role in the region,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;653

2. Notes with appreciation the successful assistance that the United Nations Human Rights Training and
Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region has provided through human rights capacitybuilding activities, technical assistance programmes and training programmes on human rights and media and human
rights education, as well as support to national human rights institutions on several human rights topics, and notes that
the Centre also provided capacity-building activities in the areas of civil and political rights, as well as economic,
social and cultural rights, such as on freedoms of opinion and expression, countering hate speech and incitement to
discrimination, and preventing violent extremism;
3. Also notes with appreciation the Centre’s full commitment to ensuring greater effectiveness and efficiency
in the implementation of its mandate;
4. Welcomes the expansion of the Centre’s outreach to the League of Arab States and additional countries in
the region, as well as to a growing number of beneficiaries, including youth;
5. Also welcomes the Centre’s efforts to reinforce its documentation mandate and its production of several
publications on human rights issues in Arabic;

_______________
650

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
652
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1993/23, E/1993/23/Corr.2,
E/1993/23/Corr.4 and E/1993/23/Corr.5), chap. II, sect. A.
653
A/74/262.
651

930

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Underlines the Centre’s role as a source for regional expertise and the need to meet an increasing number
of requests for training and documentation, including in Arabic;
7. Notes that the increasing demand that has been placed on the Centre by Member States and other
stakeholders reveals a growing recognition of its role and impact on strengthening human rights capacities in the
region;
8. Encourages the continued engagement of the Centre to work with other United Nations regional offices
to strengthen its work and to avoid duplication;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report, in
accordance with existing rules and procedures, on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/164
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)654

74/164. Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or belief
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the commitment made by all States under the Charter of the United Nations to promote and
encourage universal respect for and observance of all human rights and fundamental freedoms without distinction as
to, inter alia, religion or belief,
Welcoming Human Rights Council resolutions 16/18 of 24 March 2011,655 19/25 of 23 March 2012,656 22/31
of 22 March 2013,657 28/29 of 27 March 2015,658 31/26 of 24 March 2016,659 34/32 of 24 March 2017,660 37/38 of
23 March 2018661 and 40/25 of 22 March 2019,662 and General Assembly resolutions 67/178 of 20 December 2012,
68/169 of 18 December 2013, 69/174 of 18 December 2014, 70/157 of 17 December 2015, 71/195 of 19 December
2016, 72/176 of 19 December 2017 and 73/164 of 17 December 2018,
Reaffirming the obligation of States to prohibit discrimination and violence on the basis of religion or belief and
to implement measures to guarantee the equal and effective protection of the law,
Reaffirming also that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Reaffirming further that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights663 provides, inter alia, that
everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief, which shall include freedom to
have or to adopt a religion or belief of one’s choice and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in
public or private, and to manifest one’s religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching,
Reaffirming the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and full respect
for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information can play in strengthening democracy and combating religious

_______________
654

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Australia, Burundi, Canada, Cuba, Eritrea, Japan,
Papua New Guinea, Thailand, United Arab Emirates (on behalf of the States that are members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
taking into account also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018) and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
655
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
656
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and A/67/53/Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
657
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
658
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. III, sect. A.
659
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
660
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
661
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
662
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
663
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

931

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

intolerance, and reaffirming further that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression carries with it special duties
and responsibilities, in accordance with article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Expressing deep concern at those acts that advocate religious hatred and thereby undermine the spirit of
tolerance and respect for diversity,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group,
Condemning the criminal acts committed by terrorist and extremist groups and movements against persons
based on their religion or belief, and deeply regretting attempts to link such acts to any one specific religion or
belief,
Reaffirming that violence can never be an acceptable response to acts of intolerance on the basis of religion or
belief,
Recalling its adoption of resolutions 69/140 of 15 December 2014, 70/19 of 3 December 2015, 71/249 of
22 December 2016, 72/136 of 11 December 2017 and 73/129 of 12 December 2018 on the promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace, 69/312 of 6 July 2015 on the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and 67/104 of 17 December 2012, in which the General Assembly
proclaimed the period 2013–2022 as the International Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures,
Deeply concerned about continuing incidents of intolerance, discrimination and violence against persons based
on their religion or belief in all regions of the world,
Deploring any advocacy of discrimination or violence on the basis of religion or belief,
Strongly deploring all acts of violence against persons on the basis of their religion or belief, as well as any such
acts directed against their homes, businesses, properties, schools, cultural centres or places of worship,
Strongly deploring also all attacks on and in religious places, sites and shrines, which are in violation of
international law, in particular human rights law and international humanitarian law, including any deliberate
destruction of relics and monuments,
Deeply concerned about the prevalence of impunity in some instances, and the lack of accountability in some
cases, in addressing violence against persons on the basis of religion or belief in public and private spheres, and
stressing the importance of making the necessary efforts to raise awareness to address the spread of hate speech against
persons on the basis of religion or belief,
Concerned about actions that wilfully exploit tensions or target individuals on the basis of their religion or belief,
in particular actions that seek to prevent their exercise and full enjoyment of freedom of religion or belief,
Expressing deep concern at the instances of intolerance and discrimination and acts of violence occurring in the
world, including cases motivated by discrimination against persons belonging to religious minorities, in addition to
the negative projection of the followers of religions and the enforcement of measures that specifically discriminate
against persons on the basis of religion or belief,
Expressing concern at the growing manifestations of intolerance based on religion or belief, which can generate
hatred and violence among individuals from and within different nations and which may have serious implications at
the national, regional and international levels, and in this regard emphasizing the importance of respect for religious
and cultural diversity, as well as interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue aimed at promoting a culture of
tolerance and respect among individuals, societies and nations,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of people of all religions or beliefs to humanity and the contribution that
dialogue among religious groups can make towards an improved awareness and understanding of the common values
shared by all humankind,
Underlining the fact that States, regional organizations, national human rights institutions, non-governmental
organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in promoting tolerance and respect for
religious and cultural diversity and in the universal promotion and protection of human rights, including freedom of
religion or belief,
932

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Underlining also the importance of raising awareness about different cultures and religions or beliefs and of
education in the promotion of tolerance, which involves the acceptance by the public of and its respect for religious
and cultural diversity, including with regard to religious expression, and underlining further the fact that education, in
particular at school, should contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance and the elimination of
discrimination based on religion or belief,
Underlining further that educational measures, youth forums, strategic plans and public information and media
campaigns, including online platforms, may contribute in a meaningful way to promoting tolerance and the
elimination of negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against
persons, based on religion or belief,
Recognizing that working together to enhance the implementation of existing legal regimes that protect
individuals against discrimination and hate crimes, increasing interreligious, interfaith and intercultural efforts and
expanding human rights education are important first steps in combating incidents of intolerance, discrimination and
violence against individuals on the basis of religion or belief,
Recalling its resolution 72/241, entitled “A world against violence and violent extremism”, adopted by
consensus on 20 December 2017, welcoming the leading role of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization in promoting intercultural dialogue, the work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations,
the work of the Anna Lindh Euro-Mediterranean Foundation for the Dialogue between Cultures in Alexandria, Egypt,
and the work of the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue
in Vienna, and recalling also its resolution 65/5 of 20 October 2010 on World Interfaith Harmony Week, proposed by
King Abdullah II of Jordan,
Welcoming in this regard all international, regional and national initiatives aimed at promoting interreligious,
intercultural and interfaith harmony and combating discrimination against individuals on the basis of religion or belief,
noting the initiative of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide on the role of
religious leaders in preventing incitement that could lead to atrocity crimes and the declaration of its forum held in
Fez, Morocco, on 23 and 24 April 2015, the Istanbul Process for Combating Intolerance, Discrimination and
Incitement to Hatred and/or Violence on the Basis of Religion or Belief, the announcement on 6 October 2016 of the
establishment by the United Arab Emirates of the International Institute for Tolerance for promoting the value of
tolerance among nations, the Amman Declaration on Youth, Peace and Security adopted on 22 August 2015 and the
fifth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, held in Astana on 10 and 11 June 2015, and taking note
of the initiative of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and its outcome document,
the Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, adopted in Rabat on 5 October 2012,664
Taking note with appreciation of the continuation of the organization of workshops and meetings within the
framework of the Istanbul Process and the promotion of effective implementation of Human Rights Council resolution
16/18 to counter global violence, religious discrimination and intolerance, in particular the sixth implementation
meeting of the Process, hosted by Singapore on 20 and 21 July 2016,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;665

2. Expresses deep concern at the continued serious instances of derogatory stereotyping, negative profiling
and stigmatization of persons based on their religion or belief, as well as programmes and agendas pursued by
extremist individuals, organizations and groups aimed at creating and perpetuating negative stereotypes about
religious groups, in particular when condoned by Governments;
3. Expresses concern that the number of incidents of religious intolerance, discrimination and related
violence, as well as of negative stereotyping of individuals on the basis of religion or belief, continues to rise around
the world, which may have serious implications at the national, regional and international levels, condemns, in this
context, any advocacy of religious hatred against individuals that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or

_______________
664
665

A/HRC/22/17/Add.4, appendix.
A/74/229.

933

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

violence, and urges States to take effective measures, as set forth in the present resolution and consistent with their
obligations under international human rights law, to address and combat such incidents;
4. Condemns any advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual or electronic media or any other means;
5. Recognizes that the open public debate of ideas, as well as interreligious, interfaith and intercultural
dialogue, at the local, national and international levels, can be among the best protections against religious intolerance
and can play a positive role in strengthening democracy and combating religious hatred, and expresses its conviction
that a continuing dialogue on these issues can help to overcome existing misperceptions;
6. Also recognizes the strong need for global awareness about the possible serious implications of incitement
to discrimination and violence, which may have serious implications at the national, regional and international levels,
and urges all Member States to make renewed efforts to develop educational systems that promote all human rights
and fundamental freedoms that enhance tolerance for religious and cultural diversity, which is fundamental to
promoting tolerant, peaceful and harmonious multicultural societies;
7. Calls upon all States to take the following actions, as called for by the Secretary-General of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to foster a domestic environment of religious tolerance, peace and respect by:
(a) Encouraging the creation of collaborative networks to build mutual understanding, promoting dialogue
and inspiring constructive action towards shared policy goals and the pursuit of tangible outcomes, such as servicing
projects in the fields of education, health, conflict prevention, employment, integration and media education;
(b) Creating an appropriate mechanism within Governments to, inter alia, identify and address potential areas
of tension between members of different religious communities and assisting with conflict prevention and mediation;
(c)

Encouraging the training of government officials in effective outreach strategies;

(d) Encouraging the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities the causes of discrimination and
developing strategies to counter those causes;
(e) Speaking out against intolerance, including advocacy of religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence;
(f)

Adopting measures to criminalize incitement to imminent violence based on religion or belief;

(g) Understanding the need to combat denigration and the negative religious stereotyping of persons, as well
as incitement to religious hatred, by strategizing and harmonizing actions at the local, national, regional and
international levels through, inter alia, education and awareness-raising;
(h) Recognizing that the open, constructive and respectful debate of ideas, as well as interreligious, interfaith
and intercultural dialogue, at the local, national, regional and international levels, can play a positive role in combating
religious hatred, incitement and violence;
8.

Also calls upon all States:

(a) To take effective measures to ensure that public functionaries, in the conduct of their public duties, do not
discriminate against individuals on the basis of religion or belief;
(b) To foster religious freedom and pluralism by promoting the ability of members of all religious
communities to manifest their religion and to contribute openly and on an equal footing to society;
(c) To encourage the representation and meaningful participation of individuals, irrespective of their religion
or belief, in all sectors of society;
(d) To make a strong effort to counter religious profiling, which is understood to be the invidious use of
religion as a criterion in conducting questioning, searches and other investigative law enforcement procedures;
9. Further calls upon all States to adopt measures and policies to promote full respect for and protection of
places of worship and religious sites, cemeteries and shrines and to take protective measures in cases where they are
vulnerable to vandalism or destruction;
934

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Calls for strengthened international efforts to foster a global dialogue for the promotion of a culture of
tolerance and peace at all levels, based on respect for human rights and diversity of religions and beliefs;
11. Encourages all States to consider providing updates on efforts made in this regard as part of ongoing
reporting to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and in this respect requests the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to include those updates in her reports to the Human Rights
Council;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report that
includes information provided by the High Commissioner on steps taken by States to combat intolerance, negative
stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons, based on religion or
belief, as set forth in the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/165
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.2, para. 90)666

74/165. Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities annexed to that resolution, and bearing
in mind article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights667 as well as other relevant existing
international and regional standards and national legislation,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the effective promotion of the Declaration and all relevant
resolutions of the Human Rights Council,
Recalling further Human Rights Council resolution 32/5 of 30 June 2016, entitled “Human rights and arbitrary
deprivation of nationality”,668 and all previous resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council and the Commission
on Human Rights on the issue of human rights and the arbitrary deprivation of nationality,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 37/14 of 22 March 2018,669 in which the Council considered the
recommendations of the Forum on Minority Issues at its tenth session, held in December 2017, on the rights of
minority youth,670
Affirming that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities and dialogue between these minorities and the rest of society, as well as the constructive and
inclusive development of practices and institutional arrangements to accommodate diversity within societies,
contribute to political and social stability and the prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts involving the rights
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,

_______________
666

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
667
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
668
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. V, sect. A.
669
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
670
A/HRC/37/73.

935

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,671 of which the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development672 is an integral part, recalling that the
Sustainable Development Goals and targets seek to realize the human rights of all, and stressing the need for Member
States to integrate the 2030 Agenda into their respective national policies and development frameworks, as
appropriate, to promote the effective implementation, follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda, in order to ensure
that no one is left behind,
Expressing concern at the frequency and severity of disputes and conflicts involving persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in many countries and their often tragic consequences, and that
such persons often suffer disproportionately from the effects of conflicts resulting in the violation of their human rights
and are particularly vulnerable to forced displacement through, inter alia, population transfers, revocation of
previously held identity documents, refugee flows and forced relocation,
Emphasizing the need for reinforced efforts to realize the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities, including by addressing economic and social conditions and marginalization, as
well as to end any type of discrimination against them, including by addressing multiple, aggravated and intersecting
forms of discrimination,
Emphasizing also the fundamental importance of human rights education, training and learning as well as of
dialogue, including intercultural and interfaith dialogue, and interaction among all relevant stakeholders and members
of society on the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities,
Recognizing the importance of realizing the right to education for all and, wherever possible, providing persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities with adequate opportunities to learn their own
language or to have instruction in their own language,
Emphasizing the important role that national institutions can play in the promotion and protection of the rights
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and acknowledging the role that the
United Nations, its specialized agencies and other relevant organizations, and the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on minority issues, play in this regard by, inter alia, promoting the implementation of the Declaration,
Recognizing that a vast majority of stateless persons are persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities,
1. Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities may exercise fully and effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any
discrimination and in full equality before the law, as proclaimed in the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,673 and draws attention to the relevant provisions of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,674 including the provisions on forms of multiple discrimination;
2. Urges States and the international community to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as set out in the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, including through the encouragement of conditions for the
promotion of their identity, the provision of adequate education and the facilitation of their participation in all aspects
of the political, economic, social, religious and cultural life of society and in the economic progress and development
of their country, without discrimination, and to apply a gender perspective while doing so;
3. Encourages States to take appropriate measures so that, wherever possible, persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities may have adequate opportunities to learn their own language or to have
instruction in their own language;

_______________
671

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
673
Resolution 47/135, annex.
674
See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF.189/12/Corr.1, chap. I.
672

936

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Urges States to take all appropriate measures, inter alia, constitutional, legislative, administrative and
other measures, for the promotion and implementation of the Declaration, and appeals to States to cooperate
bilaterally and multilaterally, in particular on the exchange of best practices and lessons learned, in accordance with
the Declaration, in order to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities;
5. Recommends that States continue to reflect on current and emerging challenges facing persons belonging
to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, including the rise in persecution on religious and ethnic
grounds and increasing levels of hate crimes and hate speech targeting, among others, persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
6. Also recommends that States ensure that all measures taken with a view to implementing the Declaration
are, to the fullest extent possible, developed, designed, implemented and reviewed with the full, effective and equal
participation of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
7. Calls upon States to undertake effective efforts to prevent and combat acts of violence specifically
targeting persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
8. Also calls upon States to take all appropriate measures to ensure the protection of children who belong to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and who are at risk of becoming or have become stateless, in
accordance with the relevant obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child;675
9. Further calls upon States to take all appropriate measures to ensure the protection of women and girls
who belong to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and are exposed to discrimination on the grounds
of being stateless, and also to give special attention to the specific needs of older persons and persons with disabilities
who belong to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and who are stateless;
10. Recommends that States and other relevant actors ensure to the fullest extent possible that the Declaration
is translated into all minority languages and disseminated widely;
11. Expresses its appreciation for the successful completion, in November 2018, of the eleventh session of
the Forum on Minority Issues, on the theme “Statelessness: a minority issue”, which, through the widespread
participation of stakeholders, provided an important platform for the promotion of dialogue on this topic and, as part
of its outcome, produced recommendations to highlight the need for States to prevent and reduce statelessness by
promoting the human rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and to stress
the importance of inclusion of stateless persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and
their representatives in policy and decision-making processes affecting them,676 and encourages States to take into
consideration the relevant recommendations of the Forum;
12. Calls upon States, while bearing in mind the theme of the eleventh session of the Forum on Minority Issues
and with a view to enhancing the implementation of the Declaration and ensuring the realization of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, to take appropriate measures by, inter alia:
(a) Reviewing any legislation, policy or practice that has a discriminatory or disproportionately negative effect
on persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and that may render them vulnerable,
with a view to considering its amendment;
(b) Considering ratifying, acceding to and adhering to all relevant international instruments that protect and
promote the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and those aiming to
eliminate statelessness;
(c) Refraining from arbitrary and discriminatory denial or deprivation of nationality of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
(d) Ensuring that human rights protection is provided to stateless persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities, as human rights are universal and apply to everyone;

_______________
675
676

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
A/HRC/40/71.

937

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(e) Ensuring that birth registration, civil registration and national identification documents are provided
without discrimination on any ground, in particular race, ethnicity, religion and language, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development,671 especially the target aimed at providing a legal identity for all;
(f) Ensuring that stateless persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities have
access to justice and remedy for human rights violations and that these persons can appeal to relevant judicial and
administrative bodies in case of denial or deprivation of nationality;
(g) Ensuring full compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, in particular articles 7 and 8
thereof, and considering removing all their reservations to them;
(h) Ensuring that women enjoy equal rights with men to acquire, change or retain their nationality, as well as
equal rights with men to confer their nationality upon their children;
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the effective promotion of the Declaration677 and the
reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on minority issues and their special focus on
statelessness as an issue affecting persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;678
14. Commends the Special Rapporteur for the work that has been done and the important role played in raising
the level of awareness of and in giving added visibility to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities;
15. Calls upon all States to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in the performance of the tasks
and duties mandated to him, to provide him with all the necessary information requested and to seriously consider
responding promptly and favourably to the requests of the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries in order to enable
him to fulfil his duties effectively;
16. Encourages the specialized agencies, regional organizations, national human rights institutions and
non-governmental organizations to develop regular dialogue and cooperation with the Special Rapporteur, as well as
to continue to contribute to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities;
17. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to promote, within her
mandate, the implementation of the Declaration, and to engage in a dialogue with Governments for that purpose and
regularly update and disseminate widely the United Nations Guide for Minorities;
18. Welcomes the inter-agency cooperation among United Nations agencies, funds and programmes on
minority issues, led by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and urges them to
further increase their coordination and cooperation by, inter alia, developing policies on the promotion and protection
of the rights of persons belonging to minorities, drawing also on relevant outcomes of the Forum on Minority Issues
and taking into account the work of relevant regional organizations;
19. Calls upon the Secretary-General to make available, at the request of Governments concerned, qualified
expertise on minority issues, including in the context of the prevention of and efforts to combat statelessness, to assist
in resolving existing or potential situations involving minorities;
20. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, as well as special procedures of the Human Rights Council, to
continue to give attention, within their respective mandates, to situations and rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and in this regard to take into consideration relevant recommendations of
the Forum on Minority Issues;
21. Invites the United Nations mechanisms and bodies, the specialized agencies and regional organizations,
within their respective mandates, to continue to contribute to the protection and the prevention of violations of the rights
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, including by strengthening cooperation
in respect of information-gathering and improving the information flow between themselves and with States;

_______________
677
678

938

A/74/215.
A/73/205 and A/74/160.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

22. Encourages regional intergovernmental bodies, within their respective regions, to promote greater
attention to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia,
actively raising awareness of and promoting the Declaration in their work, encouraging its implementation at the
national level and considering the creation of thematic and/or special mechanisms on this issue;
23. Encourages national human rights institutions to pay due attention to the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, including by monitoring situations of potential threats for persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and by investigating and reporting, in accordance
with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the
Paris Principles)679 and their respective mandates, episodes of targeted violence against persons belonging to
minorities, including, when necessary, to regional and international bodies;
24. Encourages civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to promote awareness of the
Declaration and to review the extent to which it integrates the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities and the Declaration into its work, as well as to inform persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities about their rights;
25. Requests the Special Rapporteur to report annually to the General Assembly and include
recommendations for effective strategies for the better implementation of the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
26. Invites the Office of the High Commissioner, United Nations entities and Member States to support and
collaborate in the organization of regional forums on minority issues initiated by the Special Rapporteur in
accordance with his mandate, in order to complement and enrich the work and recommendations of the Forum on
Minority Issues;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution, including information on activities undertaken by Member States, the
Office of the High Commissioner, the Special Rapporteur, relevant United Nations entities and other relevant
stakeholders to enhance the implementation of the Declaration and to ensure the realization of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
28. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its seventy-sixth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/166
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/399/Add.3, para. 47)680

74/166. Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms
and to fulfil the obligations that they have undertaken under the various international instruments,
Recalling all previous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the
Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including

_______________
679

Resolution 48/134, annex.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
680

939

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Assembly resolution 73/180 of 17 December 2018 and Council resolution 40/20 of 22 March 2019,681 and mindful
of the need for the international community to strengthen its coordinated efforts aimed at achieving the
implementation of those resolutions,
Deeply concerned at the grave human rights situation, the pervasive culture of impunity and the lack of
accountability for human rights violations in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Stressing the importance of following up on the recommendations contained in the report of the commission of
inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,682 and expressing grave concern at the detailed
findings contained therein,
Recalling the responsibility of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to protect its population from crimes
against humanity, and recalling also that the commission of inquiry urged the leadership of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to prevent and suppress crimes against humanity and to ensure that perpetrators are prosecuted and
brought to justice,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,683 regretting that he still has not been allowed to visit the country
and that he has received no cooperation from the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and taking
note also of the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea submitted in accordance with resolution 73/180,684
Mindful that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,685 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,685 the Convention on the
Rights of the Child,686 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women687 and the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,688 and urging full implementation of these Conventions, and
of the recommendations contained in the concluding observations from treaty body reviews,
Noting the submission, in December 2018, by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its initial report on
the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,689
Stressing the importance of submitting the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea third periodic report to the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which has been overdue since 30 June 2008, and its third
periodic report to the Human Rights Committee, which has been overdue since 1 January 2004,
Noting the visit of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights of persons with disabilities
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in 2017, and encouraging the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to implement all of the recommendations contained in the report of the Special Rapporteur on her visit to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea submitted to the Human Rights Council at its thirty-seventh session,690
Stressing the importance of extending the cooperation of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to other United Nations special procedures and human rights mechanisms, in particular the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in accordance with their
terms of reference,
Acknowledging the participation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the third universal periodic
review process, noting the acceptance by the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of 132 of

_______________
681

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
A/HRC/25/63.
683
A/74/275/Rev.1.
684
A/74/268.
685
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
686
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
687
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
688
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
689
CRPD/C/PRK/1.
690
A/HRC/37/56/Add.1.
682

940

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the 262 recommendations,691 and its stated commitment to implement them, while expressing its concern that the
recommendations of the two previous reviews have not been implemented thus far,
Noting with regret that independent civil society organizations cannot operate in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and that, as a result, no civil society organization based in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea was able to submit a stakeholder report in the context of the universal periodic review process,
Noting the collaboration established between the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in providing human rights education to
a small number of government officials in Geneva in May 2019, and urging that such technical cooperation be
broadened,
Stressing the importance of extending the cooperation of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights field-based structure in the region,
Noting the collaboration established between the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization in order to improve the health situation
in the country,
Noting also the collaboration established between the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the United Nations Children’s Fund to improve the nutritional status of children and the quality of children’s
education,
Noting further the activities undertaken by the United Nations Development Programme, on a modest scale, in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and encouraging the engagement of the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea with the international community to ensure that the programmes benefit the persons in
need of assistance,
Noting the cooperation between the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations on a number of assessments, underscoring the importance of those assessments in analysing changes in the
national, household and individual situation with regard to food security, nutrition, health, water and sanitation, and
thereby in supporting donor confidence in the targeting of aid programmes and monitoring, and noting with
appreciation the work of international aid operators,
Stressing the importance of international humanitarian aid organizations to carry out independent needs
assessments and implement their humanitarian programmes consistent with international standards and
humanitarian principles, including in areas with no operational presence, and expressing concern about the latest
action taken by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to reduce the number of United Nations agencies’ staff
in the country,
Taking note of the United Nations humanitarian report entitled “Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 2019:
needs and priorities” and the joint rapid food security assessments conducted by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme and their calls to address the critical humanitarian
needs in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Noting with concern the findings of the United Nations that 10.9 million people in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are estimated to be undernourished, one third of children 6 to 23 months of age do not receive a
minimum acceptable diet, 1 in 5 children suffer from stunting (chronic malnutrition), around 9 million people are
estimated to have limited access to quality health services, and 39 per cent, or an estimated 9.75 million, of people do
not have access to a safely managed drinking water source, including 56 per cent of people living in rural areas,
condemning the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for diverting its resources into pursuing nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles over the welfare of its people, and emphasizing the necessity for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to respect and ensure the welfare and inherent dignity of the people in the country, as referred to
by the Security Council in its resolutions 2321 (2016) of 30 November 2016, 2371 (2017) of 5 August 2017,
2375 (2017) of 11 September 2017 and 2397 (2017) of 22 December 2017,

_______________
691

A/HRC/42/10.

941

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note of the strategic framework for cooperation between the United Nations and the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for the period 2017–2021 and the Government’s commitment in accordance
with the principles, goals and targets of the Sustainable Development Goals692 and in line with its commitments to
international agreements and conventions,
Noting with grave concern the urgency and importance of the issue of international abductions and of the
immediate return of all abductees, the long years of suffering experienced by abductees and their families, and
the lack of positive action by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, notably since the investigations on all the
Japanese nationals commenced on the basis of the government-level consultations held between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and Japan in May 2014, and calling upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
address all allegations of enforced disappearances, provide accurate information to the families of the victims on the
fates and whereabouts of their missing relatives and resolve all issues related to all abductees at the earliest possible
date, in particular the return of abductees of Japan and the Republic of Korea,
Noting the urgency and importance of the issue of separated families, including affected Koreans worldwide, in
this regard welcoming the resumption of the reunions of separated families across the border in August 2018 and the
commitments made on this issue at the inter-Korean summit held on 19 September 2018 to strengthen humanitarian
cooperation to fundamentally resolve the issue of separated families, and highlighting the importance of allowing
permanent regular reunions and contact between separated families, including through meetings at an easily accessible
location and regular facility, regular written correspondence, video reunions, and the exchange of video messages, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
Welcoming and further encouraging the efforts of Member States to raise international awareness about the
human rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and noting that human rights, including gender
equality, are intrinsically linked to peace and security,
Welcoming the diplomatic efforts, and noting the importance of dialogue and engagements, including interKorean dialogue, to seek improvement of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the country,
Underlining the efforts of the Secretary-General to contribute to improving inter-Korean relations and
promoting reconciliation and stability on the Korean Peninsula and the well-being of the Korean people,
1. Condemns the long-standing and ongoing systematic, widespread and gross violations of human rights in
and by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including those that may amount to crimes against humanity
according to the commission of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, established
by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 22/13 of 21 March 2013,693 and those identified by the group of
independent experts on accountability for human rights violations in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,694
established pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 31/18 of 23 March 2016,695 and by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the continuing impunity for such violations;
2.

Expresses its very serious concern about:

(a) The persistence of continuing reports of violations of human rights, including the detailed findings made
by the commission of inquiry in its report,682 such as:
(i) Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including inhuman
conditions of detention; rape; public executions; extrajudicial and arbitrary detention; the absence of due process
and the rule of law, including fair trial guarantees and an independent judiciary; extrajudicial, summary and
arbitrary executions; the imposition of the death penalty for political and religious reasons; collective
punishments extending up to three generations; and the extensive use of forced labour;

_______________
692

See resolution 70/1.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
694
See A/HRC/34/66/Add.1.
695
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
693

942

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(ii) The existence of an extensive system of political prison camps, where a vast number of persons are
deprived of their liberty and subjected to deplorable conditions, including forced labour, and where alarming
violations of human rights are perpetrated;
(iii) Enforced and involuntary disappearances of persons by arrest, detention or abduction against their
will; refusal to disclose the fate and whereabouts of the persons concerned; and refusal to acknowledge the
deprivation of their liberty, which places such persons subjected thereto outside the protection of the law and
which has had the effect of inflicting severe suffering on them and their families;
(iv) The forcible transfer of populations and the limitations imposed on every person who wishes to
move freely within the country and travel abroad, including the punishment of those who leave or try to leave
the country without permission, or their families, as well as punishment of persons who are returned;
(v) The situation of refugees and asylum seekers expelled or returned to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and retaliations against citizens of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who have
been repatriated from abroad, leading to punishments of internment, torture, other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment, sexual violence or the death penalty, and in this regard strongly urges all States to respect the
fundamental principle of non-refoulement, to treat those who seek refuge humanely and to ensure unhindered
access to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his Office, with a view to protecting the
human rights of those who seek refuge, and once again urges States parties to comply with their obligations
under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees696 and the 1967 Protocol thereto697 in relation to
refugees from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who are covered by those instruments;
(vi) All-pervasive and severe restrictions, both online and offline, on the freedoms of thought,
conscience, religion or belief, opinion and expression, peaceful assembly and association, the right to privacy
and equal access to information, by such means as the unlawful and arbitrary surveillance, persecution, torture,
imprisonment and, in some instances, summary executions of individuals exercising their freedom of opinion
and expression, religion or belief, and their families, and the right of everyone, including women, to take part in
the conduct of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives, of his or her country;
(vii) Violations of economic, social and cultural rights, which have led to food insecurity, severe hunger,
malnutrition, widespread health problems and other hardship for the population in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in particular for women, children, persons with disabilities, older persons and political
prisoners;
(viii) Violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women and girls, in particular the
creation of internal conditions that force women and girls to leave the country and make them extremely
vulnerable to trafficking in persons for the purpose of prostitution, domestic servitude or forced marriage and
the subjection of women and girls to gender-based discrimination, including in the political and social spheres,
forced abortions and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence;
(ix) Violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of children, in particular the continued
lack of access to basic economic, social and cultural rights for many children, and in this regard notes the
particularly vulnerable situation faced by, inter alia, returned or repatriated children, street children, children
with disabilities, children whose parents are detained, children living in detention or in institutions and children
in conflict with the law;
(x) Violations of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of persons with disabilities, especially
violations involving the use of collective camps and coercive measures that target the rights of persons with
disabilities to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children and allegations of the
possible use of persons with disabilities in medical testing, forced relocation to rural areas and separation of
children with disabilities from their parents;

_______________
696
697

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

943

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(xi) Violations of workers’ rights, including the right to freedom of association and effective recognition
of the right to collective bargaining, the right to strike as defined by the obligations of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,685 and the
prohibition of the economic exploitation of children and of any harmful or hazardous work of children as defined
by the obligations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea under the Convention on the Rights of the
Child,686 as well as the exploitation of workers sent abroad from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
work under conditions that reportedly amount to forced labour, recalling paragraph 11 of Security Council
resolution 2371 (2017) and paragraph 17 of resolution 2375 (2017), in which the Council decided that
Member States shall not provide work authorizations for nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in their jurisdictions, and also recalling paragraph 8 of Council resolution 2397 (2017), in which the
Council decided that Member States shall repatriate to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea all nationals
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea earning income in that Member State’s jurisdiction and all
government safety oversight attachés of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea monitoring workers from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea abroad immediately, but not later than 24 months from 22 December
2017, unless the Member State determines that a Democratic People’s Republic of Korea national is a national
of that Member State or a Democratic People’s Republic of Korea national’s repatriation is prohibited, subject
to applicable national and international law, including international refugee law and international human rights
law, the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters
of the United Nations698 and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations,699 and
urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to promote, respect and protect the human rights of workers,
including workers repatriated to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea;
(xii) Discrimination based on the songbun system, which classifies people on the basis of State-assigned
social class and birth and also includes consideration of political opinions and religion;
(xiii) Violence and discrimination against women, including unequal access to employment, discriminatory
laws and regulations;
(b) The continued refusal of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to extend an
invitation to the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea or to extend cooperation to the Special Rapporteur and several other United Nations
special procedures, in accordance with their terms of reference, as well as to other United Nations human rights
mechanisms;
(c) The continued lack of acknowledgement by the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea of the grave human rights situation in the country and its consequential lack of action to report on the state of
implementation of the recommendations contained in the outcome of its first700 and second701 universal periodic
reviews and to give consideration to the concluding observations of the treaty bodies;
3. Condemns the systematic abduction, denial of repatriation and subsequent enforced disappearance of
persons, including those from other countries, on a large scale and as a matter of State policy, and in this regard
strongly calls upon the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea urgently to resolve these issues of
international concern, in a transparent manner, including by ensuring the immediate return of abductees;
4. Underscores its very serious concern regarding reports of torture, summary executions, arbitrary
detention, abductions and other forms of human rights violations and abuses that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea commits against citizens of other countries within and outside of its territory;
5. Expresses its very deep concern at the precarious humanitarian situation in the country, which could
rapidly deteriorate owing to limited resilience to natural disasters and to government policies causing limitations in

_______________
698

See resolution 169 (II).
Resolution 22 A (I).
700
A/HRC/13/13.
701
A/HRC/27/10.
699

944

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the availability of and access to adequate food, compounded by structural weaknesses in agricultural production
resulting in significant shortages of diversified food and the State restrictions on the cultivation of and trade in
foodstuffs, as well as the prevalence of chronic and acute malnutrition, particularly among the most vulnerable groups,
pregnant and lactating women, children, persons with disabilities, older persons and prisoners, including political
prisoners, exacerbated due to lack of access to basic services, including health care as well as water, sanitation and
hygiene services, and urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in this regard, to take
preventive and remedial action, cooperating with international donor and humanitarian agencies for accessing people
belonging to vulnerable groups, facilitating the implementation of programmes and monitoring humanitarian
assistance consistent with international standards;
6. Welcomes the latest report to the Human Rights Council of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea;702
7. Reiterates its appreciation for the report of the group of independent experts on accountability for human
rights violations in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,703 established pursuant to Human Rights Council
resolution 31/18, including options to seek accountability and secure truth and justice for all victims;
8. Welcomes the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights704 on steps taken
pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 34/24 of 24 March 2017705 to strengthen the capacity of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, including its field-based structure in Seoul, to allow the
implementation of relevant recommendations made by the group of independent experts on accountability aimed at
strengthening current monitoring and documentation efforts, establishing a central repository for information and
evidence and having experts in legal accountability assess all information and testimonies with a view to developing
possible strategies to be used in any future accountability process;
9. Also welcomes the steps taken pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 40/20 to continue the efforts
outlined above, expresses strong support for the work being undertaken by the Office of the High Commissioner in
furtherance of the resolution, with the aim of ensuring accountability for suspected violations of international law
committed in and by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and calls upon all States to support such efforts;
10. Reiterates its appreciation for the work of the commission of inquiry, recognizes the continuing
importance of its report, and regrets that the commission received no cooperation from the authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including with regard to access to the country;
11. Acknowledges the commission of inquiry’s finding that the body of testimony gathered and the
information received provide reasonable grounds to believe that crimes against humanity have been committed
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, pursuant to policies established at the highest level of the State
for decades and by institutions under the effective control of its leadership, which was confirmed by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in her report to the Human Rights Council submitted pursuant
to resolution 34/24;
12. Expresses its concern at the failure of the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
prosecute those responsible for human rights violations, including violations which the commission of inquiry has
said may amount to crimes against humanity, and encourages the international community to cooperate with
accountability efforts and to ensure that such crimes do not remain unpunished;
13. Encourages the Security Council to continue its consideration of the relevant conclusions and
recommendations of the commission of inquiry and take appropriate action to ensure accountability, including through
consideration of referral of the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the International Criminal
Court and consideration of further sanctions in order to target effectively those who appear to be most responsible for
human rights violations that the commission has said may constitute crimes against humanity;

_______________
702

A/HRC/40/66.
A/HRC/34/66/Add.1.
704
A/HRC/40/36.
705
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
703

945

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Also encourages the Security Council to continue to discuss the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, including the country’s human rights situation, in the light of the serious concerns expressed in the
present resolution, and looks forward to its continued and more active engagement on this matter;
15. Encourages the continuing endeavours of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights field-based structure in Seoul and its efforts in developing a central repository for information and
evidence relating to suspected violations of international law, and assessing all such evidence and information in order
to develop possible strategies to be used in any future accountability process, and welcomes its regular reporting to
the Human Rights Council;
16. Calls upon Member States to undertake to ensure that the field-based structure of the Office of the High
Commissioner can function with independence, has sufficient resources and support to fulfil its mandate, enjoys full
cooperation with relevant Member States and is not subjected to any reprisals or threats;
17. Strongly urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect fully all human
rights and fundamental freedoms and, in this regard:
(a) To immediately put an end to the systematic, widespread and grave violations of human rights emphasized
above, inter alia, by implementing fully the measures set out in the above-mentioned resolutions of the General
Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council, and the recommendations addressed
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the Council in the context of the universal periodic review and by
the commission of inquiry, the United Nations special procedures and treaty bodies;
(b) To immediately close the political prison camps and to release all political prisoners unconditionally and
without any delay;
(c) To protect its inhabitants, address the issue of impunity and ensure that those responsible for crimes
involving violations of human rights are brought to justice before an independent judiciary;
(d) To tackle the root causes leading to outflows of migrants and refugees and to prosecute those involved in
migrant smuggling, trafficking in human beings and extortion, while not criminalizing the victims of trafficking;
(e) To ensure that everyone within the territory of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea enjoys the right
to liberty of movement and is free to leave the country, including for the purpose of seeking asylum outside the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, without interference by the authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea;
(f) To ensure that citizens of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who are expelled or returned to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are able to return in safety and dignity, are treated humanely and are not
subjected to any kind of punishment, and to provide information on their status and treatment;
(g) To provide citizens of other countries detained in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
protections, including freedom of communication with, and access to, consular officers in accordance with the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations,706 to which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party, and any other
necessary arrangements to confirm their status and to communicate with their families;
(h) To extend its full cooperation to the Special Rapporteur, including by granting him full, free and
unimpeded access to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and to other special procedures of the Human Rights
Council as well as to other United Nations human rights mechanisms so that a full needs assessment of the human
rights situation may be made;
(i) To engage in technical cooperation activities in the field of human rights with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and her Office, including the field-based structure in the region, as pursued by the
High Commissioner in recent years, with a view to improving the situation of human rights in the country;

_______________
706

946

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(j) To implement the accepted recommendations stemming from the universal periodic reviews and to consider
positively those recommendations which are still under consideration from the third review cycle, and to submit a
midterm voluntary report to detail progress on the implementation of recommendations accepted from the third cycle;
(k) To become a member of the International Labour Organization, to enact legislation and adopt practices to
comply with international labour standards and to consider ratifying all the relevant conventions, in particular the core
labour conventions of the International Labour Organization;
(l)

To continue and reinforce its cooperation with United Nations humanitarian agencies;

(m) To ensure full, safe and unhindered access of persons in vulnerable situations to humanitarian aid, and
take measures to allow humanitarian agencies to survey the needs of persons belonging to vulnerable groups, to obtain
critical baseline data and to enable the unhindered and impartial delivery of such humanitarian aid to all parts of the
country, on the basis of need in accordance with humanitarian principles, as it pledged to do, to furthermore ensure
access to adequate basic services and implement more effective food security and nutrition policies, including through
sustainable agriculture, sound food production and distribution measures and the allocation of more funds to the food
sector, and to allow adequate monitoring of humanitarian assistance;
(n) To further improve cooperation with the United Nations country team members and development
agencies so that they can directly contribute to improving the living conditions of the civilian population, including
progress towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals;692
(o) To consider ratifying and acceding to the remaining international human rights treaties, which would
enable a dialogue with the human rights treaty bodies, to resume reporting to monitoring bodies on treaties to which
it is a party, to participate meaningfully in treaty body reviews, and to give consideration to the concluding
observations of such bodies in order to improve the human rights situation in the country;
18. Urges the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to implement the recommendations
of the commission of inquiry, the group of independent experts, and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights without delay;
19. Reiterates the importance of maintaining high on the international agenda the grave human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including through sustained communications, advocacy and outreach
initiatives, and requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to strengthen those
activities;
20. Encourages all Member States, the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the Office of the High
Commissioner, the United Nations Secretariat, relevant specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental
organizations and forums, civil society organizations, foundations and engaged business enterprises and other
stakeholders towards which the commission of inquiry has directed recommendations to implement or take forward
those recommendations;
21. Encourages the United Nations system as a whole to continue to address the grave human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in a coordinated and unified manner;
22. Encourages the relevant United Nations programmes, funds, specialized agencies and other related
organizations to assist the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the implementation of
recommendations stemming from the universal periodic reviews, human rights treaty body reviews and from the
report of the commission of inquiry;
23. Calls upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to engage constructively with international
interlocutors with a view to promoting concrete improvements in the human rights situation on the ground, including
through human rights dialogues, official visits to the country that include adequate access to fully assess human rights
conditions, cooperation initiatives and more people-to-people contact as a matter of priority;
24. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea at its seventy-fifth session, and to this end requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and requests the Special Rapporteur
to continue to report his findings and recommendations, as well as to report on the follow-up to the implementation
of the recommendations of the commission of inquiry.
947

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/167
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 81 to 30, with 70 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.3, para. 47)707
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against: Afghanistan, Armenia, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Nicaragua,
Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia

74/167. Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,708 the
International Covenants on Human Rights709 and other international human rights instruments,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, the most
recent of which is resolution 73/181 of 17 December 2018,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 73/181710 and the report
of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran,711 submitted pursuant to Council resolution 40/18 of 22 March 2019;712
2. Recalls the pledges made by the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran with regard to improving the
human rights situation in the country;
3. Notes the significant decline in the number of executions in 2018, notably due to the reduction in the
number of executions for drug-related offences, following amendments to the Anti-Narcotics Law, passed in
October 2017;
4. Welcomes the approval in May 2018 by the Parliament of the Islamic Republic of Iran of the Law for the
Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and subsequent discussions regarding its implementation, and

_______________
707

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
708
Resolution 217 A (III).
709
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
710
A/74/273.
711
A/74/188.
712
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.

948

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

urges the authorities to work together with civil society to ensure that sufficient State funds are allocated for its
implementation and monitoring;
5. Also welcomes the continuing efforts of the Islamic Republic of Iran to host a large number of Afghans,
including approximately 1 million registered refugees, and to provide them with access to basic services, in particular
health care and education for children;
6. Further welcomes the commitments made by the Iranian authorities with regard to improving the situation
of women, and notes the ongoing discussions regarding the comprehensive bill on ensuring the protection of women
against violence and the ratification of the amendment to the Nationality Law, which gives Iranian women married to
men with foreign nationality the right to request Iranian citizenship for their children under the age of 18 years;
7. Welcomes the engagement of the Islamic Republic of Iran with human rights treaty bodies, including
through the submission of periodic reports, and notes in particular the engagement of the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Committee on the
Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its participation in the universal
periodic review;
8. Also welcomes the ongoing contact with and dialogue between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, as well as the invitations extended to other
special procedure mandate holders;
9. Further welcomes the expressed readiness of the Iranian High Council for Human Rights and other Iranian
officials to engage in bilateral dialogues on human rights, and calls upon them to increase such dialogues or resume
those that have been paused;
10. Expresses serious concern, notwithstanding the previously noted reduction in the number of executions,
notably for drug-related crimes, at the alarmingly high frequency of the imposition and carrying-out of the death
penalty by the Islamic Republic of Iran, in violation of its international obligations, including executions undertaken
against persons on the basis of forced confessions or for crimes that do not qualify as the most serious crimes,
including crimes that are overly broad or vaguely defined, in violation of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,709 expresses concern at the continuing disregard for internationally recognized safeguards, including
executions undertaken without notification of the prisoner’s family members or legal counsel, and calls upon the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to abolish, in law and in practice, public executions, which are contrary
to the 2008 directive seeking to end this practice issued by the former head of the judiciary;
11. Also expresses serious concern at the continued imposition of the death penalty by the Islamic Republic
of Iran against minors, and urges the Islamic Republic of Iran to cease the imposition of the death penalty against
minors, including persons who at the time of their offence were under the age of 18, in violation of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child,713 and to commute the sentences for child offenders on death row;
12. Calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to ensure, in law and in practice, that no one is subjected to
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, which may include sexual violence, and
punishments that are grossly disproportionate to the nature of the offence, in conformity with amendments to the
Penal Code, the constitutional guarantees of the Islamic Republic of Iran and international obligations and
standards, including but not limited to the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
(the Nelson Mandela Rules);714
13. Urges the Islamic Republic of Iran to cease the widespread and systematic use of arbitrary arrests and
detention, including the use of this practice to target dual and foreign nationals, to release those who have been
arbitrarily detained and to uphold, in law and in practice, procedural guarantees to ensure fair trial standards, including
timely access to legal representation of one’s choice from the time of arrest through all stages of trial and all appeals,
the right not to be subjected to torture, cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and consideration of
bail and other reasonable terms for release from custody pending trial, and calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to

_______________
713
714

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Resolution 70/175, annex.

949

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

ensure that it meets its obligations under article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations715 in relation to
communication with and access to nationals of sending States who are in prison, custody or detention;
14. Calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to release persons detained for the exercise of their human rights
and fundamental freedoms, including those who have been detained solely for taking part in peaceful protests, to
consider rescinding unduly harsh sentences, including those involving the death penalty and long-term internal exile,
and to end reprisals against individuals, including for cooperating or attempting to cooperate with the United Nations
human rights mechanisms;
15. Also calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to address the poor conditions of prisons, to end the practice
of deliberately denying prisoners access to adequate medical treatment, which creates a consequent risk of death, and
to put an end to the continued and sustained house arrest of leading opposition figures from the 2009 presidential
elections despite serious concerns about their health, as well as the pressure exerted upon their relatives and
dependants, including through arrest, and calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to establish credible and independent
prison oversight authorities to investigate complaints of abuse;
16. Further calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran, including the judicial and security branches, to create and
maintain, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment in which an independent, diverse and pluralistic
civil society can operate free from hindrance and insecurity, and urges the Islamic Republic of Iran to end widespread
and serious restrictions, in law and in practice, on the right to freedom of expression and opinion, including in digital
contexts, and the rights to freedom of association and peaceful assembly, and to end its harassment, intimidation and
persecution of political opponents, human rights defenders, women’s and minority rights defenders, labour and trade
union activists, students’ rights defenders, environmentalists, academics, film-makers, journalists, bloggers, social
media users and social media page administrators, media workers, religious leaders, artists, lawyers, including human
rights lawyers, and their families and persons belonging to recognized and unrecognized religious minorities and their
families, wherever it may occur;
17. Strongly urges the Islamic Republic of Iran to eliminate, in law and in practice, all forms of discrimination
and other human rights violations against women and girls, to take measures to ensure protection for women and girls
against violence and their equal protection and access to justice, to address the concerning incidence of child, early
and forced marriage, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child, to promote, support and enable
women’s participation in political and other decision-making processes, and, while recognizing the high enrolment of
women in all levels of education in the Islamic Republic of Iran, to lift restrictions on women’s equal access to all
aspects of education and women’s equal participation in the labour market and in all aspects of economic, cultural,
social and political life, including participation in and attendance at sporting events;
18. Calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to release women human rights defenders imprisoned for
exercising their rights, including the rights to freedom of association and peaceful assembly and the right to freedom
of expression and opinion, and to take appropriate, robust and practical steps to protect women human rights defenders
and guarantee their full enjoyment of all their human rights;
19. Also calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to eliminate, in law and in practice, all forms of discrimination
and other human rights violations against persons belonging to ethnic, linguistic or other minorities, including but not
limited to Arabs, Azeris, Balochis, Kurds and Turkmen, and their defenders;
20. Expresses serious concern about ongoing severe limitations and increasing restrictions on the right to
freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief, restrictions on the establishment of places of worship, undue
restrictions on burials carried out in accordance with religious tenets, attacks against places of worship and burial and
other human rights violations, including but not limited to harassment, intimidation, persecution, arbitrary arrests and
detention, and incitement to hatred that leads to violence against persons belonging to recognized and unrecognized
religious minorities, including Christians, Gonabadi Dervishes, Jews, Sufi Muslims, Sunni Muslims, Yarsanis,
Zoroastrians and members of the Baha’i faith and their defenders in the Islamic Republic of Iran, and calls upon the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to cease monitoring individuals on account of their religious identity, to
release all religious practitioners imprisoned for their membership in or activities on behalf of a recognized or
unrecognized minority religious group and to ensure that everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience

_______________
715

950

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and religion, including the freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of their choice, in accordance with its
obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
21. Calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to eliminate, in law and in practice, all forms of discrimination on
the basis of thought, conscience, religion or belief, including economic restrictions, such as the closure or confiscation
of businesses and properties, the cancellation of licences and the denial of employment in certain public and private
sectors, including government or military positions and elected office, the denial of and restrictions on access to
education, and other human rights violations against persons belonging to recognized and unrecognized religious
minorities, and to end impunity for those who commit crimes against persons belonging to recognized and
unrecognized religious minorities;
22. Also calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to launch a comprehensive accountability process in response
to all cases of serious human rights violations, including allegations of excessive use of force against peaceful
protesters and cases of suspicious deaths in custody, as well as violations involving the Iranian judiciary and security
agencies, and calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to end impunity for such violations;
23. Further calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to implement its obligations under those human rights
treaties to which it is already a party, to withdraw any reservations that are imprecise or could be considered
incompatible with the object and purpose of the treaty, to act upon the concluding observations concerning the Islamic
Republic of Iran adopted by the bodies of the international human rights treaties to which it is a party and to consider
ratifying or acceding to the international human rights treaties to which it is not already a party;
24. Calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to deepen its engagement with international human rights
mechanisms by:
(a) Cooperating fully with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran, including by accepting the repeated requests made by the Special Rapporteur to visit the country in order to carry
out the mandate;
(b) Increasing cooperation with other special mechanisms, including by facilitating long-standing requests for
access to the country from thematic special procedure mandate holders, whose access to its territory has been restricted
or denied, despite the standing invitation issued by the Islamic Republic of Iran, without imposing undue conditions
upon those visits;
(c) Continuing to enhance its cooperation with the treaty bodies, including by submitting overdue reports
under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination716 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;709
(d) Implementing all accepted universal periodic review recommendations from its first cycle, in 2010, its
second cycle, in 2014, and its third cycle, in 2019, with the full and genuine participation of independent civil society
and other stakeholders in the implementation process;
(e) Building upon the engagement of the Islamic Republic of Iran with the universal periodic review process
by continuing to explore cooperation on human rights and justice reform with the United Nations, including the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
(f) Following through on its commitment to establish an independent national human rights institution, made
in the context of both its first and its second universal periodic reviews by the Human Rights Council, with due regard
for the recommendation of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
25. Also calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to continue to translate the pledges made by the President of
the Islamic Republic of Iran with respect to human rights concerns into concrete action that results in demonstrable
improvements as soon as possible and to ensure that its national laws are consistent with its obligations under
international human rights law and that they are implemented in accordance with its international obligations;
26. Further calls upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to address the substantive concerns highlighted in the
reports of the Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic

_______________
716

Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.

951

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of Iran, as well as the specific calls to action found in previous resolutions of the General Assembly, and to respect
fully its human rights obligations in law and in practice;
27. Strongly encourages the relevant thematic special procedure mandate holders to pay particular attention
to, with a view to investigating and reporting on, the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution, including options and recommendations to improve
its implementation, and to submit an interim report to the Human Rights Council at its forty-third session;
29. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran at its
seventy-fifth session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/168
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 65 to 23, with 83 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.3, para. 47)717
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Vanuatu
Against: Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Guinea,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Haiti, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia

74/168. Situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol,
Ukraine
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and recalling the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,718 international human rights treaties and other relevant international instruments and
declarations,
Recalling the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,719 the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment720 and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,721

_______________
717

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America.
718
Resolution 217 A (III).
719
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
720
Ibid., vol. 1465, No. 24841.
721
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

952

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949722 and Additional Protocol I thereto, of 1977,723 as
applicable, as well as relevant customary international law,
Confirming the primary responsibility of States to promote and protect human rights,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States to respect international law, including the principle that all States shall
refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State and from
acting in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations, recalling its resolution 2625 (XXV)
of 24 October 1970, in which it approved the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and reaffirming the
principles contained therein,
Recalling its resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, entitled “Definition of aggression”,
Recalling also its resolution 68/262 of 27 March 2014 on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, in which it affirmed
its commitment to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders and called upon all States, international organizations and specialized agencies not
to recognize any alteration to the status of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and to
refrain from any action or dealing that might be interpreted as recognizing any such altered status,
Recalling further its resolutions 71/205 of 19 December 2016, 72/190 of 19 December 2017 and 73/263 of
22 December 2018 on the situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol,
Ukraine, its resolution 73/194 of 17 December 2018 on the problem of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, and relevant
decisions of international organizations, specialized agencies and bodies within the United Nations system,
Gravely concerned that the provisions of those resolutions and relevant decisions of international organizations,
specialized agencies and bodies within the United Nations system have not been implemented by the Russian
Federation,
Condemning the ongoing temporary occupation of part of the territory of Ukraine – the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol (hereinafter “Crimea”) – by the Russian Federation, and reaffirming the
non-recognition of its annexation,
Recalling that the General Assembly, in its resolution 3314 (XXIX), states that no territorial acquisition or
special advantage resulting from aggression is or shall be recognized as lawful,
Affirming that the seizure of Crimea by force is illegal and a violation of international law, and affirming also
that those territories must be immediately returned,
Supporting the commitment by Ukraine to adhering to international law in its efforts to put an end to the Russian
occupation of Crimea, and welcoming the commitments by Ukraine to protecting the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all its citizens,
Reaffirming the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities may exercise fully and effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination
and in full equality before the law,
Welcoming the reports of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the human
rights situation in Ukraine, of the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, and of the human rights
assessment mission of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the High Commissioner on
National Minorities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, in which they stated that violations
and abuses of human rights continued to take place in Crimea and pointed to the sharp deterioration of the overall
human rights situation,

_______________
722
723

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.

953

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming also the reports of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
situation of human rights in the temporarily occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol,
Ukraine, submitted pursuant to resolutions 71/205724 and 72/190,725 and the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to resolution 73/263,726
Reaffirming its grave concern that the human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine continues to be denied
access to Crimea, despite its existing mandate, which covers the entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders,
Condemning the imposition and retroactive application of the legal system of the Russian Federation, and its
negative impact on the human rights situation in Crimea, the imposition of automatic Russian citizenship on protected
persons in Crimea, which is contrary to international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions and
customary international law, and the deportation and regressive effects on the enjoyment of human rights of those
who have rejected that citizenship,
Gravely concerned by consistent reports that the Russian law enforcement system uses involuntary placement
in a psychiatric institution as a form of harassment against and punishment of political opponents and activists,
Deeply concerned that, since 2014, torture has reportedly been used by the Russian authorities to extract false
confessions for politically motivated prosecutions, including in the case of Oleg Sentsov, a Ukrainian film-maker, and
expressing deep concern about the ongoing arbitrary detentions and arrests by the Russian Federation of Ukrainian
citizens, including Emir-Usein Kuku and many others,
Deeply concerned also that the occupation continues to affect the enjoyment of social and economic rights by
residents, including children, older persons and persons with disabilities,
Condemning the reported serious violations and abuses committed against residents of Crimea, in particular
extrajudicial killings, abductions, enforced disappearances, politically motivated prosecutions, discrimination,
harassment, intimidation, violence, including sexual violence, arbitrary detentions and arrests, torture and
ill-treatment, in particular to extract confessions, and psychiatric internment, and their forcible transfer or deportation
from Crimea to the Russian Federation, as well as reported abuses of other fundamental freedoms, including the
freedoms of expression, religion or belief and association and the right to peaceful assembly,
Gravely concerned by the above-mentioned policies and practices of the Russian Federation, which cause a
continuing threat and make it impossible to reside in Crimea, and have caused the population to move out from the
peninsula,
Recalling that individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as deportations of protected persons from occupied
territory to the territory of the occupying Power, or to that of any other country, occupied or not, are prohibited under
international humanitarian law, regardless of their motive,
Deeply concerned by consistent reports that the Russian Federation promotes policies and conducts practices
aimed at changing the demographic structure in Crimea, and recalling in this respect that the occupying Power shall
not deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies,
Reaffirming its serious concern at the decision of the so-called Supreme Court of Crimea of 26 April 2016 and
the decision of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation of 29 September 2016 to declare the Mejlis of the
Crimean Tatar People, the self-governing body of the Crimean Tatars, to be an extremist organization and to ban its
activities,
Condemning the ongoing pressure exerted upon religious minority communities, including through frequent
police raids, undue registration requirements that have affected legal status and property rights and threats against and
persecution of those belonging to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, the Protestant Church, mosques and Muslim

_______________
724

See A/72/498.
See A/73/404.
726
A/74/276.
725

954

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

religious schools, Greek Catholics, Roman Catholics and Jehovah’s Witnesses, and condemning also the baseless
prosecution of dozens of peaceful Muslims for allegedly belonging to Islamic organizations,
Condemning also the continuous widespread misuse of counter-terrorism and anti-extremism laws to suppress
dissent,
Strongly condemning in this regard mass detentions on terrorism grounds and other forms of repression against
human rights defenders, including against activists of the Crimean Solidarity civic initiative, which documents
abuses on the peninsula and provides humanitarian assistance to the families of victims of politically motivated
prosecutions,
Recalling the order of the International Court of Justice of 19 April 2017 on provisional measures in the case
concerning the Application of the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Ukraine v. Russian
Federation),727
Recalling also the prohibition under the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 for the occupying Power to
compel protected persons to serve in its armed or auxiliary forces, including through pressure or propaganda that is
aimed at securing voluntary enlistment, and condemning the ongoing recruitment campaign in Crimea and criminal
prosecutions of Crimean men for draft evasion,
Underlining the importance of the measures to develop transparent, accessible, non-discriminatory and
expeditious procedures and regulations governing access to Crimea for human rights defenders, journalists, media
workers and lawyers, as well as the possibility to appeal, in accordance with national legislation and in conformity
with all applicable international law,
Condemning the blocking by the Russian Federation of Ukrainian websites and television channels and the
seizure of Ukrainian transmission frequencies in Crimea,
Welcoming the support provided by Ukraine to media outlets and civil society organizations that have fled
Crimea, which improves the ability of the media and civil society to work independently and without interference,
Welcoming also the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe and other
international and regional organizations to support Ukraine in promoting, protecting and ensuring human rights, and
expressing further concern over the lack of safe and unfettered access by established regional and international human
rights monitoring mechanisms and human rights non-governmental organizations to Crimea,
Acknowledging the importance of the release by the Russian Federation and Ukraine of detained persons on
7 September 2019, and calling upon the Russian Federation to release all unlawfully detained Ukrainian citizens and
to ensure their safe return to Ukraine,
1. Deplores the failure of the Russian Federation to comply with the repeated requests and demands of the
General Assembly, as well as with the order of the International Court of Justice of 19 April 2017 on provisional
measures in the case concerning the Application of the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing
of Terrorism and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(Ukraine v. Russian Federation);727
2. Strongly condemns the continuing and total disregard by the Russian Federation for its obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and international law regarding its legal responsibility for the occupied territory,
including the responsibility to respect Ukrainian law and the rights of all civilians;
3. Condemns all attempts by the Russian Federation to legitimize or normalize its attempted annexation of
Crimea, including the automatic imposition of Russian citizenship, illegal election campaigns and change of the
demographic structure of the population of Crimea;

_______________
727

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/72/4), chap. V, sect. A.

955

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Also condemns violations, abuses, measures and practices of discrimination against the residents of the
temporarily occupied Crimea, including Crimean Tatars, as well as Ukrainians and persons belonging to other ethnic
and religious groups, by the Russian occupation authorities;
5. Further condemns the unlawful imposition of laws, jurisdiction and administration in the occupied Crimea
by the Russian Federation, and demands that the Russian Federation respect obligations under international law with
regard to respecting the laws in force in Crimea prior to occupation;
6.

Urges the Russian Federation:

(a)

To uphold all of its obligations under applicable international law as an occupying Power;

(b)

To fully and immediately comply with the order of the International Court of Justice of 19 April 2017;

(c) To take all measures necessary to bring an immediate end to all violations and abuses against residents of
Crimea, in particular reported discriminatory measures and practices, arbitrary detentions and arrests, torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, revoke all discriminatory legislation and hold accountable those responsible
for those violations and abuses;
(d) To refrain from arresting or prosecuting Crimean residents for non‑criminal acts committed or opinions
expressed, including in social media comments or posts, before the occupation, and release all Crimean residents who
have been arrested or imprisoned for such acts;
(e) To respect the laws in force in Ukraine, repeal laws imposed in Crimea by the Russian Federation that
allow for forced evictions and the confiscation of private property in Crimea, in violation of applicable international
law, and respect the property rights of all former owners affected by previous confiscations;
(f) To immediately release and allow the return to Ukraine, without preconditions, of Ukrainian citizens who
were unlawfully detained and judged without regard for the requirements of international law, as well as those
transferred or deported across internationally recognized borders from Crimea to the Russian Federation;
(g) To report the number of individuals transferred from Crimea to the Russian Federation to serve criminal
sentences and take immediate actions in order to return such individuals to Crimea;
(h) To monitor and accommodate the medical needs of all Ukrainian citizens unlawfully detained for the
exercise of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, including political prisoners, in Crimea and the Russian
Federation and allow the monitoring of those detainees’ state of health and conditions of detention by independent
international monitors and physicians from reputable international health organizations, including the European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and investigate effectively all deaths in detention;
(i) To uphold the rights, in accordance with international law and until their release, of Ukrainian prisoners
and detainees in Crimea and in the Russian Federation, including those on hunger strike, and encourages it to respect
the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules);728
(j) To provide Ukrainian consular officials with information on Ukrainian citizens detained in the Russian
Federation, ensure freedom of consular communication with, and consular access to, detained Ukrainian citizens, in
accordance with the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations,729 to which the Russian Federation is a party, and
allow Ukrainian officials, including the Ukrainian Parliament Commissioner for Human Rights, to visit all Ukrainian
citizens, including political prisoners in Crimea and the Russian Federation;
(k) To address the issue of impunity and ensure that those found to be responsible for violations and abuses
are held accountable before an independent judiciary;
(l) To create and maintain a safe and enabling environment for journalists and media workers, human rights
defenders and defence lawyers to perform their work independently and without undue interference in Crimea;

_______________
728
729

956

Resolution 70/175, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(m) To restore enjoyment of the rights of all individuals, without any discrimination based on origin or religion
or belief, revoke the decisions that banned cultural and religious institutions, non-governmental organizations, human
rights organizations and media outlets and restore enjoyment of the rights of individuals belonging to ethnic
communities in Crimea, in particular Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars, including that to engage in cultural gatherings;
(n) To ensure that the right to freedom of opinion and expression and the rights to peaceful assembly and
freedom of association can be exercised by all Crimean residents in any form, including single-person pickets, without
any restrictions other than those permissible under international law, including international human rights law, and
without discrimination on any grounds;
(o) To refrain from criminalizing the right to freedom of opinion and expression and the right to peaceful
assembly and quash all penalties imposed on Crimean residents for expressing dissenting views, including regarding
the status of Crimea;
(p)

To ensure the availability of education in the Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar languages;

(q) To revoke immediately the decision declaring the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People an extremist
organization and banning its activities, repeal the decision banning leaders of the Mejlis from entering Crimea and
refrain from maintaining or imposing limitations on the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to conserve its
representative institutions;
(r) To end the practice of compelling Crimean residents to serve in the armed or auxiliary forces of the
Russian Federation, including through pressure or propaganda, and in particular ensure that Crimean residents are not
compelled to participate in military operations of the Russian Federation;
(s) To end the practices of deporting Ukrainian citizens from Crimea for not taking Russian citizenship and
of discriminating against Crimean residents for not possessing identity documents issued by the Russian Federation,
stop transferring its own civilian population to Crimea and end the practice of encouraging such transfers;
(t) To cooperate fully and immediately with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, including its Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, which must have safe, secure and unhindered access to the entire territory of Ukraine, including the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, and the Council of Europe on the situation of human
rights in Crimea;
7. Calls upon the Russian Federation to address the substantive concerns and all recommendations
highlighted in the reports of the Secretary-General726 and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the temporarily occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol, Ukraine,724,725 as well as previous relevant recommendations from 27 reports on the situation of
human rights in Ukraine by the Office of the High Commissioner based on the work of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine established to prevent further deterioration of human rights in Crimea;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek ways and means, including through consultations with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and relevant regional organizations, to ensure safe and
unfettered access to Crimea by established regional and international human rights monitoring mechanisms, in
particular the human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, to enable them to carry out their mandate;
9. Urges the Russian Federation to ensure the proper and unimpeded access of international human rights
monitoring missions and human rights non‑governmental organizations to Crimea, including all places where persons
may be deprived of their liberty, recognizing that the international presence and monitoring of compliance with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law in Crimea are of paramount importance in
preventing further deterioration of the situation;
10. Supports the efforts of Ukraine to maintain economic, financial, political, social, informational, cultural
and other ties with its citizens in the occupied Crimea in order to facilitate their access to democratic processes,
economic opportunities and objective information;
11. Calls upon all international organizations and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, when
referring to Crimea in their official documents, communications and publications, including with regard to statistical
data of the Russian Federation, to refer to “the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine,
temporarily occupied by the Russian Federation”, and encourages all States and other international organizations to
do the same;
957

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Calls upon the international community to continue to support the work of the United Nations to ensure
respect for international human rights law and international humanitarian law in Crimea;
13. Calls upon Member States to continue advocacy for the respect of human rights, including by condemning
human rights violations and abuses committed in Crimea at bilateral and multilateral forums;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to take all steps necessary to ensure the full and effective coordination of
all United Nations bodies with regard to the implementation of the present resolution;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide his good offices and pursue his discussions
relating to Crimea, involving all relevant stakeholders and including the concerns addressed in the present resolution;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on
the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution, including options and recommendations to improve
its implementation, and to submit an interim report to the Human Rights Council at its forty-fourth session;
17. Decides to continue its consideration of the matter at its seventy-fifth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
RESOLUTION 74/169
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 106 to 15, with 57 abstentions,* on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.3, para. 47)730
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium,
Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against: Algeria, Belarus, Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Mauritania,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Afghanistan, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia

74/169. Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights731 and
relevant international human rights treaties, including the International Covenants on Human Rights,732

_______________
730

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America.
731
Resolution 217 A (III).
732
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

958

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic and to the principles of the Charter, and demanding that the Syrian regime meet its
responsibility to protect the Syrian population and to respect, protect and fulfil the human rights of all persons
within its jurisdiction,
Recalling its resolutions 66/176 of 19 December 2011, 66/253 A of 16 February 2012, 66/253 B of 3 August
2012, 67/183 of 20 December 2012, 67/262 of 15 May 2013, 68/182 of 18 December 2013, 69/189 of 18 December
2014, 70/234 of 23 December 2015, 71/130 of 9 December 2016, 71/203 of 19 December 2016, 71/248 of
21 December 2016 and 73/182 of 17 December 2018, Human Rights Council resolutions S-16/1 of 29 April 2011,733
S-17/1 of 23 August 2011,733 S-18/1 of 2 December 2011,734 19/1 of 1 March 2012,735 19/22 of 23 March 2012,735
S-19/1 of 1 June 2012,736 20/22 of 6 July 2012,737 21/26 of 28 September 2012,738 22/24 of 22 March 2013,739 23/1
of 29 May 2013,740 23/26 of 14 June 2013,740 24/22 of 27 September 2013,741 25/23 of 28 March 2014,742 26/23 of
27 June 2014,743 27/16 of 25 September 2014,744 28/20 of 27 March 2015,745 29/16 of 2 July 2015,746 30/10
of 1 October 2015,747 31/17 of 23 March 2016,748 32/25 of 1 July 2016,749 33/23 of 30 September 2016,750 S-25/1
of 21 October 2016,751 34/26 of 24 March 2017,752 35/26 of 23 June 2017,753 36/20 of 29 September 2017754 and
39/15 of 28 September 2018,755 Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 2042 (2012) of
14 April 2012, 2043 (2012) of 21 April 2012, 2118 (2013) of 27 September 2013, 2139 (2014) of 22 February
2014, 2165 (2014) of 14 July 2014, 2170 (2014) of 15 August 2014, 2178 (2014) of 24 September 2014,
2191 (2014) of 17 December 2014, 2209 (2015) of 6 March 2015, 2235 (2015) of 7 August 2015, 2254 (2015) of
18 December 2015, 2258 (2015) of 22 December 2015, 2268 (2016) of 26 February 2016, 2286 (2016) of
3 May 2016, 2314 (2016) of 31 October 2016, 2319 (2016) of 17 November 2016, 2328 (2016) of 19 December
2016,2332 (2016) of 21 December 2016, 2336 (2016) of 31 December 2016, 2393 (2017) of 19 December 2017,
2401 (2018) of 24 February 2018 and 2449 (2018) of 13 December 2018 and the statements by the President of the
Security Council of 3 August 2011,756 2 October 2013,757 17 August 2015758 and 8 October 2019,759

_______________
733

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. I.
Ibid., Supplement No. 53B and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.2 and A/66/53/Add.2/Corr.1), chap. II.
735
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and A/67/53/Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
736
Ibid., chap. V.
737
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. A.
738
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
739
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
740
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
741
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
742
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
743
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
744
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1, A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2), chap. IV, sect. A.
745
Ibid., Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53), chap. II.
746
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
747
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/70/53/Add.1), chap. II.
748
Ibid., Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. II.
749
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. A.
750
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.1 and A/71/53/Add.1/Corr.1), chap. II.
751
Ibid., Supplement No. 53B and corrigendum (A/71/53/Add.2 and A/71/53/Add.2/Corr.1), chap. II.
752
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53), chap. II.
753
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
754
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
755
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
756
S/PRST/2011/16; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2011–31 July 2012 (S/INF/67).
757
S/PRST/2013/15; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2013–31 July 2014 (S/INF/69).
758
S/PRST/2015/15; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2015–31 December 2016 (S/INF/71).
759
S/PRST/2019/12.
734

959

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Strongly condemning the grave human rights situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, the indiscriminate killing
and deliberate targeting of civilians, including humanitarian workers, as such, including those involving the continued
indiscriminate use of heavy weapons and aerial bombardments, which has caused more than 500,000 fatalities,
including the killing of more than 17,000 children, the continued widespread and systematic gross violations, as well
as abuses, of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, including by the starvation of civilians as
a method of warfare and the use of chemical weapons, including chlorine gas, sarin and sulfur mustard, which are
prohibited under international law, and acts of violence that foment sectarian tensions by the Syrian regime against
the Syrian population,
Reiterating that the only sustainable solution to the current crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic is through an
inclusive and Syrian-led political process, under the auspices of the United Nations, that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people, and the establishment of a constitutional committee that would prepare the work for
free and fair elections and political transition in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), with a view to
establishing credible, inclusive and non‑sectarian governance, with the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women, welcoming the establishment of the Constitutional Committee, reaffirming in this regard the important role
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, stressing the importance of their full
participation and involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security and the need to
increase their role in decision-making with regard to conflict prevention and resolution, and recognizing the work
carried out by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria to that end,
Welcoming the efforts of the Special Envoy in establishing the Constitutional Committee to advance United
Nations efforts to achieve a sustainable political solution to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic in line with
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), and recalling that pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015) a political solution
to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic also comprises free and fair elections, under the supervision of the United
Nations, to the satisfaction of the governance and to the highest international standards of transparency and
accountability, with all Syrians, including displaced persons and refugees, eligible to participate, as well as the
establishment of a neutral and safe environment,
Reconfirming its endorsement of the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012,760 endorsing the joint statement on
the outcome of the multilateral talks on Syria held in Vienna of 30 October 2015 and the statement of the International
Syria Support Group of 14 November 2015 (the Vienna statements) in pursuit of the full implementation of the
Geneva communiqué, facilitated by the Special Envoy, as the basis for a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
transition in order to end the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, and stressing that the Syrian people will decide the
future of the Syrian Arab Republic,
Noting with deep concern the culture of impunity for the most serious violations of international law and
violations and abuses of human rights law committed during the present conflict, which has provided a fertile ground
for further violations and abuses,
Emphasizing the importance of accountability for the most serious crimes committed during the conflict for
ensuring sustainable peace,
Recalling that, amid expressions of popular discontent over restrictions on the enjoyment of civil, political,
economic and social rights, civilian protests erupted in Dar’a in March 2011, and noting that the violent oppression
of civilian protests by the Syrian regime, which later escalated to the direct shelling of civilians, fuelled the escalation
of armed violence and violent extremist groups and terrorist groups,
Recalling also all relevant resolutions on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and the protection
of United Nations personnel, including its resolution 73/137 of 14 December 2018, as well as Security Council
resolutions on the protection of humanitarian personnel, including resolution 2175 (2014) of 29 August 2014, the
relevant statements by the President of the Security Council referring to the specific obligations under international
humanitarian law to respect and protect, in situations of armed conflict, medical personnel and humanitarian workers
who participate exclusively in medical duties, their means of transport, equipment, hospitals and facilities, and to
ensure that the wounded and sick receive, to the maximum extent practicable and with the least possible delay, the
medical care required, while also recalling that, under international law, deliberate attacks against hospitals and places

_______________
760

960

Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), annex II.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

where the sick and wounded are collected, provided that they are not targets, and attacks on buildings, materials, medical
units, means of transport and individuals using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949761
in accordance with international law relate to war crimes, and recalling the applicable rules of international humanitarian
law whereby no one should be punished for carrying out medical activities consistent with medical ethics,
Expressing grave concern at the indiscriminate use of force by the Syrian regime against civilians, which has
caused immense human suffering and fomented the spread of extremism and extremist groups and which
demonstrates the continuing failure of the Syrian regime to protect the population and implement the relevant
resolutions and decisions of United Nations bodies and has created a safe haven and operating environment for crimes
against humanity,
Expressing grave concern also at the remaining presence of extremism and violent extremist groups, terrorists
and terrorist groups, and strongly condemning all violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the Syrian Arab Republic by any party to the conflict, in particular so-called ISIL (also
known as Da’esh), the Nusrah Front, Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist groups, militias fighting on behalf of the regime,
and other violent extremist groups,
Noting with serious concern the observation of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic that non-State armed groups still resort to the use of force against civilians,
Reaffirming its condemnation in the strongest possible terms of the use of chemical weapons by anyone under
any circumstances, emphasizing that any use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time, by anyone, under any
circumstances is unacceptable and is and would be a violation of international law, and expressing its strong conviction
that those individuals responsible for the use of chemical weapons must and should be held accountable,
Condemning in the strongest possible terms the fact that chemical weapons have been used since 2012 in the
Syrian Arab Republic, including as reported by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in its reports of 2016 and 2017,762 concluding that the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces were responsible for the attacks which released toxic substances in Talmenes in 2014 and in Sarmin and
Qmenas in 2015, that ISIL (also known as Da’esh) used sulfur mustard in Marea in 2015 and in Umm Hawsh in 2016
and that the Syrian Arab Republic was responsible for the release of sarin at Khan Shaykhun in 2017, and accordingly
noting with great concern the reports of the fact-finding mission of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons regarding incidents in Ltamenah763 and Saraqib,764 as well as the final report regarding the incident
involving alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Duma,765 which concluded that there were reasonable grounds
to believe that the use of a toxic chemical as a weapon had taken place, and demanding that the perpetrators
immediately desist from any further use of chemical weapons,
Expressing support for the work carried out by the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic, welcoming its reports, strongly condemning the lack of cooperation by the Syrian regime with
the Commission of Inquiry, reiterating its decision to transmit the reports of the Commission of Inquiry to the Security
Council, expressing its appreciation to the Commission of Inquiry for its briefings to members of the Security Council,
and requesting that the Commission of Inquiry continue to brief the General Assembly and members of the Security
Council,
Welcoming the reports for 2018 and 2019 of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist
in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011766 and their consideration by the General Assembly, noting
with serious concern the observation of the Commission of Inquiry that, since March 2011, the Syrian regime has
conducted widespread attacks against the civilian population as a matter of policy, including targeted attacks on

_______________
761

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
See S/2016/738/Rev.1, S/2016/888 and S/2017/904.
763
See S/2017/931, annex, and S/2018/620, annex.
764
See S/2018/478, annex.
765
See S/2019/208, annex.
766
A/73/295, A/73/741 and A/74/313.
762

961

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

protected persons and objects, including medical facilities, personnel and transport and blocked humanitarian
convoys, as well as enforced disappearances, torture in detention, summary executions and other violations and
abuses, underscoring the need for those allegations to be examined and evidence to be collected and made available
for future accountability efforts, and recalling the United Nations decision and efforts to formally establish the board
of inquiry tasked with probing attacks that hit deconflicted civilian sites in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic,
Strongly condemning the reported killing of detainees in Syrian military intelligence facilities and the
widespread practice of enforced disappearance, arbitrary detention and the use of sexual and gender-based violence
and torture in detention centres referred to in the reports of the Commission of Inquiry, including, but not limited to,
Branch 215, Branch 227, Branch 235, Branch 251, the Air Force Intelligence Investigation Branch at Mazzah military
airport and Saydnaya prison, including the reported practice of mass hangings by the regime, as well as the reported
killing of detainees at military hospitals, including Tishrin and Harasta hospitals,
Recalling the statements made by the Secretary-General, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the special procedures of the Human Rights Council that crimes against humanity and war crimes are
likely to have been committed in the Syrian Arab Republic, noting the repeated encouragement by the High
Commissioner for the Security Council to refer the situation to the International Criminal Court, and regretting that a
draft resolution767 was not adopted notwithstanding broad support from Member States,
Calling for the immediate repeal of Law No. 10/2018, concerned about the Syrian regime’s infringement on the
housing, land and property of Syrians, particularly through the dispossession of displaced Syrians’ land and property
in the national legislation and similar measures, which would have a significant detrimental impact on the rights of
Syrians displaced by the conflict to claim their property and to return to their homes in a safe, voluntary and dignified
manner when the situation on the ground allows it,
Expressing concern that the implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2254 (2015), 2258 (2015), 2268 (2016), 2286 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018)
remains largely unfulfilled, and noting the urgent need to strengthen efforts to address the humanitarian situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic, including through protection of civilians and full, immediate, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access,
Recalling its commitment to Security Council resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), and 2253 (2015) of
17 December 2015,
Alarmed that more than 5.6 million refugees, including more than 3.8 million women and children, have been
forced to flee the Syrian Arab Republic and that 13 million people in the Syrian Arab Republic, of whom 6.2 million
are internally displaced, require urgent humanitarian assistance, which has resulted in an influx of Syrian refugees
into neighbouring countries, other countries in the region and beyond, and alarmed at the risk the situation presents to
regional and international stability,
Expressing its profound indignation at the death of more than 17,000 children and the many more injured since the
beginning of the peaceful protests in March 2011, and at all grave violations and abuses committed against children in
contravention of applicable international law, such as their recruitment and use, killing and maiming, sexual violence,
sexual exploitation and abuse, kidnapping and abductions, attacks on schools and hospitals, and denial of humanitarian
access, as well as their arbitrary arrest, detention, torture and ill-treatment and their use as human shields, and noting the
ongoing work of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
Recalling with serious concern the findings of the Commission of Inquiry in its report entitled “Out of sight, out
of mind: deaths in detention in the Syrian Arab Republic”, noting in this regard the issuing of death notifications of
detained individuals by the Syrian regime, which provides further indication of systematic violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law, and urging the regime to provide families with the remains of
their relatives whose fate has been disclosed, including those who have been summarily executed, to take all
appropriate measures immediately to protect the lives and rights of all persons currently detained or unaccounted for,
and to clarify the fate of those who remain missing or are still in custody in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2474 (2019) of 11 June 2019,

_______________
767

962

S/2014/348.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Expressing its deep appreciation for the significant efforts that have been made by neighbouring countries and
other countries in the region to accommodate Syrians, while acknowledging the increasing financial, socioeconomic
and political impact of the presence of large-scale refugee and displaced populations in those countries,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations and the League of Arab States and all diplomatic efforts to achieve
a political solution to the Syrian crisis based on the final communiqué of the Action Group for Syria of 30 June 2012760
and consistent with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015),
Expressing full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, with a view to
the protection of the civilian population and the full implementation of the Syrian political process that establishes
credible, inclusive and non-sectarian governance in accordance with the final communiqué and consistent with
Security Council resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2258 (2015), urging Syrian parties to engage constructively with the
Constitutional Committee in order to pave the way for the negotiation of a genuine political transition, noting with
appreciation the mediation efforts to facilitate the establishment of a ceasefire in the Syrian Arab Republic, as noted
by the Security Council in its resolution 2336 (2016), and supporting the efforts to end violence, while expressing
deep concern at the violations, demanding that all parties to the ceasefire in the Syrian Arab Republic respect their
commitments, and urging all Member States, especially the members of the International Syria Support Group, to use
their influence to ensure respect for those commitments and the full implementation of those resolutions, to support
efforts to create conditions for a durable and lasting ceasefire, which is essential to achieving a political solution to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, and to bring to an end the systematic, widespread and gross violations and abuses
of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law,
1. Strongly condemns the systematic, widespread and gross violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian law committed in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks in civilian areas and against civilian infrastructure, in particular attacks on
medical facilities and schools, which continue to claim civilian lives, and demands that all parties comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law;
2. Deplores and condemns in the strongest terms the continued armed violence by the Syrian regime against
its own people since the beginning of the peaceful protests in 2011, and demands that the Syrian regime immediately
put an end to all attacks against civilians, take all feasible precautions to avoid, and in any event to minimize, incidental
loss of civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects and meet its responsibilities to protect the Syrian
population and immediately implement Security Council resolutions 2254 (2015), 2258 (2015) and 2286 (2016);
3. Urges all Member States, especially the members of the International Syria Support Group, to create
conditions for continued negotiations for a political solution to the Syrian conflict, under the auspices of the United
Nations, by working towards the nationwide ceasefire, to enable full, immediate and safe humanitarian access and to
lead to the release of those arbitrarily detained and ensure the assessment of the number of people who remain in
prisons, consistent with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), as only a durable and inclusive political solution to
the conflict can bring an end to the systematic, widespread and gross violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian law;
4. Strongly condemns any use of chemical weapons, such as chlorine, sarin and sulfur mustard, by any party
to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, emphasizes that the development, production, acquisition, stockpiling,
retention, transfer or use of chemical weapons anywhere, at any time, by anyone, under any circumstances, is
unacceptable, constitutes one of the most serious crimes under international law, and is a violation of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction768 and Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), and expresses its strong conviction that individuals
responsible for the development, production, acquisition, stockpiling, retention, transfer or use of chemical weapons
must and should be held accountable;
5. Also strongly condemns the continued use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular
the chlorine attack on 4 February 2018 in Saraqib, the attack on 7 April 2018 in Duma and the chlorine attack on
19 May 2019 on Latakia Province, which killed dozens of men, women and children and severely injured hundreds
more, recalls the decision of the Security Council that the Syrian Arab Republic shall not use, develop, produce,

_______________
768

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.

963

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

otherwise acquire, stockpile or retain chemical weapons, or transfer, directly or indirectly, chemical weapons to other
States or non-State actors, recalls the relevant reports of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism, and demands that the Syrian regime and so-called ISIL (also known
as Da’esh) immediately desist from any further use of chemical weapons;
6. Expresses grave concern at the chemical weapons attack in Duma on 7 April 2018, and notes the report
of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic that a vast body of evidence
suggested that chlorine had been dropped by helicopter on a residential building, as well as the report of the factfinding mission of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on that attack,765 in which it was stated
that the evaluation and analysis of all the information gathered by the mission provided reasonable grounds to believe
that the use of a toxic chemical as a weapon had taken place;
7. Calls for a significant enhancement of the verification measures of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, welcomes the establishment and operationalization of the Investigation and Identification Team
of the Organisation, which is authorized to identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons, looks forward to
the first report to be issued by the Team, which will be an important first step towards the ultimate goal of bringing
the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons to justice, and in this regard also welcomes the memorandum of
understanding concluded between the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons;
8. Welcomes the issuance of the Secretary-General’s bulletin on the records and archives of the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism,769 and calls upon the
Secretary-General to ensure that the relevant materials are processed expeditiously to be shared with the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism without any further delays;
9. Demands that the Syrian regime adhere fully to its international obligations, including the requirement
that it declare in full its chemical weapons programme, with special emphasis on the need for the Syrian Arab Republic
to urgently resolve the verified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies pertaining to its declaration in respect of the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction and to eliminate its chemical weapons programme in its entirety, as referred to in the report of the
Director General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons dated 22 February 2016770 indicating
that the Technical Secretariat is at present unable to verify fully that the declaration and related submissions of the
Syrian Arab Republic are accurate and complete, as required by the Convention and decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 of the
Executive Council of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons;771
10. Requests additional procedures for stringent verification pursuant to article IV, paragraph 8, and article V,
paragraph 10, of the Convention, in order to ensure the complete destruction of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme and prevent any further use of chemical weapons;
11. Deplores and condemns in the strongest terms the continued widespread and systematic gross violations
and abuses of human rights and fundamental freedoms and all violations of international humanitarian law by the
Syrian regime, the government-affiliated militias and those who fight on their behalf, including those deliberately
targeting civilians or civilian objects, including attacks on schools, hospitals and places of worship, with heavy
weapons, aerial bombardments, cluster munitions, ballistic missiles, barrel bombs, chemical or other weapons and
other force against civilians, as well as the starvation of the civilian population as a method of warfare, attacks on
schools, hospitals and places of worship, massacres, arbitrary executions, extrajudicial killings, the killing and
persecution of peaceful protesters, human rights defenders and journalists, individuals and members of communities
on the basis of their religion or belief, arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances, violations of human rights,
including those of women and children, forced displacement of members of minority groups and of those opposed to

_______________
769

ST/SGB/2019/4.
EC-81/HP/DG.1.
771
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), annex I.
770

964

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the Syrian regime, unlawful interference with access to medical treatment, failure to respect and protect medical
personnel, torture, systematic sexual and gender-based violence, including rape in detention, and ill-treatment;
12. Condemns unequivocally all attacks and violence against journalists and media workers by the Syrian
regime, the government-affiliated militias and non-State armed groups, urges all parties to respect the professional
independence and rights of journalists, and recalls in this regard that journalists and media workers engaged in
dangerous professional missions in areas of armed conflict shall be considered civilians and shall be protected as such,
provided that they take no action adversely affecting their status as civilians;
13. Strongly condemns all violations and abuses of human rights and all violations of international
humanitarian law, including the killing and persecution of individuals and members of communities on the basis of
their religion or belief, by armed extremist groups, as well as any human rights abuses or violations of international
humanitarian law by non-State armed groups, including Hizbullah and those designated as terrorist groups by the
Security Council;
14. Deplores and strongly condemns the terrorist acts and violence committed against civilians by so-called
ISIL (also known as Da’esh), the Nusrah Front (also known as Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham), Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist
groups, terrorist groups designated by the Security Council and other violent extremist groups and their continued
gross, systematic and widespread abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, and
reaffirms that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, gender, ethnicity, nationality or
civilization;
15. Condemns in the strongest terms the gross and systematic abuse of women’s and children’s rights by all
terrorist groups and armed groups, including so‑called ISIL (also known as Da’esh), in particular the killing of women
and girls, sexual and gender-based violence, including the enslavement and sexual exploitation and abuse of women
and girls and the forced recruitment, use and abduction of children;
16. Condemns the reported forced displacements of the population in the Syrian Arab Republic, including
forced displacement of civilians as a result of local truce agreements, as highlighted by the Commission of Inquiry,
and the alarming impact thereof on the demography of the country, which amounts to a strategy of radical
demographic change initiated by the Syrian regime, its allies and other non‑State actors, calls upon all parties
concerned to cease immediately all activities related to these actions, including any activities that may amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity, notes that impunity for such crimes is unacceptable, reaffirms that those
responsible for such breaches of international law, must be brought to justice, and supports efforts to collect evidence
in view of future legal action;
17. Emphasizes the importance of creating conditions conducive to voluntary, safe, dignified and informed
movements of internally displaced persons within the Syrian Arab Republic, and strongly urges all parties to work
with the United Nations to ensure that any such movements are in line with the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement,772 and that displaced persons receive the information they need to make informed and voluntary
decisions about their movement and safety;
18. Reminds the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic of its obligations under the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,773 including its obligation to take effective
measures to prevent acts of torture in any territory under its jurisdiction, and calls upon all States parties to the
Convention to comply with any relevant obligations under the Convention, including with respect to the principle of
extradite or prosecute contained in article 7 of the Convention;
19. Encourages the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced persons and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to remain seized of the urgent human rights and humanitarian
situation of internally displaced persons in the Syrian Arab Republic, with a view to helping Member States, the
United Nations, including the High-level Panel on Internal Displacement established by the Secretary General, and
other humanitarian and human rights actors to improve their responses to internal displacement in the Syrian Arab
Republic, with a focus on identifying durable solutions for displaced persons, reducing the significant gap between

_______________
772
773

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.

965

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

needs and available resources, improving the collection and coordination of data on displacement, including on
displaced children, and providing more effective assistance through well-planned programmes;
20. Strongly condemns the reported persistent and widespread use of sexual violence, abuse and exploitation,
including in government detention centres, including those run by the intelligence agencies, and notes that such acts
may constitute violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human rights
law, and in this regard expresses deep concern at the prevailing climate of impunity for sexual and gender-based
violence;
21. Also strongly condemns all violations and abuses committed against children in contravention of
applicable international law, such as their recruitment and use, killing and maiming, rape and all other forms of sexual
violence, abductions, denial of humanitarian access for children, and attacks on civilian objects, including schools and
hospitals, as well as their arbitrary arrest, unlawful detention, torture and ill-treatment and their use as human shields;
22. Reaffirms the Syrian regime’s responsibility for the systematic use of enforced disappearances, takes note
of the assessment of the Commission of Inquiry that the Syrian regime’s use of enforced disappearances amounts to
a crime against humanity, and condemns the targeted disappearances of young men and the exploitation of ceasefires
as an opportunity to forcibly recruit and arbitrarily detain them;
23. Demands that the Syrian regime, in accordance with its obligations under relevant provisions of
international human rights law, including the right to life and the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health, promote non-discriminatory access to health services and respect and protect
medical and health personnel from obstruction, threats and physical attacks;
24. Strongly condemns all attacks on medical and health personnel, their means of transport and equipment,
as well as on hospitals and other medical facilities, deplores the long-term consequences of such attacks for the
population and health-care systems of the Syrian Arab Republic, and reaffirms that humanitarian workers and their
means of transport, equipment and facilities must be protected in accordance with international humanitarian law;
25. Urges all parties to the conflict to develop effective measures to prevent acts of violence, attacks and
threats of attacks against sick and wounded persons, internally displaced persons, as well as medical personnel and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, hospitals and other medical facilities, including
through the conduct of full, prompt, impartial and effective investigations to hold those responsible for any such acts
to account;
26. Expresses its profound concern about the findings contained in the report of the Commission of Inquiry
regarding the displacement of more than half of the 2.5 million people residing in Idlib who have been displaced since
the onset of conflict, often multiple times, stresses that the situation in Idlib is of particular concern, expresses its
support for the current agreement to cease hostilities in order to avoid a further humanitarian catastrophe, and calls
upon the guarantors of that agreement to ensure that the ceasefire is upheld and that access is granted in a rapid,
unimpeded and sustainable manner;
27. Demands that the Syrian regime cooperate fully with the Commission of Inquiry, including by granting it
immediate, full and unhindered access throughout the Syrian Arab Republic;
28. Strongly condemns the intervention in the Syrian Arab Republic of all foreign terrorist fighters and those
foreign organizations and foreign forces fighting on behalf of the Syrian regime, expresses deep concern that their
involvement further exacerbates the deteriorating situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, including the human rights
and humanitarian situation, which has a serious negative impact on the region, and further demands that all foreign
terrorist fighters, and those who are fighting in support of the Syrian regime, including all militias sponsored by foreign
Governments, must immediately withdraw from the Syrian Arab Republic;
29. Demands that all parties immediately put an end to all violations and abuses of international human rights
law and violations of international humanitarian law, recalls, in particular, the obligation under international
humanitarian law to distinguish between civilians and combatants and the prohibition against indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks and all attacks against civilians and civilian objects, further demands that all parties to the
conflict take all appropriate steps to protect civilians, in compliance with international law, including by desisting from
attacks directed against civilian objects, such as medical centres, schools and water stations, and refrain from
militarizing such facilities, seek to avoid establishing military positions in densely populated areas and enable the
966

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

evacuation of the wounded and all civilians who wish to leave areas of conflict, including besieged areas, and recalls
in this regard that the Syrian regime bears primary responsibility for protecting its population;
30. Condemns in the strongest terms all attacks on protected objects, including indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks and those which may constitute a war crime, taking place in the Syrian Arab Republic, and
requests the Commission of Inquiry to continue to investigate all such acts, and demands that the Syrian regime meet
its responsibility to protect the Syrian population;
31. Demands that the Syrian regime immediately cease any attacks on civilians, any disproportionate attacks
and any indiscriminate use of weapons in populated areas, and recalls in this regard the obligation to respect
international humanitarian law in all circumstances;
32. Emphasizes the need for accountability for crimes involving breaches of international law, in particular of
international humanitarian law and human rights law, some of which may constitute war crimes or crimes against
humanity, committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, through fair and independent investigations and
prosecutions at the domestic or international level;
33. Urges all Member States and, in particular, parties to the conflict to cooperate fully with the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism, including through the provision of relevant information and documentation,
stresses its mandate to closely cooperate with the Commission of Inquiry, also urges the Mechanism to make a
particular effort to ensure consultation and cooperation with Syrian civil society organizations by concluding
cooperation frameworks, and requests the United Nations system as a whole to enhance cooperation with the
Mechanism and to promptly respond to any request, including access to all information and documentation, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 71/248;
34. Welcomes the inclusion of the full funding for the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism in
the budget proposal of the Secretary-General for 2020, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 73/182, and
emphasizes the need to fully implement its previous decisions on the funding of the Mechanism in order to ensure
that the Mechanism can operate at its full capacity as soon as possible;
35. Emphasizes the need to ensure that all those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law
or violations and abuses of human rights law are held to account through appropriate, fair and independent domestic
or international criminal justice mechanisms, in accordance with the principle of complementarity, stresses the need
to pursue practical steps towards this goal, and for that reason encourages the Security Council to take appropriate
action to ensure accountability, noting the important role that the International Criminal Court can play in this regard;
36. Welcomes the efforts by States to investigate conduct in the Syrian Arab Republic and to prosecute crimes
within their jurisdiction committed in the Syrian Arab Republic, encourages them to continue to do so and to share
relevant information between States in accordance with their national legislation and international law, and also
encourages other States to consider doing the same;
37. Urgently requests the convening of a high-level panel discussion, funded by voluntary contributions, led
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights, the Commission of Inquiry and Syrian
civil society to brief the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the situation of human rights in the Syrian
Arab Republic, and encourages United Nations monitoring and reporting to help this panel to further document
violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human rights, including those that may
amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes, to provide recommendations to facilitate improvements in civilian
protection and accountability measures, and to feature witness testimony of Syrian human rights defenders and other
Syrian voices through appropriate and safe means;
38. Deplores the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, and urges the international
community to assume its responsibility for providing urgent financial support to enable the host countries and
communities to respond to the growing humanitarian needs of Syrian refugees, while emphasizing the principle of
burden-sharing;
39. Calls upon all members of the international community, including all donors, to fulfil their previous
pledges and continue to provide much-needed support to the United Nations, its specialized agencies and other
humanitarian actors to provide humanitarian assistance to the millions of Syrians who are in need, including those
displaced both internally and in host countries and communities;
967

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

40. Welcomes the efforts of those countries outside the region that have put in place measures and policies to
assist and host Syrian refugees, encourages them to do more, also encourages other States outside the region to
consider implementing similar measures and policies, with a view to providing Syrian refugees with protection and
humanitarian assistance, and acknowledges the need to improve the conditions on the ground to facilitate the return
of refugees in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner to their place of origin or choice;
41. Strongly condemns the intentional denial of humanitarian assistance to civilians, from whatever quarter,
and in particular the denial of medical assistance and the withdrawal of water and sanitation services to civilian areas,
which has recently worsened, stressing that the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare is prohibited under
international law, and noting especially the primary responsibility of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in
this regard;
42. Demands that the Syrian regime and all other parties to the conflict ensure the full, immediate, unimpeded
and sustained access of the United Nations and humanitarian actors, including to besieged and hard-to-reach areas
such as Rukban, from Damascus, that the Syrian regime cease to impede the ability of the United Nations and
humanitarian actors to move through the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic and beyond, and that all parties to
the conflict preserve the Faysh Khabur border crossing and allow sustained deliveries of humanitarian assistance to
persons in need across the Syrian Arab Republic, including through commercial routes, consistent with Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2254 (2015), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018);
43. Strongly condemns practices including abduction, hostage-taking, arbitrary and incommunicado
detention, torture, the murder of innocent civilians and summary executions carried out by non-State armed groups
and terrorist groups designated by the Security Council, most notably so-called ISIL (also known as Da’esh) and the
Nusrah Front (also known as Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham), and underlines that such acts may amount to crimes against
humanity;
44. Deplores the suffering and torture in detention centres throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, as depicted
in the reports of the Commission of Inquiry and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as well as in the evidence presented by “Caesar” in January 2014, and in the reports of widespread killing of
detainees by Syrian military intelligence;
45. Strongly condemns the reported killing of detainees in Syrian military intelligence facilities, and calls upon
the Syrian regime to release all unlawfully held detainees, including women, children and the elderly, and to facilitate
information about those who died while in detention by the Syrian regime, as and return their remains, with full
transparency regarding what happened to these individuals;
46. Calls for the appropriate international monitoring bodies to be granted access to detainees in government
prisons and detention centres, including all military facilities referred to in the reports of the Commission of Inquiry;
47. Demands that all parties take all appropriate steps to protect civilians and persons hors de combat,
including persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and stresses that, in this regard,
the primary responsibility to protect the population lies with the Syrian regime;
48. Strongly condemns the damage and destruction of the cultural heritage of the Syrian Arab Republic, in
particular that of Palmyra and Aleppo, and the organized looting and trafficking of Syrian cultural property, as outlined
by the Security Council in its resolutions 2199 (2015) of 12 February 2015 and 2347 (2017) of 24 March 2017,
affirms that attacks intentionally directed against historic monuments may amount to war crimes, and underlines the
need to bring the perpetrators of such crimes to justice;
49. Notes with concern the recent escalation of violence in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, which
has seriously undermined the stability and security of the whole region, with a risk of further undermining the political
process, eroded progress in the fight against ISIL (also known as Da’esh), worsened the humanitarian situation and
led to additional widespread displacement, and further emphasizes that any attempt to bring about demographic
change in the region would be unacceptable;
50. Stresses the situation of particular concern in the northern part of the province of Aleppo, as well as Idlib,
strongly condemns the attacks on civilians and first responders and civilian infrastructure where ongoing violence,
including airstrikes, continues to cause death and injury among civilians and first responders, as well as devastating
968

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

damage to civilian infrastructure, including health-care and educational facilities, and welcomes the establishment of
the United Nations board of inquiry mandated to investigate the destruction of and damage to facilities on the United
Nations deconfliction list and United Nations-supported facilities;
51. Urges all parties to the conflict to take all appropriate steps to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel, personnel of the specialized agencies and all other personnel engaged in
humanitarian relief activities, including national and locally recruited personnel, as required by international
humanitarian law, without prejudice to their freedom of movement and access, stresses the need not to impede or
hinder these efforts, recalls that attacks on humanitarian workers may amount to war crimes, and notes in this regard
that the Security Council has reaffirmed that it will take further measures in the event of non‑compliance with its
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2234 (2015), 2258 (2015), 2286 (2016), 2393 (2017),
2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018) by any Syrian party;
52. Urges the international community to support the leadership and full, effective and meaningful
participation of women in all efforts aimed at finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis, as envisaged
by the Security Council in its resolutions 1325 (2000), 2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013 and 2242 (2015)
of 13 October 2015;
53. Reaffirms that there can only be a political solution to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, reiterates
its commitment to the national unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, and urges the parties to the
conflict to abstain from actions that may contribute to the continuing deterioration of the human rights, security and
humanitarian situation, in order to reach a genuine political transition, based on the final communiqué of the Action
Group for Syria of 30 June 2012,760 consistent with Security Council resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016), that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people for a civil, democratic and pluralistic State, with the full and
effective participation of women, where there is no room for sectarianism or discrimination on ethnic, religious,
linguistic, gender or any other grounds, and where all persons receive equal protection, regardless of gender, religion
or ethnicity, and further demands that all parties work urgently towards the comprehensive implementation of the final
communiqué, including through the establishment of an inclusive transitional governing body with full executive
powers, which shall be formed on the basis of mutual consent while ensuring the continuity of governmental
institutions.
RESOLUTION 74/170
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/400, para. 29)774

74/170. Integrating sport into youth crime prevention and criminal justice strategies
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,775 and recalling the shared commitment of Member States to upholding the
rule of law and preventing and countering crime in all its forms and manifestations,
Reaffirming also the cross-cutting nature of crime prevention and criminal justice issues and the consequent
need to better integrate those issues into the wider agenda of the United Nations in order to enhance system-wide
coordination,
Recalling the relevant United Nations standards and norms in the area of crime prevention and criminal justice,
including the Guidelines for the Prevention of Crime,776 the guidelines for cooperation and technical assistance in the
field of urban crime prevention,777 the United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (the

_______________
774

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee on the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council.
775
Resolution 217 A (III).
776
Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/13, annex.
777
Economic and Social Council resolution 1995/9, annex.

969

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Riyadh Guidelines),778 the updated Model Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence against
Women in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,779 the United Nations Model Strategies and Practical
Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,780
the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules)781 and the
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules),782
Recalling also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, by which it adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and recognizing, inter alia, that sport is an important enabler of sustainable development,
Recalling further Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption
resolution 7/8 of 10 November 2017 on corruption in sport,783 in which, inter alia, the Conference expressed concern
that corruption could undermine the potential of sport and its role in contributing to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets, contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Welcoming the International Conference on Safeguarding Sport from Corruption, which was held in Vienna on
5 and 6 June 2018, and also welcoming the follow-up conference, held in Vienna on 3 and 4 September 2019,
Recognizing the importance of protecting children and young people in sport from potential exploitation and
abuse so as to ensure a safe environment that supports their healthy development,
Recalling its resolution 72/6 of 13 November 2017 on building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal, and, in this connection, acknowledging the major role of the United Nations system and its country
programmes and the role of Member States in promoting human development through sport and physical education,
Recalling also article 31 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,784 in which States parties recognized the
right of the child to leisure and to engage in play and in recreational activities, and recalling further the Declaration
and Plan of Action contained in the document entitled “A world fit for children”,785 in which Member States
committed to promoting physical, mental and emotional health among children through play and sports,
Recalling further the outcome document of the thirtieth special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Our
joint commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem”,786 in which Member States
recommended providing access for children and youth to regular sports and cultural activities, with a view to
promoting healthy lives and lifestyles and as a measure to prevent drug abuse, and recognizing the relevance of this
measure for the enhancement of crime prevention and criminal justice more widely,
Underscoring the role of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice as the principal
policymaking body of the United Nations in the field of crime prevention,
Expressing concern about the risks to youth posed by corruption and crime in sport and about the large number
of children and youth who may or may not be in conflict with the law but who are abandoned, neglected, abused,
exploited or exposed to drug abuse and who are in marginal circumstances and in general at social risk,
Convinced of the importance of preventing the involvement of children and youth in criminal activities by
supporting their development and strengthening their resilience to antisocial and delinquent behaviour, of supporting
the rehabilitation of children and youth in conflict with the law and their reintegration into society, of protecting child
victims and witnesses, including by preventing revictimization, and of addressing the needs of children and youth in

_______________
778

Resolution 45/112, annex.
Resolution 65/228, annex.
780
Resolution 69/194, annex.
781
Resolution 40/33, annex.
782
Resolution 70/175, annex.
783
See CAC/COSP/2017/14, sect. I.A.
784
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
785
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
786
Resolution S-30/1, annex.
779

970

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

vulnerable situations, and convinced also that holistic crime prevention and criminal justice responses should take into
account human rights and the best interests of the child,
Recognizing that sports and physical activity have the power to change perceptions, counter prejudices and
improve behaviour, as well as to inspire people, break down racial and political barriers, promote gender equality and
combat discrimination,
Stressing that the rehabilitation and social reintegration of persons deprived of their liberty as a result of criminal
conduct are among the essential aims of the criminal justice system and that the Nelson Mandela Rules and other
relevant standards and norms, in particular the Beijing Rules and the United Nations Rules for the Protection of
Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty,787 recommend that authorities not only offer programmes related to education,
vocational training and work, as well as other forms of assistance that are appropriate and available, including those
of a remedial, moral, spiritual, social and health- and sports-based nature, but also pay special attention to young
prisoners in this regard,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Strengthening the global
framework for leveraging sport for development and peace”,788 which contains an update to the United Nations Action
Plan on Sport for Development and Peace,789
Recognizing the complementary nature of youth crime prevention and criminal justice efforts and work on sport
for development and peace, and recognizing also that such initiatives can benefit from more coherent, integrated
approaches at all levels, with an emphasis on communities, families, children and youth, including those in vulnerable
situations,
Encouraging partnerships among all appropriate levels of government and relevant stakeholders within civil
society in order to strengthen and sustain effective crime prevention strategies, programmes and initiatives, as
appropriate, and promote a culture of peace and non-violence,
Acknowledging the important advocacy role that can be played by international sports federations in bridging
the policy priorities of sports administrators, the United Nations and national and municipal governments, and
acknowledging also the deepened relationship between the International Olympic Committee and the United Nations
on sport for development and peace,
1. Reaffirms that sport is an important enabler of sustainable development, and recognizes the growing
contribution of sport to the realization of development, justice and peace through its promotion of tolerance and respect
and the contributions it makes to the empowerment of women and of young people, individuals and communities, as
well as to health, education and social inclusion objectives;
2. Invites Member States, entities of the United Nations system, the International Olympic Committee, the
International Paralympic Committee and other stakeholders, including sports-related organizations, federations and
associations, athletes, the media, civil society, academia and the private sector, to promote greater awareness and
action to reduce crime so as to contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development790
through sports-based initiatives, taking into account the importance of youth crime prevention and criminal justice
and the risks to youth posed by corruption and crime in sport, and to use sport as a tool to promote peace, justice and
dialogue during and beyond the period of the Olympic and Paralympic Games;
3. Invites the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to launch a global awareness-raising and
fundraising campaign during the 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Summer Games and the 2022 World Cup
competition to promote sport and sports-based learning as part of strategies aimed at addressing the risk factors of
youth crime and drug abuse and to provide assistance to requesting Member States in this area, and invites the national

_______________
787

Resolution 45/113, annex.
A/73/325.
789
See A/61/373.
790
Resolution 70/1.
788

971

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

organizing committees, the International Olympic Committee and the Fédération Internationale de Football
Association to work in close cooperation with the Office in this regard;
4. Encourages Member States to advance the integration of sport into cross-cutting crime prevention and
criminal justice strategies, policies and programmes, where appropriate and consistent with domestic law, on the basis
of reliable standards, indicators and benchmarks, and to ensure the monitoring and evaluation of such strategies,
policies and programmes;
5. Also encourages Member States to emphasize and advance the use of sport as a vehicle to promote crime
prevention and criminal justice and the rule of law, to realize gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls, to ensure the participation of everyone without discrimination of any kind and to promote tolerance, mutual
understanding and respect, which in turn reinforce peaceful and inclusive societies;
6. Welcomes the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice, particularly its efforts to promote sport in the context of youth crime and drug abuse prevention as a
vehicle for life-skills training, and its efforts to address the risk posed to youth by corruption and crime in sport,
including through the development of tools and the provision of technical assistance in the context of the Global
Programme for the Implementation of the Doha Declaration: Towards the Promotion of a Culture of Lawfulness, and
the Global Programme on Safeguarding Sport from Corruption and Crime;
7. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in line with its mandate and in close coordination
with Member States, as well as in cooperation with relevant international organizations and partners, to continue
identifying and disseminating information and good practices on the use of sport and sports-based learning in
connection with crime and violence prevention, including the prevention of violence against women and children, as
well as in the context of the social reintegration of offenders, and to provide advice and support to policymakers and
practitioners;
8. Calls upon Member States to strengthen community-based support measures for youth to address risk
factors of crime and violence, and encourages Member States to provide sport and recreational facilities and
programmes in this regard;
9. Encourages Member States, in cooperation with relevant stakeholders, to use sports-based activities more
widely to promote primary, secondary and tertiary prevention of youth crime and the social reintegration of young
offenders, as well as to prevent recidivism by them, and, in this regard, to promote and facilitate effective research,
monitoring and evaluation of relevant initiatives, including gang-related initiatives, to assess their impact;
10. Invites Member States to consider the development of clear policy frameworks within which sports-based
initiatives can operate to effect positive change in the fields of crime prevention and criminal justice;
11. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to convene an expert group meeting, in close
coordination with Member States and in collaboration with all relevant United Nations entities, in particular the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal
justice programme network and sports organizations such as the International Olympic Committee and the Fédération
Internationale de Football Association, to examine effective ways and means of integrating sport into youth crime
prevention and criminal justice, building upon its existing programmes and taking into account the Sustainable
Development Goals and other relevant United Nations action plans, standards and norms, with a view to analysing
and compiling a set of best practices that cater to various stakeholders and enhance system-wide coordination, and to
present a report to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice for consideration at its twenty-ninth
session, as well as to the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice for its
information, and in this connection welcomes the offer of the Government of Thailand to act as host for that expert
group meeting in 2019;
12. Invites the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network to
consider including in their work programmes the issue of integrating sport into youth crime prevention and criminal
justice, noting the efforts of Member States to achieve the relevant Sustainable Development Goals;

972

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

13. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide information
to the Secretary-General on the implementation of the present resolution as a possible contribution to his report to the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the implementation of resolution 73/24 of 3 December 2018 on sport
as an enabler of sustainable development;
14. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for these purposes in
accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations.
RESOLUTION 74/171
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/400, para. 29)791

74/171. Follow-up to the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and
preparations for the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
The General Assembly,
Emphasizing the responsibility assumed by the United Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal
justice in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 155 C (VII) of 13 August 1948 and General
Assembly resolution 415 (V) of 1 December 1950,
Acknowledging that the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice, as major
intergovernmental forums, have influenced national policies and practices and promoted international cooperation in
that field by facilitating the exchange of views and experience, mobilizing public opinion and identifying policy
options at the national, regional and international levels,
Recognizing the significant contributions of the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal
justice in promoting the exchange of experience in research, law and policy development and the identification of
emerging trends and issues in crime prevention and criminal justice among States, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and individual experts representing various professions and disciplines,
Recalling its resolution 56/119 of 19 December 2001 on the role, function, periodicity and duration of the
United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, in which it stipulated the
guidelines in accordance with which, beginning in 2005, the congresses, pursuant to paragraphs 29 and 30 of the
statement of principles and programme of action of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme,792 should be held,
Recalling also its resolution 70/174 of 17 December 2015 and its resolutions 71/206 of 19 December 2016,
72/192 of 19 December 2017 and 73/184 of 17 December 2018 on the follow-up to the Thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations for the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,
Recalling further, in particular, that in its resolution 73/184 it decided to hold the Fourteenth Congress in Kyoto,
Japan, from 20 to 27 April 2020, with pre-Congress consultations to be held on 19 April 2020,
Mindful that in its resolution 73/184 it decided that the high-level segment of the Fourteenth Congress would
be held during the first two days of the Congress in order to allow Heads of State or Government and government
ministers to focus on the main theme of the Congress793 and to enhance the possibility of generating useful
feedback,

_______________
791

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee on the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council.
792
Resolution 46/152, annex.
793
“Advancing crime prevention, criminal justice and the rule of law: towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda”.

973

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Mindful also that in its resolution 73/184 it decided that, in accordance with its resolution 56/119, the Fourteenth
Congress would adopt a single declaration, to be submitted to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice for its consideration,
Recognizing the efforts made by the Government of Japan to ensure an effective preparatory process for the
Fourteenth Congress,
Noting with appreciation the holding of the European Regional Preparatory Meeting for the first time since 1995,
Welcoming with appreciation the decision of the Government of Japan, building upon the initiative taken by the
host country of the Thirteenth Congress, to organize the Youth Forum, which is to precede the Fourteenth Congress,
1. Invites Governments to consider taking into account the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges
and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public Participation794 when formulating
legislation and policy directives and to make all efforts, where appropriate, to implement the principles contained
therein, in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Invites Governments and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to inform the
Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice about their activities aimed at the
implementation of the Doha Declaration with a view to providing guidance on the formulation of legislation, policies
and programmes in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice at the national and international levels, and to
that end requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report on the subject, to be submitted to the Fourteenth Congress
for its consideration;
3.

Notes with appreciation the progress made thus far in the preparations for the Fourteenth Congress;

4. Welcomes the work undertaken by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in following up on the
implementation of the Doha Declaration;
5.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General;795

6. Also takes note with appreciation of the discussion guide prepared by the Secretary-General, in
cooperation with the institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network, for
the regional preparatory meetings and for the Fourteenth Congress;796
7. Welcomes the regional preparatory meetings, which were held in all five regions and at which the overall
theme of the Fourteenth Congress was examined, together with the substantive items on the agenda and the workshop
topics, and takes note of the outcomes, to be taken into account during the preparations for and the deliberations of
the Congress;
8. Invites Member States to consider, as part of the overall theme and substantive agenda items to be
discussed at the Fourteenth Congress, focusing on the work of practitioners, to prioritize strengthening international
cooperation and capacity-building and to highlight public-private partnership in efforts related to crime prevention,
criminal justice and enhancing the rule of law;
9. Requests the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, in accordance with its resolution
73/184, to begin to prepare, at intersessional meetings to be held well in advance of the Fourteenth Congress, a
structured, short and concise draft declaration with a robust overarching political message addressing the main topics
to be discussed at the Congress, taking into account the outcomes of the regional preparatory meetings, consultations
with relevant organizations and entities and the relevant discussions held in preparation for the Congress, as well as
the mandate and objectives of the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice;
10. Encourages Member States to finalize their negotiation of the Kyoto declaration in a timely manner prior
to the commencement of the Fourteenth Congress;

_______________
794

Resolution 70/174, annex.
E/CN.15/2019/11.
796
A/CONF.234/PM.1.
795

974

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

11. Emphasizes the importance of the workshops to be held during the Fourteenth Congress, and invites
Member States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other relevant entities to provide
financial, organizational and technical support to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and to the institutes
of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network for the preparations for the
workshops, including the preparation and circulation of relevant background material;
12. Invites Member States to include in their delegations panellists and experts who may contribute their
substantive expertise to the workshops and thus enable active and meaningful discussions during those workshops;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, subject to the availability of extrabudgetary resources, to
facilitate the participation of developing countries in the workshops, and reiterates its encouragement to States, the
institutes of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme network, other concerned entities
and the Secretary-General to work together in order to ensure that the workshops are well focused and achieve
practical results, leading to technical cooperation ideas and projects and documents for enhancing bilateral and
multilateral technical assistance activities in crime prevention and criminal justice;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to make available the resources necessary to ensure the participation of
the least developed countries in the Fourteenth Congress, in accordance with past practice;
15. Encourages Governments to make preparations for the Fourteenth Congress at an early stage by all
appropriate means, including, where appropriate, by establishing national preparatory committees, with a view to
contributing to a focused and productive discussion on the topics and to participating actively in the organization and
conduct of the workshops, by submitting national position papers on the various substantive items of the agenda and
by encouraging contributions from the academic community and relevant scientific institutions;
16. Invites Member States to send representatives to the Fourteenth Congress of the highest appropriate level,
for example Heads of State or Government or government ministers and attorneys general, to make statements in the
high-level segment on the theme and substantive items of the Congress and to participate actively in its proceedings
by sending legal and policy experts with special training and practical experience in crime prevention and criminal
justice;
17. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to facilitate the organization of ancillary meetings of
non-governmental and professional organizations participating in the Fourteenth Congress, in accordance with past
practice, as well as meetings of professional and geographical interest groups, and to take appropriate measures to
encourage the participation of the academic and research community in the Congress;
18. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to encourage the participation of representatives from
relevant entities of the United Nations system in the Fourteenth Congress, bearing in mind the main theme, agenda
items and workshop topics of the Congress;
19. Welcomes the plan for the documentation of the Fourteenth Congress, prepared by the Secretary-General
in consultation with the extended Bureau of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice;797
20. Also welcomes the appointment by the Secretary-General of a Secretary-General and an Executive
Secretary of the Fourteenth Congress, who will perform their functions under the rules of procedure for United
Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare an overview of the state of crime and criminal justice
worldwide for presentation at the Fourteenth Congress;
22. Requests the Commission to give high priority at its twenty-ninth session to considering the declaration
of the Fourteenth Congress, with a view to recommending, through the Economic and Social Council, appropriate
follow-up by the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure proper follow-up to the present resolution and to report thereon,
through the Commission, to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session.

_______________
797

E/CN.15/2019/11, sect. II.D.

975

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/172
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/400, para. 29)798

74/172. Education for Justice and the rule of law in the context of sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, which are the indispensable foundation of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, and reiterating its
determination to foster strict respect for them and to establish a just and lasting peace all over the world,
Reaffirming also the right of everyone to education, which is enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights799 and is recognized by States parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,800
the Convention on the Rights of the Child,801 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,802 the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities803 and other relevant instruments,
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, as set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,804 are integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development, and
acknowledging the importance of taking measures to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting
lifelong learning opportunities for all, including expanded opportunities for all children, particularly girls, to access
quality education, as well as the need to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide
access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels,
Recognizing the important and positive contribution of young people to efforts to maintain and promote peace
and the rule of law,
Reaffirming the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United
Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels, and Public Participation,805 in which Member States emphasized that education for all children
and youth, including the eradication of illiteracy, was fundamental to the prevention of crime and corruption and to
the promotion of the rule of law and human rights while respecting cultural identities, and stressed the fundamental
role of youth participation in crime prevention efforts,
Taking note of the Incheon Declaration: Education 2030 – towards inclusive and equitable quality education
and lifelong learning for all, adopted at the World Education Forum 2015, held in Incheon, Republic of Korea, from
19 to 22 May 2015,806 which affirmed the understanding of education as a main driver of development that is essential
for peace, tolerance, human fulfilment and sustainable development, as well as key to achieving full employment and
poverty eradication,
Acknowledging the importance of working to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education at all levels –
early childhood, primary, secondary, tertiary, adult and distance education, including technical and vocational training
– so that all people may have access to lifelong learning opportunities that help them to acquire the knowledge and
skills needed to access opportunities to participate fully in society and contribute to sustainable development,

_______________
798

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee on the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council.
799
Resolution 217 A (III).
800
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
801
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
802
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
803
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
804
Resolution 70/1.
805
Resolution 70/174, annex.
806
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World Education Forum 2015, Incheon,
Republic of Korea, 19–22 May 2015 (Paris, 2015).

976

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Reiterates its invitation to Governments to take into consideration the Doha Declaration on Integrating
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic
Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public Participation,805
adopted by the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, when formulating
legislation and policy directives and to make every effort, where appropriate, to implement the principles contained
therein, in conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Recalls the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,804 in which Member States committed themselves
to the Sustainable Development Goals and targets and to ensuring that all learners acquired the knowledge and skills
needed to promote sustainable development, including through education for sustainable development;
3. Urges Member States to provide access to education for all, including technical and professional skills,
and to promote lifelong learning skills for all, and invites Member States to promote educational programmes related
to crime prevention, criminal justice and the rule of law, in particular for children and young people;
4. Calls upon Member States to integrate crime prevention and criminal justice strategies into all relevant
social and economic policies and programmes, in particular those affecting youth, with a special emphasis on
programmes focused on increasing educational and employment opportunities for youth and young adults;
5. Invites Member States, in accordance with domestic legislation, to encourage strengthened cooperation
between the crime prevention and criminal justice sectors and the education sector, as well as other relevant sectors,
to promote the integration of education on justice and the rule of law into their education systems and programmes;
6. Emphasizes the right to education, recognizes that investment in universal, quality and inclusive education
and training is the most important investment that States can make to ensure the short- and long-term development of
youth, reiterates that access to inclusive, equitable and quality formal and non-formal education at all levels, including,
as appropriate, catch-up and literacy education, including in information and communications technologies, for those
who did not receive formal education, information and communications technologies and volunteerism are important
factors that enable young people to acquire the relevant skills and to build their capacities, including for employability
and entrepreneurial development, and to obtain decent and productive work, and calls upon Member States to take
the actions necessary to ensure that young people have access to such services and opportunities, which will allow
them to be drivers of development;
7. Invites Member States to develop awareness-raising programmes to convey key values based on the rule
of law and supported by educational programmes, to be accompanied by economic and social policies promoting
equality, solidarity and justice, and to reach out to young people, drawing on them as agents of positive change;
8. Also invites Member States to intensify, in line with their domestic legal frameworks, national and
international efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination, including racism, religious intolerance, xenophobia and
gender-related discrimination, by, inter alia, raising awareness, developing educational materials and programmes and
considering, where appropriate, drafting and enforcing legislation against discrimination and, to these ends, to strive
to achieve all relevant Sustainable Development Goals, including Goals 4, 5, 8, 10 and 16;
9. Welcomes the ongoing work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, in the
area of education on justice and the rule of law, including under the Education for Justice initiative, which is a key
component of the Global Programme for the Implementation of the Doha Declaration: Towards the Promotion of a
Culture of Lawfulness;
10. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue its efforts to promote education on
the rule of law and justice in collaboration with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
in particular under the Global Citizenship Education for the Rule of Law: Doing the Right Thing partnership, and
welcomes in this regard the launch of the joint publication entitled Strengthening the Rule of Law through Education:
A Guide for Policymakers;
11. Notes that the main theme of the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, to be held in Kyoto, Japan, in 2020, is “Advancing crime prevention, criminal justice and the rule of law:
towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda”, and welcomes the fruitful discussions and deliberations at the regional
preparatory meetings for the Fourteenth Congress on that subject, particularly those relating to education;

977

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to report on its activities to promote education
on justice in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Doha Declaration to be submitted at the
Fourteenth Congress;
13. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the purposes described
above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations.
RESOLUTION 74/173
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/400, para. 29)807

74/173. Promoting technical assistance and capacity-building to strengthen national measures
and international cooperation to combat cybercrime, including information-sharing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/230 of 21 December 2010, in which it endorsed the Salvador Declaration on
Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their
Development in a Changing World, adopted by the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, and requested the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to establish, in line with
paragraph 42 of that Declaration, an open-ended intergovernmental expert group to conduct a comprehensive study
of the problem of cybercrime and responses to it by Member States, the international community and the private
sector, including the exchange of information on national legislation, best practices, technical assistance and
international cooperation, with a view to examining options to strengthen existing and to propose new national and
international legal or other responses to cybercrime,
Recalling also its resolutions 46/152 of 18 December 1991, 60/1 of 16 September 2005, 67/1 of 24 September
2012, 69/193 and 69/196 of 18 December 2014, 70/178 of 17 December 2015, 71/209 of 19 December 2016,
72/196 of 19 December 2017 and 73/186 and 73/187 of 17 December 2018,
Recalling further its resolution 70/174 of 17 December 2015, in which it endorsed the Doha Declaration on
Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and
Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public
Participation,
Welcoming Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 26/4 of 26 May 2017,808 in which
the Commission decided that the open-ended intergovernmental Expert Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study
on Cybercrime would dedicate its future meetings to examining, in a structured manner, each of the main issues dealt
with in the draft comprehensive study on cybercrime prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
under the auspices of the Expert Group, encouraged the Expert Group to develop possible conclusions and
recommendations for submission to the Commission and requested the Office to periodically collect information on
new developments, progress made and best practices identified,
Welcoming also the workplan of the Expert Group for the period 2018–2021, which was adopted by the Expert
Group at its fourth meeting, held in Vienna from 3 to 5 April 2018,
Noting that the Expert Group will dedicate its next meeting to international cooperation and prevention, taking
into account the information on those issues in the draft comprehensive study on cybercrime, comments submitted by
Member States and recent developments at the national and international levels,
Recalling its resolution 73/186, in which, inter alia, it noted with appreciation the fourth meeting of the Expert
Group and called upon Member States to support the workplan of the Expert Group,

_______________
807

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee on the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council.
808
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2017, Supplement No. 10 (E/2017/30), chap. I, sect. D.

978

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also its resolution 73/187, in which it requested the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member
States on the challenges that they faced in countering the use of information and communications technologies for
criminal purposes and to present a report based on those views for its consideration at its seventy-fourth session,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 73/187, it decided to include in the provisional agenda of its seventyfourth session an item entitled “Countering the use of information and communications technologies for criminal
purposes”,
Stressing the need to enhance coordination and cooperation among Member States in combating cybercrime,
including by providing technical assistance to developing countries, upon request, to improve national legislation and
enhance the capacity of national authorities to deal with cybercrime in all its forms, including its prevention, detection,
investigation and prosecution, emphasizing in this context the role that the United Nations, in particular the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, plays, and reaffirming the importance of respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the use of information and communication technologies,
Welcoming with appreciation the work of the Expert Group and its focus on substantive discussions among
practitioners and experts from Member States,
Noting that the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime809 is a tool that may be used
by States parties to provide international cooperation for preventing and combating transnational organized crime and
that, for some States parties, may be used in some cases of cybercrime,
Conscious of the challenges faced by all States in combating cybercrime, and emphasizing the need to reinforce
technical assistance and capacity-building activities, upon request and based on national needs, taking into account
the specific challenges faced by developing countries in this regard,
Looking forward to the discussions to be held during the Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, which will address issues pertaining to cybercrime, including electronic evidence,
Welcoming with appreciation the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in advancing the
implementation of the Global Programme on Cybercrime for the purpose of fulfilling its mandate to provide technical
assistance and capacity-building on cybercrime,
1. Welcomes with appreciation the outcome of the fifth meeting of the open-ended intergovernmental Expert
Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime, held in Vienna from 27 to 29 March 2019;
2. Acknowledges the importance of the work of the Expert Group to continue to exchange information on
national legislation, best practices, technical assistance and international cooperation, with a view to examining options
to strengthen existing responses and to propose new national and international legal or other responses to cybercrime;
3. Notes with appreciation that the Expert Group will develop, in accordance with its workplan for the period
2018–2021, possible conclusions and recommendations for submission to the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice;
4. Recognizes the Expert Group as an important platform for the exchange of information on national
legislation, best practices, technical assistance and international cooperation, with a view to examining options to
strengthen existing responses and to propose new national and international legal or other responses for cybercrime;
5. Encourages Member States to develop and implement measures to ensure that cybercrime and crimes in
which electronic evidence is relevant can be effectively investigated and prosecuted at the national level and that
effective international cooperation can be obtained in this area, in accordance with domestic law and consistent with
relevant and applicable international law, including applicable international human rights instruments;
6. Urges Member States to encourage the training of law enforcement officers, investigative authorities,
prosecutors and judges in the field of cybercrime, including in relevant skills in evidence collection and information
technology, and to equip them to effectively carry out their respective roles in investigating, prosecuting and
adjudicating cybercrime offences;

_______________
809

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.

979

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

7. Encourages Member States to endeavour to provide, upon request and based on national needs,
appropriate technical assistance and sustainable capacity-building to strengthen the ability of national authorities to
deal with cybercrime and to continue exchanging views on practical experiences and other technical aspects in this
regard;
8. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, pursuant to Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 22/8 of 26 April 2013,810 as a central repository of cybercrime laws and
lessons learned with a view to facilitating the continued assessment of needs and criminal justice capabilities and the
delivery and coordination of technical assistance;
9. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to periodically collect information
on new developments, progress made and best practices identified and to periodically report that information to the
Expert Group and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice;
10. Invites the Expert Group to provide advice, on the basis of its work, to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, including with regard to the Global Programme on Cybercrime, in order to assist, without prejudice to
other issues included in the mandate of the Expert Group, in identifying high-priority capacity-building needs and
effective responses, without prejudice to the status of the Commission as the governing body of the crime programme
of the Office;
11. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide, upon request and based
on national needs, technical assistance and sustainable capacity-building to Member States to deal with cybercrime,
through the Global Programme on Cybercrime and, inter alia, its regional offices, in relation to the prevention,
detection, investigation and prosecution of cybercrime in all its forms, recognizing that cooperation with Member
States, relevant international and regional organizations, the private sector, civil society and other relevant stakeholders
can facilitate this activity;
12. Invites Member States to consider pursuing cooperation, where appropriate and in a transparent and
accountable manner, with the private sector and civil society in developing measures to combat cybercrime;
13. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the purposes described
above, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission at its twenty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/174
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/400, para. 29)811

74/174. Countering child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the potential for victims812 of child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online to experience
life-changing trauma, including negative developmental trajectories,

_______________
810

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (E/2013/30 and E/2013/30/Corr.1),
chap. I, sect. D.
811
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee on the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council.
812
The term “survivors” is often used to acknowledge that victims of child sexual abuse and child exploitation online can recover from the
trauma they have endured.

980

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Acknowledging that advances in information and communications technologies have provided significant
economic and social advantages to countries, communities and children, fuelling economic development and
encouraging interconnectedness through the sharing of ideas and experiences, but that such advances also present
unprecedented opportunities for child sex offenders to access, produce and distribute child sexual abuse material that
violates the integrity and rights of children and enable harmful online contact with children, irrespective of their
physical location or nationality,
Concerned that new and evolving information and communications technologies, including encryption
capability and anonymizing tools, are being misused to commit crimes involving child sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse,
Noting that child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse may take many forms, such as, but not limited to, contact
and non-contact offending, online offending, trafficking in children for the purposes of sexual exploitation, grooming
for sexual purposes, using child sexual abuse images for blackmail or extortion, the acquisition, production,
distribution, making available, sale, copying, possession and accessing of child sexual abuse material and livestreaming of child sexual abuse, and that all forms of exploitation are harmful and have a negative impact on the
development and long-term well-being of children and on family cohesion and social stability,813
Emphasizing that the increasing number of ways that child sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse material
can be produced, distributed, sold, copied, collected and viewed online and the ability of individuals to congregate
with one another online and promote child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse have increased risks to children,
including by normalizing child sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse and by encouraging harmful contact with
children, and noting that this conduct violates and threatens the integrity, rights and safety of children,
Noting that the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime814 is a tool that may be used
by States parties to provide international cooperation for preventing and combating transnational organized crime and
that, in some States parties, may be used in some cases of child sexual abuse and sexual exploitation online,
Stressing the importance of enhancing coordination and cooperation among Member States in preventing and
combating child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online, identifying child victims, bringing perpetrators to justice
and reinforcing the provision of technical assistance to requesting States to improve national legislation and enhance
the capacity of national authorities to deal with child sexual exploitation in all its forms, including in the process of
prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution and the physical and psychological recovery and social
integration of child victims,
Recalling the Convention on the Rights of the Child815 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography,816
Noting that the term “child pornography” is being increasingly referred to, within some Member States, as child
sexual exploitation or child sexual abuse material to better reflect the nature of such material and the seriousness of
the harm suffered by the child in this context,
Reaffirming the importance of existing international legal instruments that contribute to the fight against child
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse and contain internationally agreed upon definitions, and recognizing the
importance of using terminology that reflects the severity of the harm inflicted on children by such conduct,
Acknowledging the importance of existing legal instruments that require parties to criminalize the sexual abuse
and exploitation of children and that enable effective international cooperation in the context of combating child sexual
exploitation and abuse,
Recalling its resolutions 73/154 of 17 December 2018 on protecting children from bullying, 73/148 of
17 December 2018, entitled “Intensification of efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against women
and girls: sexual harassment”, 69/194 of 18 December 2014 on the United Nations Model Strategies and Practical

_______________
813

The actions mentioned in this paragraph are not necessarily criminal offences in all Member States.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
815
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
816
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
814

981

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and
72/195 of 19 December 2017 on improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons, Economic and
Social Council resolutions 2011/33 of 28 July 2011 on prevention, protection and international cooperation against
the use of new information technologies to abuse and/or exploit children and 2004/27 of 21 July 2004 on the
guidelines on justice for child victims and witnesses of crime and Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice resolution 16/2 of 27 April 2007 on effective crime prevention and criminal justice responses to combat sexual
exploitation of children,817
Acknowledging the distinct and important roles that parents, legal guardians, schools, civil society, sport
associations, communities, State institutions and the media play in securing children’s protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse online and in preventing all forms of violence, including by promoting children’s online
safety,
Reaffirming the importance of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme in
promoting effective action to strengthen international cooperation in crime prevention and criminal justice,
Affirming the importance of the work of the Expert Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime
and its contribution to the understanding of the threat of cybercrime,
Noting the importance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its Global Programme on
Trafficking in Persons, Global Programme on Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice and Global Programme on Cybercrime, through which the Office provides capacity-building and
technical assistance to requesting States to, inter alia, combat the sexual abuse and exploitation of children, including
online,
Recognizing the importance of international, regional and bilateral multi-stakeholder partnerships and initiatives
that advance the effective protection and promotion of the rights of the child and the elimination of child sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse online and through which research aimed at establishing a rigorous evidence base
around children’s use of the Internet is conducted, and in this regard noting the efforts of, inter alia, the WeProtect
Global Alliance and Global Kids Online,
Recalling Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 27/3 of 18 May 2018,818 in which
the Commission expressed concern that the criminal misuse of information and communications technologies made
it possible for criminals to commit illegal activities such as the recruitment, control and harbouring of children
subjected to trafficking in persons and the advertising of the trafficking in such children, as well as the construction of
false identities enabling the abuse and/or exploitation of children, grooming and the creation of live-streamed or other
child abuse materials,
Recalling also Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 26/3 of 26 May 2017 on
mainstreaming a gender perspective into crime prevention and criminal justice policies and programmes and into
efforts to prevent and combat transnational organized crime,819
1. Urges Member States to criminalize child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, including child sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse online, allowing for the prosecution of perpetrators, to grant law enforcement agencies
appropriate powers and to provide tools to identify perpetrators and victims and effectively combat child sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse;
2. Also urges Member States to strengthen, consistent with their domestic legal frameworks, their efforts to
combat cybercrime in relation to child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, including when committed online;
3. Calls upon Member States that are parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography816 to implement their legal obligations;

_______________
817

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2007, Supplement No. 10 (E/2007/30/Rev.1), part one, chap. I, sect. D.
Ibid., 2018, Supplement No. 10 (E/2018/30), chap. I, sect. C.
819
Ibid., 2017, Supplement No. 10 (E/2017/30), chap. I, sect. D.
818

982

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Urges Member States to increase public awareness of the serious nature of child sexual exploitation and
child sexual abuse materials, how such materials constitute sexual offences against children and how the production,
distribution and consumption of such materials put more children at risk of sexual exploitation and abuse, including
by normalizing the conduct depicted in such materials and fuelling the demand for such materials;
5. Also urges Member States to take legislative or other measures, in accordance with domestic law, to
facilitate the detection by Internet service and access providers and other relevant entities of child sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse materials and to ensure, in compliance with domestic law, the reporting of such materials to the
relevant authorities and their removal by Internet service and access providers and other relevant entities, including in
conjunction with law enforcement agencies;
6. Encourages Member States, in accordance with domestic law, to appropriately resource investigations
into and prosecutions of crimes involving child sexual exploitation or sexual abuse online;
7. Also encourages Member States to proactively share information on best practices and to take action to
combat child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, including by seizing or removing child sexual abuse materials
from the Internet and reducing the time taken do so, consistent with domestic laws;
8. Further encourages Member States to involve government institutions responsible for telecommunications
and data protection policies and the information and communications technology industry in strengthening national
coordination to counter child sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse online;
9. Encourages Member States to involve relevant government institutions and the private sector in their
efforts to facilitate the reporting and tracing of suspicious financial transactions, with the aim of detecting, deterring
and combating child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online;
10. Also encourages Member States to keep an appropriate balance between the development and
implementation of privacy protection policies and efforts to identify and report child sexual abuse materials and child
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online;
11. Further encourages Member States to develop effective, evidence-based crime prevention measures and
to implement such measures as part of overall crime prevention strategies to reduce the risk of children being subjected
to sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online;
12. Encourages Member States to produce, where appropriate, information and analyses to inform risk
assessments on child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online and the development of effective mitigation
measures, including by collecting relevant quantitative and qualitative data, disaggregated by age, gender and other
relevant factors, as appropriate, and also encourages Member States to mainstream a gender perspective into their
research on and analysis of child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online;
13. Urges Member States to establish and implement public policies and to proactively share information on
best practices, including on support programmes for victims and the mainstreaming of a gender perspective, in order
to protect and defend children from child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, including online, and the
non-consensual, exploitative circulation of material depicting victims;
14. Encourages Member States to identify and support victims of child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
online through the provision of access to evidence-based, quality programmes, care and counselling for their physical,
psychological and social recovery, as well as psychological care, trauma counselling, rehabilitation and social
reintegration, ensuring and maintaining the protection of the rights of affected children, the privacy of victims and the
confidentiality of their reporting, with assistance from all relevant stakeholders;
15. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to assist Member States, upon request, in
developing and implementing measures to increase access to justice and protection, including through domestic
legislative and other measures for victims of child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online, bearing in mind childand gender-sensitive procedures, to obtain a just and timely remedy for violations of their rights;
16. Invites Member States to exchange best practices in the reporting of child sexual exploitation and abuse
online, including reporting indicators, and ways and means to enhance public awareness of these reporting
mechanisms;

983

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Calls upon those States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime814 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime,820 taking into account the role of those instruments in the fight against trafficking in children,
including for the purpose of sexual exploitation;
18. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with domestic legal frameworks and applicable international
law, to strengthen international cooperation to combat child sexual abuse and exploitation online through, where
appropriate and among others, mutual legal assistance and extradition, as well as police-to-police and agency-to-agency
cooperation, in order to counter such crimes and ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice and victims are
identified, while respecting the right of children to privacy;
19. Urges Member States to demonstrate their continued work and efforts to further strengthen international
cooperation in the fight against child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online, including by ensuring that child
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online are comprehensively considered within the context and based on the
workplan of the Expert Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime, which provides a valuable forum
for discussions on cybercrime;
20. Encourages Member States to contribute resources to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
including the Global Programme on Cybercrime, in order to counter child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
online;
21. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for the implementation of
the relevant paragraphs of the present resolution, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations.
RESOLUTION 74/175
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/400, para. 29)821

74/175. Technical assistance provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
related to counter-terrorism
The General Assembly,
Recalling all relevant United Nations resolutions on technical and legislative assistance in countering terrorism,
particularly the most recent ones,822
Recalling also that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security and that all acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivations, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed, and that they are to be unequivocally
condemned,
Reaffirming that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Reaffirming also its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and unity of all States, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,

_______________
820

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chair of the Committee on the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council.
822
Resolutions 72/194, 72/284, 73/174, 73/186 and 73/211 and Security Council resolutions 2133 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2195 (2014),
2199 (2015), 2253 (2015), 2309 (2016), 2322 (2016), 2341 (2017), 2347 (2017), 2349 (2017), 2368 (2017), 2396 (2017) and 2462 (2019).
821

984

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Stressing again the need to strengthen international, regional and subregional cooperation to effectively prevent
and combat terrorism, in particular by enhancing the national capacity of States through the provision of technical
assistance, based on the needs and priorities identified by requesting States,
Emphasizing the need to address the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism while fully respecting the
fundamental principles and purposes of the Charter and international law,
Recalling the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace823 and the Global Agenda for
Dialogue among Civilizations,824
Reaffirming its concern that terrorists could benefit from transnational organized crime as a source of financing
or logistical support, recognizing that the nature and scope of the linkages between terrorism and transnational
organized crime vary by context, and emphasizing the need to coordinate efforts at the local, national, regional,
subregional and international levels to respond to this challenge, in accordance with international law,
Recalling in particular its resolution 72/194 of 19 December 2017, in which it, inter alia, called upon the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to further enhance technical assistance, upon request, for building the capacity of
Member States to become party to and implement the international conventions and protocols related to counterterrorism, including through targeted programmes and the training of relevant criminal justice and law enforcement
officials, upon request, to develop their capacity to effectively respond to, prevent, investigate and prosecute terrorist
acts, the development of and participation in relevant initiatives and the development of technical tools and
publications, in consultation with Member States,
Reiterating all aspects of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy825 and the need for States to
continue to fully implement all four pillars of the Strategy, and recalling its resolution 72/284 of 26 June 2018, entitled
“The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review”,
Recognizing the importance of countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism as and when conducive
to terrorism, stressing in that regard the importance of an integrated and balanced implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy across its four pillars, recognizing the efforts of the Secretary-General in
that regard, and reaffirming the principal responsibility of Member States to implement the Strategy,
Welcoming the partnership between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to promote education as a tool for preventing all forms of crime,
including terrorism, and to uphold the rule of law,
Noting with appreciation the ongoing work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to support
Member States in their efforts to prevent and counter terrorism in all its forms and manifestations in the crime
prevention and criminal justice context, and reiterating that this work needs to be done in close coordination with
Member States,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on technical assistance in implementing the international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism,826
Recalling its resolution 71/291 of 15 June 2017, by which it established the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
Noting the signing of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact by United Nations
entities, the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the World Customs Organization, and
noting also the role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as the Chair of the Working Group on Criminal
Justice, Legal Responses and Countering the Financing of Terrorism,

_______________
823

Resolutions 53/243 A and B.
Resolution 56/6.
825
Resolution 60/288.
826
E/CN.15/2019/5.
824

985

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the important role that parliaments can play in preventing and countering terrorism and addressing
conditions conducive to terrorism, and recognizing also the relevance of the partnership established between the InterParliamentary Union, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in that
regard,
Welcoming guidance by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on the issue of children affected by
terrorism, including guidance on the prevention of the involvement of children with terrorist groups and on the
rehabilitation and reintegration of those children, provided in the Handbook on Children Recruited and Exploited by
Terrorist and Violent Extremist Groups: the Role of the Justice System and its three related training manuals,
Noting that Member States may face challenges in obtaining and using admissible evidence, including digital,
physical and forensic evidence, including in areas affected by armed conflicts, that can be used to help prosecute and
secure the convictions of foreign terrorist fighters and those supporting foreign terrorist fighters,
1. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the existing international
conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
within its mandate and in close coordination with the relevant entities of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, to continue to provide technical assistance to Member States, upon request, for the ratification
and legislative incorporation of those international legal instruments;
2. Encourages Member States to consider ratifying or acceding to other relevant conventions to support
international cooperation in criminal matters, such as the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocols thereto,827 and calls upon Member States to implement effectively the instruments to which
they are party;
3. Also encourages Member States to continue to promote, consistent with their legal frameworks, effective
coordination among law enforcement and other relevant entities and authorities responsible for preventing and
countering terrorism, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, upon request and within its
mandate, to continue to provide technical assistance in that regard;
4. Calls upon Member States to continue to strengthen international coordination and cooperation in order
to prevent and counter terrorism in all its forms and manifestations in accordance with international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, to effectively implement relevant international instruments and United Nations
resolutions, to consider entering, when appropriate, into treaties on extradition and mutual legal assistance, to enable
the effective exchange of relevant financial intelligence and to ensure adequate training of all relevant personnel on
executing international cooperation activities;
5. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to provide technical
assistance, upon request, to Member States to those ends, including by continuing and enhancing its assistance related
to international legal and judicial cooperation pertaining to countering terrorism, including in criminal matters related
to foreign terrorist fighters, and by fostering the development of strong and effective central authorities for
international cooperation in criminal matters;
6. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to strengthen the
provision of technical assistance to Member States, upon request, related to collecting, analysing, preserving, storing,
using and sharing forensic and electronic evidence for the investigation and prosecution of terrorism and terrorismrelated offences and related to enhancing mutual legal assistance in that regard, and welcomes the Practical Guide for
Requesting Electronic Evidence Across Borders developed by the Office;828
7. Calls upon Member States, including through relevant central authorities, and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and other relevant United Nations entities that support capacity-building to share best practices
and technical expertise informally and formally with a view to improving the collection, handling, preservation,

_______________
827
828

986

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
In cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the International Association of Prosecutors.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

sharing and use of relevant information and evidence, consistent with domestic and international law, including
information and evidence obtained from the Internet or in areas affected by armed conflict, in order to ensure the
effective investigation and prosecution of those who have committed crimes, including foreign terrorist fighters
returning and relocating to and from areas affected by armed conflict;
8. Encourages Member States to use, as appropriate, the platforms and tools developed by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, including the Sharing Electronic Resources and Laws on Crime knowledge
management portal, to facilitate international cooperation in criminal matters related to terrorism and to provide the
Office with relevant information to promote the sharing of good practices and experience and with the contact details
of and any other relevant information about designated authorities for inclusion in its repository database;
9. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in cooperation with the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL) and other relevant entities of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, to continue to provide technical assistance to Member States, upon request, to collect, record
and share biometric data in order to responsibly and properly identify terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters, in
compliance with domestic law and international law, welcomes the publication of the United Nations Compendium
of Recommended Practices for the Responsible Use and Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism, developed
within the Working Group on Border Management and Law Enforcement relating to Counter-Terrorism, and stresses
the importance of populating and making full use of the databases of INTERPOL in this regard;
10. Stresses the importance of the development and maintenance of effective, fair, humane, transparent and
accountable criminal justice systems by Member States, in accordance with applicable international law, as a
fundamental basis of any strategy to counter terrorism, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
whenever appropriate, to take into account in its technical assistance to counter terrorism the elements necessary for
building national capacity in order to strengthen criminal justice systems and the rule of law;
11. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate in the area of countering and
preventing terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, to continue to develop specialized legal knowledge and to
continue to strengthen the provision of technical assistance to Member States, upon request, on effective measures for
criminal justice responses addressing the prevention of terrorism in compliance with all their obligations under
international law, in particular human rights, refugee and humanitarian law;
12. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to further enhance technical assistance, upon
request, for building the capacity of Member States to become party to and implement the international conventions
and protocols related to counter-terrorism, including through targeted programmes and the training of relevant
criminal justice and law enforcement officials, upon request, to develop their capacity to effectively respond to,
prevent, investigate and prosecute terrorist acts and their financing, the development of and participation in relevant
initiatives and the development of technical tools and publications, within its mandate and in close consultation with
Member States;
13. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate and in collaboration with,
when appropriate, relevant United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities, to continue to
provide assistance to requesting Member States in addressing the threat of foreign terrorist fighters, including
returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters, through its capacity-building activities, with regard to enhancing
their cooperation, developing relevant measures and appropriate criminal justice responses, preventing the financing,
mobilization, travel, recruitment, training, organization and radicalization of foreign terrorist fighters, ensuring that
any person who participates in the financing, planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts or in supporting
terrorist acts is brought to justice and developing and implementing appropriate criminal justice responses, in
compliance with relevant obligations under international and domestic law;
14. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to enhance its coordination with the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and other United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities with the aim
of delivering to Member States, upon request, as well as on the basis of the mutual evaluation reports of Member
States done in the framework of combating money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, integrated technical
assistance on counter-terrorist financing measures, including assistance that will improve the capacity of Member
States to comply with their international obligations to prevent and combat the financing of terrorism;

987

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

15. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue providing technical assistance to
Member States, upon request and as appropriate, to assess their terrorist financing risks and to identify the financial
activities, financial services and economic sectors most vulnerable to terrorist financing risks, in line with relevant
international standards on countering money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, and welcomes the guidance
issued by the United Nations, including the Guidance Manual for Member States on Terrorist Financing Risk
Assessments published by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
16. Encourages Member States to further identify, analyse and counter any potential, existing and in some
cases growing links between transnational organized crime, illicit drug-related activities, money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism, in order to enhance criminal justice responses to those crimes, recognizing that terrorists could
benefit from transnational organized crime as a source of financing or logistical support and that the nature and scope
of the linkages between terrorism and transnational organized crime vary by context, and calls upon the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to support, upon request, the efforts of Member States in that
regard;
17. Calls upon Member States to strengthen efforts to improve the security and resilience of critical
infrastructure and the protection of particularly vulnerable or “soft” targets, such as infrastructure and public places,
as well as to develop strategies to prevent, protect against, mitigate, investigate, respond to and recover from damage
from terrorist attacks, in particular in the area of civil protection, and to consider establishing or strengthening
partnerships with the public and private sectors in this regard, and calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to Member States, upon request, with a view to strengthening
their criminal justice responses as well as their strategies for reducing the risk of terrorist attacks on critical
infrastructure;
18. Also calls upon Member States to strengthen their border management so as to effectively prevent the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters and terrorist groups, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to that end to requesting States;
19. Notes with appreciation the cooperation between the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the Office of Information and Communications Technology of the Secretariat
under the United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme in providing to Member States, upon request,
related technical assistance to build their legislative and operational capacity, including in collecting, processing,
analysing and effectively exchanging travel data such as advance passenger information and passenger name
record data;
20. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue, within its mandate, to develop its
specialized knowledge of the international legal framework for combating chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear terrorism as enshrined in the conventions and protocols on terrorism in order to continue to provide assistance
to requesting Member States in preventing and countering those forms of terrorism, and welcomes the e-learning
module developed by the Office in this regard;
21. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to continue to support
requesting Member States in the implementation of capacity-building programmes to strengthen crime prevention
and criminal justice responses to the destruction of and trafficking in cultural property by terrorists;
22. Further requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate, to continue to
develop its specialized legal knowledge in close consultation with Member States in order to continue to provide
assistance to requesting Member States in preventing and countering the criminal misuse of information and
communications technology, in particular the Internet, as well as social and other media, to plan, recruit for, fund,
commit or incite to commit terrorist attacks, and to support Member States in effectively criminalizing, investigating
and prosecuting such acts in accordance with domestic law and applicable international law, while fully respecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including freedom of expression, and in promoting the use of the Internet
as a tool for countering the spread of terrorism, in close cooperation with private companies and social media
platforms;

988

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

23. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide, upon request, technical assistance for
building the capacity of Member States in the development and implementation of assistance and support programmes
for victims of terrorism in accordance with relevant national legislation, with emphasis on the special needs of women
and children;
24. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, through its Global Programme on Violence
against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to continue to support requesting Member
States, in accordance with relevant national legislation, in preventing the involvement of children in armed and
terrorist groups and in ensuring that children alleged to have, accused of having or recognized as having infringed the
law, particularly those who are deprived of their liberty, bearing in mind United Nations standards and norms in
juvenile justice, and children who are victims and witnesses of crime are treated in a manner that observes their rights
and respects their dignity in accordance with applicable law, including international law, in particular the obligations
under the Convention on the Rights of the Child,829 for States parties to that Convention, as well as the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict,830 and that
relevant measures are taken to effectively reintegrate children formerly associated with armed groups and terrorist groups;
25. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in cooperation with relevant United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities, to assist Member States, upon request, in mainstreaming
gender perspectives into criminal justice responses to terrorism in order to prevent the recruitment of women and girls
as terrorists and to promote the full protection of women and girls from any form of exploitation or violence
perpetrated by terrorists, consistent with their obligations under human rights law, taking also into account, as
appropriate, inputs from relevant stakeholders, including civil society, and welcomes in this regard the Handbook on
Gender Dimensions of Criminal Justice Responses to Terrorism, in which, inter alia, the challenges faced by families
of foreign terrorist fighters are addressed;
26. Encourages Member States to take appropriate measures, in line with domestic law, to maintain a safe
and humane environment in prisons, develop tools that can help to address radicalization to violence and terrorist
recruitment, develop risk assessments to evaluate the susceptibility of inmates to terrorist recruitment and
radicalization to violence, taking into consideration, as appropriate, the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules),831 and make use of information shared by other States,
including through the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, on approaches and good practices pertaining to
prevention of radicalization to violence and terrorist recruitment of individuals in prisons, and encourages the Office
to intensify its technical assistance in that regard;
27. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in coordination with other United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities, to continue to strengthen its cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations and arrangements in the delivery of technical assistance, and notes the ongoing
joint initiatives developed by entities of the Global Compact;
28. Expresses its appreciation to Member States that have supported the technical assistance activities of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, including through financial contributions, and invites Member States to
consider making additional, sustainable voluntary financial contributions and providing in-kind support, in accordance
with the rules and procedures of the United Nations, in particular in view of the need for enhanced, effective and
coordinated delivery of technical assistance on criminal justice responses to prevent and counter terrorism;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with
sufficient resources to carry out activities, within its mandate, to assist Member States, upon request, in the
implementation of the relevant elements of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;825
30. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.

_______________
829

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
831
Resolution 70/175, annex.
830

989

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/176
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/400, para. 29)832 and as orally revised

74/176. Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, which constitutes
an offence and a serious threat to human dignity and physical integrity, human rights and sustainable development,
Reiterating its concern that, despite sustained measures taken at the international, regional and national levels,
trafficking in persons remains one of the grave challenges facing the international community, which also impairs the
enjoyment of human rights and needs a more concerted collective and comprehensive international response,
Bearing in mind that all States have an obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish
perpetrators of trafficking in persons and to protect and assist victims, and that not doing so violates and impairs or
nullifies the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the victims,
Recalling the adoption by the General Assembly of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,833 and
recalling also the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals on eliminating all forms of violence against all women
and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation,834 on taking
immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking and secure
the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including recruitment and use of child soldiers, and
by 2025 end child labour in all its forms,835 and on ending abuse and exploitation of, trafficking in and all forms of
violence against and torture of children,836
Recalling also the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,837 as well as its
supplementing Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,838
which provided the definition of the crime of trafficking in persons, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography839 and the Supplementary
Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery,840
Taking note of the adoption of the Protocol of 2014 to the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), of the
International Labour Organization, which recognizes that trafficking in persons for the purposes of forced or
compulsory labour is the subject of growing international concern,
Recalling the adoption of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons by the
General Assembly in its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010, and underlining the importance of its full implementation,

_______________
832

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Serbia, Seychelles,
Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
833
Resolution 70/1.
834
Target 5.2.
835
Target 8.7.
836
Target 16.2.
837
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
838
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
839
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
840
Ibid., vol. 266, No. 3822.

990

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming that the Global Plan of Action was developed:
(a) To promote universal ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, as
well as other relevant international instruments that address trafficking in persons, and to reinforce the implementation
of existing instruments against trafficking in persons,
(b) To help Member States to reinforce their political commitments and legal obligations to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons,
(c) To promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent responses at the national, regional and
international levels to counter trafficking in persons,
(d) To promote a human rights-based, gender- and age-sensitive approach in addressing all factors that make
people vulnerable to trafficking in persons and strengthening the criminal justice response, which are necessary to
prevent trafficking in persons, protect its victims and prosecute its perpetrators,
(e) To raise awareness within the United Nations system and also among States and other stakeholders, such
as the private sector, civil society and the international and national mass media, and the public at large,
(f) To foster cooperation and coordination among all relevant stakeholders, including Member States,
international organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector, and within various entities of the United
Nations system, taking into account existing best practices and lessons learned,
Recalling its resolutions 61/180 of 20 December 2006, 64/178 of 18 December 2009, 67/190 of
20 December 2012, 68/192 of 18 December 2013, 70/179 of 17 December 2015 and 72/195 of 19 December
2017 on improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons and its other relevant resolutions on
trafficking in persons,841
Recalling also its resolutions 71/322 of 8 September 2017 and 73/189 of 17 December 2018, entitled
“Strengthening and promoting effective measures and international cooperation on organ donation and transplantation
to prevent and combat trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal and trafficking in human organs”,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2017/18 of 6 July 2017 on the implementation of
the Global Plan of Action and previous Council resolutions on trafficking in persons,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 32/3 of 30 June 2016, entitled “Trafficking in persons, especially
women and children: protecting victims of trafficking and persons at risk of trafficking, especially women and children
in conflict and post-conflict situations”,842 and other relevant resolutions of the Council on trafficking in persons,
Recalling also Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 27/2 of 18 May 2018, entitled
“Preventing and combating trafficking in persons facilitated by the criminal misuse of information and
communications technologies”,843 and the other relevant resolutions of the Commission on trafficking in persons,
Welcoming the adoption of the political declaration on the implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly held at United Nations
Headquarters in New York on 27 and 28 September 2017,844 and looking forward to the next high-level meeting of
the Assembly to review the implementation of the Global Plan of Action, to be held in 2021, as envisaged in the
political declaration,
Taking note of the reference to preventing and countering trafficking in persons and the victim-oriented approach
in the context of addressing trafficking in persons in the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote

_______________
841

Resolutions 55/67, 58/137, 59/166, 61/144, 63/156 and 63/194.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/71/53), chap. V, sect. A.
843
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2018, Supplement No. 10 (E/2018/30), chap. I, sect. C.
844
Resolution 72/1.
842

991

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public Participation, adopted by the Thirteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015,845
Recalling the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on addressing large movements of refugees and migrants, held at United Nations Headquarters
in New York on 19 September 2016,846 in which States declared that they would, with full respect for their obligations
under international law, vigorously combat human trafficking and migrant smuggling with a view to their elimination,
including through targeted measures to identify victims of human trafficking or those at risk of trafficking, provide
support for the victims of human trafficking and work to prevent human trafficking among those affected by
displacement,
Recognizing the important role of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons in
fostering coordination and cooperation in the global fight against trafficking in persons, within the existing mandates
of its members and partners,847
Recognizing also that the Inter-Agency Coordination Group, within its mandate, contributes to the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action, taking note with appreciation of the activities of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime as coordinator of the Coordination Group, as well as the activities of the members of the
Coordination Group acting on a rotational basis as Chair of the working group of the Coordination Group, and
encouraging the more robust participation of all members of the Coordination Group,
Taking note with appreciation of the work of the 2019 Co-Chairs of the Inter‑Agency Coordination Group, the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, including the convening of the first consultative briefing outside of the United
Nations system, at the Alliance against Trafficking in Persons,
Taking note with appreciation also of the thematic focus of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group in 2018 on
trafficking in children and in 2019 on trafficking in persons and technology, and on measures to prevent trafficking in
persons in public procurement, as well as in the procurement of goods and services by the United Nations,
Recalling that the Inter-Agency Coordination Group was established to foster cooperation among relevant
United Nations agencies and other international organizations involved in combating human trafficking in countries
around the world using, to the extent possible, mechanisms already in place at the regional and national levels, and to
share information, experiences and good practices relating to the activities of the partner agencies to counter trafficking
with Governments, international and regional organizations and other relevant bodies,
Emphasizing the central role of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the global fight
against trafficking in persons, particularly in providing technical assistance to Member States, upon their request, to
implement the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, by making use of existing capacitybuilding tools, lessons learned from Member States and expertise available in other international organizations,
Recognizing the need to continue to foster a global partnership against trafficking in persons among all
stakeholders and the need to continue to work towards an enhanced comprehensive and coordinated approach to

_______________
845

Resolution 70/174, annex.
Resolution 71/1.
847
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL), the International Labour Organization, the International Organization for Migration, the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, the United Nations Population Fund, the World Bank,
the Department of Peace Operations of the Secretariat, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs of the Secretariat, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the International Centre for Migration Policy Development, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, and the Council of Europe as partners of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group.
846

992

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

prevent and combat trafficking and to protect and assist victims of trafficking in persons through the appropriate
national, regional and international mechanisms,
Recognizing also the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and international cooperation mechanisms
and initiatives, including information exchanges on good practices, of Governments and of intergovernmental and
non‑governmental organizations to address the problem of trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
Taking note with appreciation of the different initiatives of Member States, promoted in the United Nations to
contribute to the global fight against trafficking in persons,848
Recalling that trafficking in persons is fuelled by high profits for traffickers and demand that fosters all forms
of exploitation, with trafficking in persons disproportionately affecting women and girls, who are particularly
vulnerable to trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation,
Stressing the need to take appropriate measures to ensure access to justice and protections for victims in criminal
justice processes, including measures to ensure that identified victims of trafficking in persons are not penalized for
having been trafficked and that they do not suffer from victimization as a result of actions taken by government
authorities, communities and families,
Recognizing that broad international cooperation between Member States and relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations is essential for effectively countering the threat of trafficking in persons and other
contemporary forms of slavery,
Recognizing also that victims of trafficking are often subject to multiple forms of discrimination and violence,
including on the grounds of gender, age, disability, ethnicity, culture and religion, as well as national or social origin,
and that these forms of discrimination may themselves fuel trafficking in persons, and that women and children
without nationality or without birth registration are particularly vulnerable to trafficking in persons,
Recognizing further the potential of the Internet and other information and communications technologies to
prevent and combat trafficking in persons and to assist victims, stressing the need for increased law enforcement
cooperation in this regard to address the new challenges generated by the rapid development of the Internet and other
information and communications technologies, expressing concern that human traffickers have misused the Internet
and other information and communications technologies to facilitate trafficking in persons, including for the purpose
of recruiting and exploiting women and children and controlling victims, and in this regard taking note of the issue
brief “Human trafficking and technology: trends, challenges and opportunities”, produced by the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group,
Stressing the need to promote and protect the rights of victims of trafficking in persons and to reintegrate victims
into the community, including by taking into account, where appropriate, the Recommended Principles and
Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking849 and the commentary thereon developed by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the Guidelines on the Protection of Child Victims
of Trafficking developed by the United Nations Children’s Fund,
Welcoming the efforts of Member States, United Nations agencies, international organizations, civil society
organizations, the private sector and financial institutions to address the problem of trafficking in persons, including
women and children as the most vulnerable group, and emphasizing the urgent need for them to further enhance their
efforts and cooperation to build the evidence base, including by sharing their knowledge and best practices as widely
as possible,
Affirming that capacity-building is a very important component in combating trafficking in persons, and in this
regard stressing the need to intensify international cooperation to combat trafficking in persons, as well as technical
assistance for countries aimed at strengthening their ability to prevent all forms of trafficking, including supporting
their development programmes,

_______________
848

Such as, inter alia, Alliance 8.7; Finance Against Slavery and Trafficking; the call to action to end forced labour, modern slavery and
human trafficking; the principles to guide government action to combat human trafficking in global supply chains; and the Bali Process on
People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime.
849
E/2002/68/Add.1.

993

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Taking note of the Khartoum process and its Declaration adopted in Khartoum on 16 October 2014 during the
Regional Ministerial Conference on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn of Africa, coordinated by the
African Union, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Organization
for Migration, which aimed to strengthen national, regional and international cooperation and build capacities in the
African countries to combat trafficking in persons and migrant smuggling,
Taking note also of the Second Work Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons in the Western Hemisphere
2015–2018, adopted by States members of the Organization of American States at the fourth Meeting of National
Authorities on Trafficking in Persons, held on 4 and 5 December 2014 in Brasilia, and extended until 2020 by States
members at the fifth Meeting of National Authorities on Trafficking in Persons, held on 12 and 13 March 2018 in
Washington, D.C.,
Recognizing that the Global Plan of Action and the establishment of the United Nations voluntary trust fund for
victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, established in compliance with the Global Plan of
Action, aim at raising awareness of the situation of victims of human trafficking and at providing them with
humanitarian, legal and financial aid through established channels of assistance, such as governmental,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Reaffirming the importance of humanitarian, legal and financial aid to victims of trafficking in persons,
including through governmental, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, including the United
Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, managed by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations voluntary trust fund on contemporary forms of slavery,
managed by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the International
Organization for Migration Global Assistance Fund,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,850
Taking note also of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children,851 as well as the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Council on contemporary
forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences,852 and of the Special Rapporteur of the Council on the sale
and sexual exploitation of children, including child prostitution, child pornography and other child sexual abuse
material,853
Recognizing that, in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the Conference of the Parties to the Convention is established to improve the capacity of States parties to combat
transnational organized crime and to promote and review the implementation of the Convention, including the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and in this regard
taking note of resolution 9/1 of 19 October 2018, entitled “Establishment of the Mechanism for the Review of the
Implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto”,
adopted by the Conference of the Parties at its ninth session, held in Vienna from 15 to 19 October 2018,854
1. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to, as a matter of priority,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime837 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime,838 taking into consideration the central role of those instruments in the fight
against trafficking in persons, and also urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully and
effectively;
2. Urges Member States and other stakeholders mentioned in the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons,855 and invites the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against

_______________
850

A/74/127.
A/74/189.
852
A/74/179.
853
A/74/162.
854
See CTOC/COP/2018/13, sect. I.A.
855
Resolution 64/293.
851

994

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Transnational Organized Crime and relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, within their
respective mandates, to continue to contribute to the full and effective implementation of the Global Plan of Action,
including by means of strengthening cooperation and improving coordination among themselves in achieving that goal;
3. Recalls the holding of the high-level meetings of the General Assembly during its sixty-seventh session,
from 13 to 15 May 2013, and during its seventy-second session, on 27 and 28 September 2017, to appraise the
progress achieved in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action, which, inter alia, reiterated strong political will
to step up efforts against trafficking in persons;
4. Also recalls its decision, in its resolution 68/192, to appraise, from within existing resources, on a fouryear basis starting at its seventy-second session, the progress achieved in the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action in order to assess achievements, gaps and challenges, including in the implementation of the relevant legal
instruments, and therefore decides to convene a high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the progress achieved
in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action at its seventy-sixth session, after the general debate, but no later
than December 2021;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly, in close cooperation and
coordination with Member States, to take all appropriate measures to arrange the high-level meeting;
6. Recalls its decision to designate 30 July as the World Day against Trafficking in Persons, to be observed
annually, and, while welcoming events held by Member States, United Nations agencies, other international
organizations and civil society at the international, regional and national levels to mark the World Day, invites all
stakeholders to continue to observe the World Day in order to raise awareness of trafficking in persons and the situation
of the victims of this crime and for the promotion and protection of their rights;
7. Expresses solidarity with and compassion for victims and survivors of trafficking in persons, and calls for
the full respect of their human rights and the provision of appropriate victim-centred care and assistance, where
applicable, including interpretation and sign language, where appropriate, to victims of trafficking, and services for
their rehabilitation in cooperation with civil society and other relevant partners;
8. Expresses support for the activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, reaffirms its request
to the Secretary-General to provide adequate support to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,
and invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to the Office for the purpose of providing assistance to
Member States upon request;
9. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to cooperate with relevant international
organizations outside the United Nations system and to invite such organizations and interested Member States to
participate, when appropriate, in the meetings of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons
and to keep Member States informed of the schedule of and the progress made by the Coordination Group;
10. Takes note of the consultative briefings for Member States hosted by the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group at United Nations Headquarters in June and October 2018 on the work and priorities of the Coordination Group
in 2018 and beyond, and takes note with appreciation of the participation of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in the briefings as the first regional organization to partner with and co-chair in 2019 the
Coordination Group, as well as of the Council of Europe and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on trafficking in persons, especially women and children, as partners of the Coordination Group;
11. Welcomes the first meeting of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group at the level of principals of the
relevant United Nations agencies and organizations, including those agencies that are not active members of the
Coordination Group, held in London on 2 May 2018, which contributed to relaunching the Coordination Group as a
forum for policy exchange, and takes note with appreciation of the briefing for Member States and other relevant
partners about the outcome of the meeting and future activities of the Coordination Group held on 29 June 2018 at
United Nations Headquarters, as well as requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as coordinator of
the Coordination Group, to continue to convene such meetings of the Coordination Group at the level of principals
on a regular basis, and in this context takes note of the role of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
as the first regional entity to co-chair the Coordination Group, and also takes note of the engagement of the European
Union Anti-Trafficking Coordinator with the Coordination Group;

995

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

12. Invites regional organizations, within their mandates, to join and consider co-chairing, along with a United
Nations agency, the Inter-Agency Coordination Group to strengthen the exchange of expertise and regional
experiences and thus enhance international cooperation in combating trafficking in persons and assisting the victims
of this crime;
13. Takes note of the ongoing process undertaken by the Inter-Agency Coordination Group to conduct studies
on emerging trends in the field of trafficking in persons, and to ensure that information-sharing among relevant
agencies and between countries is done in accordance with international and national legal frameworks and takes into
account privacy and confidentiality;
14. Invites the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in its capacity as coordinator of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group, and other relevant agencies of the United Nations system to further strengthen their activities
related to the implementation of relevant international instruments and the Global Plan of Action to drive greater
progress in eliminating trafficking in persons, and invites Member States and other international and bilateral donors
to provide voluntary contributions to the Office for these purposes, in accordance with the policies, rules and
procedures of the United Nations;
15. Calls upon Member States to take into consideration new methods of recruiting those at risk of being
subjected to trafficking in persons, such as the misuse of the Internet by traffickers, in particular for recruiting children,
to take measures to develop targeted awareness-raising campaigns, including for law enforcement, front‑line service
providers and at-risk industries, to identify the signs of trafficking in persons and to develop specialized training for
law enforcement and criminal justice practitioners;
16. Invites Member States to address the social, economic, cultural, political and other factors that make
people vulnerable to trafficking in persons, such as poverty, unemployment, inequality, humanitarian emergencies,
including armed conflicts and natural disasters, sexual violence, gender discrimination and social exclusion and
marginalization, as well as a culture of tolerance towards violence against women, youth and children;
17. Calls upon Member States, international organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector,
through partnerships, as appropriate, to increase and support prevention efforts in countries of origin, transit and
destination by focusing domestically and globally on the demand and supply chains that foster all forms of trafficking
and the goods and services produced as a result of trafficking in persons;
18. Encourages Member States to take legislative or other measures to prevent, combat and eradicate
trafficking in persons in the context of international migration by strengthening capacities and international
cooperation to investigate, prosecute and penalize trafficking in persons, discouraging demand that fosters exploitation
leading to trafficking, and ending impunity of trafficking networks;
19. Also encourages Member States to cooperate on issues concerning trafficking in persons with the InterAgency Coordination Group, and in this regard takes note of the Toolkit for Guidance in Designing and Evaluating
Counter‑Trafficking Programmes of the Coordination Group, which might contribute to establishing a common
framework for aligning activities and defining and assessing progress, as well as building a voluntary, robust and
shared evidence base of effective programmes and practices to combat trafficking in persons;
20. Further encourages Member States to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on trafficking in persons, especially women and children, as well as with other relevant special procedures,
including the Special Rapporteur of the Council on violence against women, its causes and consequences, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, the Special Rapporteur of the Council on the
sale and sexual exploitation of children, including child prostitution, child pornography and other child sexual abuse
material, and the Special Rapporteur of the Council on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and
consequences;
21. Calls upon Member States to continue their efforts to criminalize trafficking in persons in all its forms,
including the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services,
slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs, especially concerning children and persons
with disabilities, and to condemn these practices and to investigate, prosecute and penalize traffickers and
intermediaries while providing victim-centred protection and assistance to the victims of trafficking with full respect
for their human rights, and invites Member States to continue to support those United Nations agencies and
international organizations that are actively involved in victim protection;

996

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

22. Also calls upon Member States to take measures to support family reunification for victims of trafficking
in persons, where safe and appropriate, especially when those are children, taking into consideration the best interests
of the child;
23. Notes the second consultative meeting on strengthening partnerships with national rapporteurs and
relevant mechanisms on trafficking in persons, held in Bangkok on 21 and 22 May 2014, co-hosted by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the establishment of an informal
network of such mechanisms located all over the world to address trafficking in persons in a consistent manner and
to exchange information and best practices built on different national experiences, requests the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to continue its efforts to collect information on national efforts to combat trafficking in persons,
as well as on relevant national mechanisms, to make up-to-date information available to Member States, and invites
Member States to host consultative meetings between relevant national mechanisms on trafficking in persons that
continue transnational dialogue and the exchange of information on common challenges;
24. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in its capacity as fund manager of the United
Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, to continue to
encourage contributions by States and all other relevant stakeholders to the trust fund;
25. Welcomes the biennial publication of the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, prepared by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, looks forward to the next such report, to be produced by the Office in 2020,
pursuant to the Global Plan of Action, and encourages Member States to provide to the Office evidence-based data
on patterns, flows and forms of trafficking in persons, including for the purpose of the removal of organs;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the
General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, including recommendations on measures to bring greater urgency to
and improve the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons.
RESOLUTION 74/177
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/400, para. 29)856

74/177. Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in particular
its technical cooperation capacity
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 46/152 of 18 December 1991, 60/1 of 16 September 2005, 67/1 of 19 September
2012, 69/193 and 69/196 of 18 December 2014, 70/178 and 70/182 of 17 December 2015, 71/209 of 19 December
2016, 72/196 of 19 December 2017 and 73/186 of 17 December 2018,
Reaffirming also its resolutions relating to the urgent need to strengthen international cooperation and technical
assistance in promoting and facilitating the ratification and implementation of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,857 the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as

_______________
856

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Netherlands, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
857
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.

997

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

amended by the 1972 Protocol,858 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,859 the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,860 the United Nations
Convention against Corruption861 and all the international conventions and protocols against terrorism,
Recalling the importance of the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into
the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at
the National and International Levels, and Public Participation, adopted by the Thirteenth United Nations Congress
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,862
Welcoming Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/17 of 23 July 2019 on the follow-up to the Thirteenth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations for the Fourteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, and recalling that the theme of the Fourteenth Congress,
to be held in Kyoto, Japan, from 20 to 27 April 2020, will be “Advancing crime prevention, criminal justice and the
rule of law: towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda”,
Underscoring the role of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice as the principal
policymaking body of the United Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, and reaffirming its
resolution 73/183 of 17 December 2018 on enhancing the role of the Commission in contributing to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in which Member States were encouraged to raise
awareness of the work of the Commission in the successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda,
Reaffirming its resolution 73/185 of 17 December 2018 on the rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice
in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals,
Expressing its grave concern about the negative effects of transnational organized crime on development, peace,
stability and security and human rights, about the increasing vulnerability of States to such crime and about the
growing degree of penetration of criminal organizations and their financial and economic resources into the economy,
Expressing concern at the involvement of organized criminal groups, as well as the substantial increase in the
volume, rate of transnational occurrence and range of criminal offences related to trafficking in precious metals, stones
and other minerals in some parts of the world, and the potential use of trafficking in precious metals, stones and other
minerals as a source of funding for organized crime, other relevant criminal activities and terrorism,
Deeply concerned about the growing links, in some cases, between forms of transnational organized crime and
terrorism, recognizing that countering transnational organized crime and terrorism is a common and shared
responsibility, and in this respect recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/21 of 23 July 2019 on
technical assistance provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime related to counter-terrorism,
Convinced that the rule of law and development are strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing and that the
advancement of the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through crime prevention and
criminal justice mechanisms, is essential for sustained and inclusive economic growth and sustainable development
and the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, and in this
respect reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,863 which, inter alia, includes the commitment to
promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels, and in this respect recalling its resolution 70/299 of
29 July 2016 on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda at the global level,
Emphasizing that transnational organized crime must be addressed with full respect for the principle of the
sovereignty of States and in accordance with the rule of law as part of a comprehensive response to promote durable
solutions through the promotion of human rights and more equitable socioeconomic conditions,

_______________
858

Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
860
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
861
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.
862
Resolution 70/174, annex.
863
Resolution 70/1.
859

998

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Encouraging Member States to develop and implement, as appropriate, comprehensive, evidence-based crime
prevention policies, national and local strategies and action plans based on an understanding of the multiple factors that
contribute to crime and to address such factors in a holistic manner, in close cooperation with all stakeholders, including
civil society, and in this respect stressing that social development and the promotion of the rule of law, including the
fostering of a culture of lawfulness while respecting cultural identities, in accordance with the Doha Declaration,
should be integral elements of strategies to foster crime prevention and economic development in all States,
Concerned at the increasing rate of violence in urban areas, and recognizing the need for inclusive measures to
address urban safety and the prevention of related crime and violence in an integrated, participatory and cross-sectoral
manner,
Reaffirming its commitment and strong political will in support of effective, fair, humane and accountable criminal
justice systems and the institutions comprising them, encouraging the effective participation and inclusion of all sectors
of society, thus creating the conditions needed to advance the wider United Nations agenda, and recognizing the
responsibility of Member States to uphold human dignity, all human rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular for
those affected by crime and those who may be in contact with the criminal justice system, including vulnerable
members of society, regardless of their status, who may be subject to multiple and aggravated forms of discrimination,
and to prevent and counter hate crimes, as well as crimes motivated by intolerance or discrimination of any kind,
Taking note of Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 25/2 of 27 May 2016 on
promoting legal aid, including through a network of legal aid providers,864 in which the Commission encouraged
Member States to adopt or strengthen legislative or other measures to ensure that effective legal aid, including for
victims of crime, is provided consistent with their domestic legislation and in line with the United Nations Principles
and Guidelines on Access to Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems,865 and which also contributes to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Welcoming the efforts made by some Member States to establish a common documentation standard as a tool
for facilitating both technical interoperability and accessibility of legal documentation,
Deeply concerned about the negative impact of corruption on development and on the enjoyment of human
rights, and recognizing the universal importance of good governance, transparency, integrity and accountability, thus
calling for a zero-tolerance approach to corruption and more effective measures to prevent and counter corruption in
all its forms, including bribery, as well as measures to prevent the laundering of proceeds of corruption and other
forms of crime,
Bearing in mind its resolution 73/190 of 17 December 2018 on preventing and combating corrupt practices and
the transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset recovery and returning such assets to legitimate owners, in
particular to countries of origin, in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
Welcoming the progress made with regard to the second cycle of the Mechanism for the Review of Implementation
of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, and stressing the importance of full participation by States parties
in the Mechanism and the effective implementation of the Convention in all its aspects by all States parties,
Taking note of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Development Programme
Manual on Corruption Surveys and the development of methodological tools, standards and guidelines that can
support countries in producing comparable and up-to-date statistics on corruption, including in the context of
Sustainable Development Goal implementation,
Bearing in mind that, pursuant to chapter V of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, the return of
assets is one of the main objectives, an integral part and a fundamental principle of the Convention and that the States
parties to the Convention shall afford one another the widest measure of cooperation and assistance in that regard,
Recognizing that, thanks to their nearly universal adherence and wide scope of application, the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime866 and the United Nations Convention against Corruption offer

_______________
864

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2016, Supplement No. 10 (E/2016/30), chap. I, sect. D.
Resolution 67/187, annex.
866
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
865

999

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

fundamental legal bases for international cooperation to support the investigation and prosecution of crimes covered
by those Conventions, including for extradition, mutual legal assistance and confiscation and asset recovery, and that
they provide effective mechanisms that should be further implemented and utilized in practice,
Reaffirming its resolution 73/191 of 17 December 2018, in which it decided to convene in the first half of 2021
a special session of the General Assembly on challenges and measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation, and to adopt a concise and action-oriented political declaration agreed upon in
advance, by consensus, through intergovernmental negotiations under the auspices of the Conference of the States
Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, and invited the Conference of the States Parties to lead
the preparatory process for the special session by addressing all organizational and substantive matters in an
open-ended manner,
Recognizing the efforts of the Group of 20 in countering corruption at both the global and the national levels,
taking note with appreciation of the anti-corruption initiatives outlined in the communiqué of the Summit of the Group
of 20, held in Osaka, Japan, on 28 and 29 June 2019, and urging the Group of 20 to continue to engage other States
Members of the United Nations and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in its work in an inclusive and
transparent manner to ensure that initiatives of the Group of 20 complement or strengthen the work being undertaken
by the United Nations system,
Stressing the importance of strengthened international cooperation, based on the principles of shared
responsibility and in accordance with international law, to effectively address the world drug problem, dismantle illicit
networks and counter transnational organized crime, including money-laundering, illicit financial flows, smuggling
of migrants, trafficking in persons, trafficking in arms and other forms of organized crime, all of which threaten
national security and undermine sustainable development and the rule of law, and stressing also in this respect the
importance of law enforcement cooperation and exchange of information, as well as of designated central authorities
and effective points of contact dedicated to facilitating the procedures related to international cooperation, including
for extradition and mutual legal assistance requests, as well as the importance of the coordinating role of relevant
regional networks,
Welcoming the high-level debate of the General Assembly held on 6 June 2019 on the theme “The role of
regional organizations in strengthening and implementing crime prevention initiatives and criminal justice responses”,
and taking note of the summary of the discussion prepared by the President of the General Assembly and transmitted
to the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and to all
Member States,
Noting the important contribution that public-private sector cooperation can make in efforts to prevent and
combat criminal activities, such as transnational organized crime, corruption, cybercrime and terrorism, in particular
in the tourism sector,
Reaffirming the commitments made by Member States in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted on 8 September 2006,867 and its successive biennial reviews, in particular in its resolution 72/284
of 26 June 2018, in which it encouraged Member States and United Nations entities to strengthen and better coordinate
their actions against terrorism and to prevent and combat violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism,
including through technical assistance provided to Member States upon their request, and highlighting in this respect
the work of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, established through its resolution 71/291 of 15 June 2017, and that of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities on strengthening the capability of the
United Nations system to assist Member States in implementing the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy,
Highlighting the importance of its resolutions on measures to eliminate international terrorism and on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism adopted at its seventy-third and
seventy-fourth sessions,
Expressing concern that terrorists may benefit from transnational organized crime in some regions, including
from trafficking in arms, drugs and cultural property, as well as trafficking in persons and human organs, and from
the illicit trade in natural resources, including oil, and in oil products, modular refineries and related material, precious

_______________
867

1000

Resolution 60/288.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

metals, stones and other minerals, charcoal and wildlife, as well as from kidnapping for ransom and other crimes,
including extortion, money-laundering and bank robbery, and condemning the destruction of cultural heritage
perpetrated by terrorist groups in some countries,
Recalling its resolution 66/177 of 19 December 2011 on strengthening international cooperation in combating
the harmful effects of illicit financial flows resulting from criminal activities, in which it urged States parties to the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention against Corruption
to apply fully the provisions of those Conventions, in particular measures to prevent and combat money-laundering,
including by criminalizing the laundering of proceeds of transnational organized crime, as well as measures to enhance
national confiscation regimes and international cooperation, including in asset recovery, and recalling also its
resolution 73/222 of 20 December 2018, in which, inter alia, it reiterated its deep concern about the impact of illicit
financial flows, in particular those caused by tax evasion, corruption and transnational organized crime, on the
economic, social and political stability and development of societies, and especially on developing countries,
Noting with concern the misuse of virtual assets and related payment methods by criminal individuals and
transnational organized crime groups to raise, move and store funds, including the proceeds of crime, as well as the
potential use of emerging payment methods, such as prepaid cards and mobile payments or virtual assets, by terrorists
and terrorist groups,
Taking into consideration all resolutions of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the
relevant resolutions of the Economic and Social Council, in particular those relating to the strengthening of
international cooperation, as well as to the technical assistance and advisory services of the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the fields of crime
prevention and criminal justice, promotion and reinforcement of the rule of law and reform of criminal justice
institutions, including with regard to the implementation of technical assistance to Member States in improving
systems for collecting and analysing data on crime prevention and criminal justice at all levels,
Noting the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations system task force on transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking for the purpose of developing an effective and comprehensive approach to those
crimes within the United Nations system, and reaffirming the crucial role of Member States in this regard, as reflected
in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the progress made by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the delivery of advisory
services and technical assistance to requesting Member States in the areas of crime prevention and criminal justice
reform, data and information analysis, preventing and countering organized crime, corruption, piracy and
transnational organized crime committed at sea, illicit financial flows, money-laundering, economic and financial
crimes, including fraud, as well as tax and corporate crimes, cybercrime, criminal misuse of the Internet and other
information and communications technologies as well as such misuse for terrorist purposes, trafficking in endangered
species of wild fauna and flora and other crimes that affect the environment, such as trafficking in timber, precious
metals, stones and other minerals, direct and indirect trade in oil and refined oil products with organized criminal and
terrorist groups, counterfeiting in trademark goods, match-fixing, trafficking in cultural property and artefacts,
kidnapping, smuggling of migrants, organ trafficking, trafficking in persons, including the support and protection, as
appropriate, of victims, their families and witnesses, illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, drug
trafficking and trafficking in falsified medical products, as well as terrorism, including progress in tackling the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, including those who are returning and relocating, and preventing chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear terrorism, as well as in the area of international cooperation, with special emphasis
on extradition and mutual legal assistance and the international transfer of sentenced persons,
Welcoming the adoption by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime of a regional approach to
programming, based on continuing consultations and partnerships at the national and regional levels, particularly on
its implementation, and focused on ensuring that the Office responds in a sustainable and coherent manner to the
priorities of Member States,
Reiterating its concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and welcoming the extension of the mandate of the standing open-ended intergovernmental working group
on improving the governance and financial situation of the Office,

1001

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 26/3 of 26 May 2017 on
mainstreaming a gender perspective into crime prevention and criminal justice policies and programmes and into
efforts to prevent and combat transnational organized crime,868
Reiterating its condemnation of all forms of violence against women and girls, and in this respect reaffirming
its resolutions 71/170 of 19 December 2016, 72/149 of 19 December 2017 and 73/148 of 17 December 2018,
recalling the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council addressing various
aspects of violence against women and girls of all ages, and recalling also the agreed conclusions adopted by the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-eighth session, which addressed the elimination and prevention of all
forms of violence against women and girls,869
Expressing deep concern about the gender-related killing of women and girls, recalling its relevant resolutions,
recognizing the key role of law enforcement and the criminal justice system in preventing and responding to the
gender-related killing of women and girls, including by ending impunity for such crimes, and recognizing the
importance of collecting relevant data and developing preventive measures,
Noting the significance of the United Nations Model Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination of
Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice870 as a way to assist countries in
strengthening their national crime prevention and criminal justice capacities to respond to all forms of violence against
women and girls,
Recalling its resolution 69/194 of 18 December 2014, by which it adopted the United Nations Model Strategies
and Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, convinced of the importance of preventing youth crime, including through sports, supporting the rehabilitation
of young offenders and their reintegration into society, protecting in particular child victims of all forms of violence,
including those in contact with the law and witnesses, including efforts to prevent their revictimization, and addressing
the needs of children of prisoners, stressing that such responses should take into account the human rights and best
interests of children and young people, consistent with the obligations of the States parties under relevant international
instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child871 and the Optional Protocols thereto,872 and noting
other relevant United Nations standards and norms in juvenile justice, where appropriate,
Taking note with appreciation of the partnership between the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in promoting the importance of education
as an effective tool for the prevention of crime and terrorism, under the Education for Justice initiative, and in this
respect taking note with appreciation also of the launch of the joint publication entitled Strengthening the Rule of Law
through Education: A Guide for Policymakers,
Emphasizing the relevance of international instruments and United Nations standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice related to the treatment of prisoners, in particular women and juveniles,
Recalling its resolution 70/146 of 17 December 2015, in which it reaffirmed that no one shall be subjected to
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Stressing the importance of the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials873 and the Basic Principles on
the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials,874 which are voluntary guidelines that emphasize, inter
alia, efficient and human rights-based policing,

_______________
868

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2017, Supplement No. 10 (E/2017/30), chap. I, sect. D.
Ibid., 2014, Supplement No. 7 (E/2014/27), chap. I, sect. A.
870
Resolution 69/194, annex.
871
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
872
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
873
Resolution 34/169, annex.
874
See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990:
report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.
869

1002

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling its resolution 65/229 of 21 December 2010 on the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women
Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules), and in this regard encouraging
the efforts of Member States to implement the Bangkok Rules,
Welcoming the adoption, by its resolution 70/175 of 17 December 2015, of the revision to the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, as the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules), and reaffirming its resolution 72/193 of 19 December 2017, in which, inter
alia, Member States were encouraged to endeavour to improve conditions of imprisonment and to promote the
practical application of the Nelson Mandela Rules as the universally acknowledged and updated minimum standards
for the treatment of prisoners, to use the Rules as a guide in the development of prison laws, policies and practices, to
continue exchanging good practices and identifying challenges faced in the practical application of the Rules and to
share their experiences in dealing with those challenges,
Welcoming also Economic and Social Council resolution 2017/19 of 6 July 2017 on promoting and
encouraging the implementation of alternatives to imprisonment as part of comprehensive crime prevention and
criminal justice policies,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, which constitutes a serious crime and a grave
offence to human dignity and physical integrity, a violation or abuse of human rights and a challenge to sustainable
development and requires the implementation of a comprehensive approach that includes measures to prevent such
trafficking, to punish the traffickers and to identify and protect the victims of such trafficking, and a robust criminal
justice response, and recalling in this respect the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,875 and its resolutions 71/167
of 19 December 2016, 72/195 of 19 December 2017 and 73/146 of 17 December 2018,
Bearing in mind its resolution 73/189 of 17 December 2018 on strengthening and promoting effective measures
and international cooperation on organ donation and transplantation to prevent and combat trafficking in persons for
the purpose of organ removal and trafficking in human organs,
Reaffirming its resolution 72/1 of 27 September 2017, by which it adopted the political declaration on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
Underlining that Member States need to recognize that the crime of smuggling of migrants and the crime of
trafficking in persons are distinct crimes and require separate and complementary legal, operational and policy
responses, while recognizing that smuggled migrants might also become victims of trafficking in persons and
therefore require appropriate protection and assistance, and recalling its resolutions 69/187 of 18 December 2014,
70/147 of 17 December 2015 and 72/179 of 19 December 2017, in which it called upon all Member States to protect
and assist migrants, including migrant children and adolescents, and Economic and Social Council resolutions
2014/23 of 16 July 2014 and 2015/23 of 21 July 2015,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, in which it, inter alia, committed to taking immediate
and effective measures to eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking and secure the
prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour,
Recalling its resolution 71/1 of 19 September 2016, by which it adopted the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants, which addresses the issue of large movements of refugees and migrants,
Stressing the importance for Member States to take legislative or other measures to prevent, combat and
eradicate trafficking in persons in the context of international migration by strengthening capacities and international
cooperation to investigate, prosecute and penalize trafficking in persons, discouraging demand that fosters exploitation
leading to trafficking, and ending impunity of trafficking networks,
Welcoming the work of the United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, established in accordance with the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking

_______________
875

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.

1003

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

in Persons, adopted by its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010, as well as the important contribution of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons, within its mandate, to the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action, and of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children,
Concerned at the growing involvement of terrorist and organized criminal groups in all forms and aspects of
trafficking in cultural property and related offences, and alarmed by the destruction of cultural heritage perpetrated
recently by terrorist groups, which is linked to trafficking in cultural property in some countries and to financing of
terrorist activities,
Recognizing the indispensable role of crime prevention and criminal justice responses in combating all forms
and aspects of trafficking in cultural property and related offences in a comprehensive and effective manner, and
underlining the importance of the technical assistance provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
aimed at supporting the implementation of the International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences876 and at facilitating
operational cooperation against all forms of trafficking in cultural property, including through the practical assistance
tool developed to that end,
Welcoming resolution 27/5 of 18 May 2018 of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,877
which focused on the need to strengthen international cooperation to prevent and counter trafficking in cultural
property, including through judicial cooperation and mutual legal assistance, and noting the efforts of Member States
to implement General Assembly resolutions 68/186 of 18 December 2013, 69/196, and 73/130 of 13 December 2018,
Affirming that the destruction of cultural heritage, which is representative of the diversity of human culture,
erases the collective memories of a nation, destabilizes communities and threatens their cultural identity, and
emphasizing the importance of cultural diversity and pluralism as well as freedom of religion and belief for achieving
peace, stability, reconciliation and social cohesion, and recalling in this respect its resolution 73/130,
Reaffirming the intrinsic value of biological diversity and its various contributions to sustainable development
and human well-being, and recognizing that wild fauna and flora in their many beautiful and varied forms are an
irreplaceable part of the natural systems of the Earth which must be protected for this generation and the generations
to come,
Emphasizing that the protection of wildlife must be part of a comprehensive approach to achieving poverty
eradication, food security, sustainable development, including the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity, economic growth, social well-being and sustainable livelihoods,
Expressing deep concern about crimes that affect the environment, including illicit trafficking in endangered
and, where applicable, protected species of wild fauna and flora, and in hazardous waste, and emphasizing the need
to combat such crimes by strengthening coordinated action to eliminate, prevent and combat corruption and disrupt
illicit networks and also by coordinating international cooperation, capacity-building, criminal justice responses and
law enforcement efforts,
Recognizing, in this respect, the legal framework provided by and the important role of the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora878 as the primary mechanism for regulating
international trade in species of wild fauna and flora listed in its appendices,
Recalling the adoption of its resolutions 71/326 of 11 September 2017 and 73/343 of 16 September 2019 on
tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife, and welcoming Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
resolution 28/3 of 24 May 2019,879

_______________
876

Resolution 69/196, annex.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2018, Supplement No. 10 (E/2018/30), chap. I, sect. C.
878
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 993, No. 14537.
879
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2019, Supplement No. 10 (E/2019/30), chap. I, sect. D.
877

1004

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Concerned at the growing trend of cybercrime and the misuse of information and communications technologies
in multiple forms of crime, and recalling its resolution 73/187 of 17 December 2018, as well as Economic and Social
Council resolutions 2019/19 and 2019/20 of 23 July 2019,
Stressing the need to enhance coordination and cooperation among Member States in combating cybercrime,
including by providing technical assistance to developing countries, upon request, to improve national legislation and
enhance the capacity of national authorities to deal with cybercrime in all its forms, including its prevention, detection,
investigation and prosecution, emphasizing in this context the role that the United Nations, in particular the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, plays, and reaffirming the importance of respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the use of information and communications technologies,
Welcoming, in this respect, Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 26/4 of 26 May
2017 on strengthening international cooperation to combat cybercrime,868 in which the open-ended intergovernmental
Expert Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime was requested to continue its work and exchange
of information on national legislation, best practices, technical assistance and international cooperation with a view to
examining options to strengthen existing responses and propose new national and international legal or other
responses to cybercrime, and was encouraged to develop possible conclusions and recommendations for submission
to the Commission,
Concerned at the serious challenges and threats posed by illicit trafficking in firearms, their parts and
components and ammunition, and about its links with other forms of transnational organized crime, including drug
trafficking, as well as terrorism,
Noting international efforts to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in conventional arms, in particular
in small arms and light weapons, as demonstrated by the adoption in 2001 of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,880 the entry into force in
2005 of the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,881 and the
entry into force in 2014 of the Arms Trade Treaty,882
Welcoming the 2019 Ministerial Declaration on Strengthening Our Actions at the National, Regional and
International Levels to Accelerate the Implementation of Our Joint Commitments to Address and Counter the World
Drug Problem,883 adopted during the ministerial segment of the sixty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, in which Member States committed to accelerating, based on the principle of common and shared
responsibility, the full implementation of the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,884 the Joint Ministerial
Statement of the 2014 high-level review by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the implementation by Member
States of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action885 and the outcome document of the special session of the
General Assembly on the world drug problem held in 2016,886 aimed at achieving all commitments, operational
recommendations and aspirational goals set out therein,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General prepared pursuant to
resolution 73/186;887

_______________
880

Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July
2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
881
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2326, No. 39574.
882
See resolution 67/234 B.
883
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2019, Supplement No. 8 (E/2019/28), chap. I, sect. B.
884
Ibid., 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.
885
Ibid., 2014, Supplement No. 8 (E/2014/28), chap. I, sect. C.
886
Resolution S-30/1, annex.
887
A/74/125.

1005

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Reaffirms its resolution 70/1, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development”, which, inter alia, includes the commitment to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels;
3. Calls upon all Member States, when appropriate, to take into consideration the Doha Declaration on
Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and
Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels, and Public
Participation, adopted at the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in
Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015,862 when formulating legislation and policy directives, and to make every effort, where
appropriate, to implement the principles contained therein in conformity with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide
technical assistance, upon request, to Member States, including through its Global Programme for the Implementation
of the Doha Declaration and the Education for Justice initiative;
4. Encourages Member States to promote the integrity, honesty and responsibility of criminal justice
practitioners through specialized and appropriate training and the application of codes or standards of conduct, and in
this context notes the work of the Global Judicial Integrity Network aimed at strengthening judicial integrity;
5. Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto,857 the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,858 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,859 the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988,860 the
United Nations Convention against Corruption861 and the international conventions and protocols related to terrorism,
and urges States parties to those conventions and protocols to make efforts towards their effective implementation,
particularly with regard to preventing and combating transnational organized crime, including cybercrime;
6. Reaffirms that the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,866 the twentieth
anniversary of which will be celebrated in 2020, and the Protocols thereto represent the most important tools of the
international community for fighting transnational organized crime, including cybercrime, and notes with appreciation
that the number of States parties has reached 190, which is a significant indication of the commitment shown by the
international community to combating transnational organized crime;
7. Welcomes the adoption of resolution 9/1 of 19 October 2018, entitled “Establishment of the Mechanism
for the Review of the Implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
the Protocols thereto”, at the ninth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, held in Vienna from
15 to 19 October 2018,888 and urges States parties to implement and support the Mechanism;
8. Encourages States parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime to
submit case law, legislation and other relevant responses to the knowledge management portal known as Sharing
Electronic Resources and Laws on Crime;
9. Welcomes the decisions of the Conference of the Parties at its eighth session, held in Vienna from 17 to
21 October 2016, to promote greater use of the Convention by central authorities in extradition and mutual legal
assistance and to enhance the effectiveness of these authorities and to strengthen, as appropriate, the implementation
of the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;881
10. Urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption to continue to provide full
support to the review mechanism adopted by the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention, notes the progress
made under the second cycle of the Mechanism for the Review of Implementation of the Convention, and further
notes with appreciation that the number of States parties has reached 186, which is a significant indication of the
commitment shown by the international community to combating corruption and related crimes;
11. Also urges States parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption to increase their efforts and
to take measures to prevent and counter corruption, with the necessary focus on, among others, acts of corruption that

_______________
888

1006

See CTOC/COP/2018/13, sect. I.A.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

involve vast quantities of assets, without undermining their commitment to preventing and countering corruption at
all levels and in all forms, and calls upon States parties to the Convention to take measures to ensure that legal and
natural persons are held accountable for corruption offences, including when they involve bribery and vast quantities
of assets, in accordance with the Convention;
12. Welcomes the progress achieved by the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption in the implementation of their respective mandates, and calls upon States parties to give full effect to the
resolutions adopted by those bodies, including providing information regarding compliance with the treaties;
13. Encourages Member States to strengthen the capacity of their respective criminal justice systems to
investigate, prosecute and punish all forms of crime, while supporting an effective, fair, humane and accountable
criminal justice system and protecting the human rights and fundamental freedoms of defendants, as well as the
legitimate interests of victims and witnesses, and to adopt and reinforce measures to ensure access to effective legal
aid in criminal justice systems, and in this context takes note of the establishment of the Global Judicial Integrity
Network in April 2018;
14. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to
Member States, upon request, including, inter alia, in the field of international cooperation in criminal matters, to
strengthen the rule of law, also taking into account the work undertaken by other United Nations entities, within
existing mandates, as well as regional and bilateral efforts, and to continue to ensure coordination and coherence,
including through the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group;
15. Calls for greater coordination and coherence among United Nations entities and with stakeholders,
including donors, host countries and recipients of capacity-building, in countering transnational organized crime;
16. Reiterates the importance of providing the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme with sufficient, stable and predictable funding for the full implementation of its mandates;
17. Encourages all States to have national and local action plans for crime prevention in order to take into
account, in a comprehensive, integrated and participatory manner, inter alia, factors that place certain populations and
places at higher risk of victimization and/or of offending, and to ensure that such plans are based on the best available
evidence and good practices, and stresses that crime prevention should be considered an integral element of strategies
to foster social and economic development in all States, in accordance with the commitments contained in General
Assembly resolutions 70/1 and 70/299;
18. Recommends that Member States adopt multisectoral crime prevention policies and programmes for
youth, taking into consideration their varying needs, and safeguard their well-being, recognizing that youth may face
specific challenges and risk factors that make them particularly vulnerable to crime, all forms of violence, terrorism
and victimization;
19. Invites the President of the General Assembly, in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and with the involvement of relevant stakeholders, to hold, within existing resources and during the
seventy-fourth session, a high-level debate on the theme “Urban safety, security and good governance: making crime
prevention a priority for all” and to prepare a summary of the discussion for transmission to the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice and to all Member States;
20. Urges Member States, in cooperation with the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme, to develop national, subregional, regional and international strategies, with the support of relevant
international organizations, as appropriate, and other necessary measures, including the establishment, in accordance
with domestic legislation, of designated central and competent authorities and effective points of contact dedicated to
facilitating the procedures related to international cooperation, including for extradition and mutual legal assistance
requests, in order to effectively address transnational organized crime; to strengthen all forms of cooperation to enable
the return of illicitly acquired assets in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption for asset recovery, in particular chapter V, with the cooperation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, within its existing mandate; and to inform accordingly the Office about existing or updated contact details of
such authorities and points of contact to facilitate international cooperation as appropriate;

1007

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

21. Encourages Member States to study the implementation of a common documentation standard, including
within the United Nations system and in cooperation with relevant international institutions;
22. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme in
promoting effective action to strengthen international cooperation in crime prevention and criminal justice, as well as
of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the fulfilment of its mandate in crime prevention and
criminal justice, including providing to Member States, upon request and as a matter of high priority, technical
cooperation, advisory services and other forms of assistance, and coordinating with and complementing the work of
all relevant and competent United Nations bodies and offices in respect of all forms of organized crime, including
piracy and transnational organized crime committed at sea, cybercrime, criminal misuse of the Internet and other
information and communications technologies as well as such misuse for terrorist purposes, the misuse of new
information technologies to abuse and exploit children, trafficking in cultural property and artefacts, illicit financial
flows, money-laundering, economic and financial crimes, including fraud, as well as tax and corporate crimes, matchfixing, counterfeiting in trademark goods, illicit trafficking in endangered species of wild fauna and flora and other
crimes that affect the environment, such as trafficking in timber, precious metals, stones and other minerals, drug
trafficking, kidnapping, trafficking in persons, including the support and protection, as appropriate, of victims, their
families and witnesses, organ trafficking, smuggling of migrants and illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in
firearms, direct and indirect trade in oil and refined oil products with organized criminal and terrorist groups, as well
as corruption and terrorism;
23. Encourages Member States to collect relevant information and to further identify, analyse and counter any
existing, growing or potential links, in some cases, between transnational organized crime, illicit drug-related
activities, money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, in order to enhance criminal justice responses to those
crimes, and calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its relevant mandates, to support, upon
request, the efforts of Member States in that regard;
24. Calls upon Member States to strengthen cooperation at the international, regional, subregional and
bilateral levels to counter the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, including those who are returning and
relocating, including through enhanced operational and timely information-sharing, logistical support, as appropriate,
and capacity-building activities, such as those provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to share
and adopt best practices to identify foreign terrorist fighters, to prevent the travel of foreign terrorist fighters from, into
or through Member States, to prevent the financing, mobilization, recruitment and organization of foreign terrorist
fighters, to prevent and counter violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, to enhance efforts to
implement prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies, taking into account gender and age dimensions,
and to ensure that any person who participates in the financing, planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts
or in the supporting of terrorist acts is brought to justice, in compliance with obligations under international law, as
well as applicable domestic law, and requests the Office to continue to provide technical assistance, upon request, in
this regard in cooperation and coordination with the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities;
25. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to further enhance technical assistance, upon
request, for building the capacity of Member States to become party to and implement the international conventions
and protocols related to counter-terrorism, including through targeted programmes and the training of relevant
criminal justice and law enforcement officials, upon request, and the development of technical tools and publications,
within its mandate, and in this respect takes note with appreciation of the Guidance Manual for Member States on
Terrorist Financing Risk Assessments, published by the Office;
26. Calls upon Member States to address the threat posed by radicalization to terrorism in prisons, and calls
upon the United Nations, especially the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to continue to support Member
States in this regard in cooperation and coordination with the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities;
27. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to increase collaboration with intergovernmental,
international and regional organizations that have transnational organized crime mandates, as appropriate, in order to
share best practices, foster cooperation and take advantage of their unique and comparative advantage;
28. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its country and regional
offices in building capacity at the local level in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, and urges the Office
1008

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

to consider regional vulnerabilities, projects and impacts in the fight against transnational organized crime in all its
forms, in particular in developing countries, when deciding to close and allocate offices, with a view to maintaining
an effective level of support to national and regional efforts in those areas;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with
adequate resources to support, in an effective manner, efforts towards the implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, the United
Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 and the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, and to discharge its functions as the secretariat of the conferences of the
parties to the conventions, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, as well as the United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice, in accordance
with its mandate, and requests the Secretariat to continue to provide support to the Commissions within their
respective mandates, enabling them to actively contribute, as appropriate, to the global follow-up and the thematic
review of progress made by Member States in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals as set forth in
resolutions 70/299, and 72/305 of 23 July 2018;
30. Urges all Member States to provide the fullest possible financial and political support to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by widening its donor base and increasing voluntary contributions, in particular
general-purpose contributions, so as to enable it to continue, expand, improve and strengthen, within its mandates, its
research, operational and technical cooperation activities;
31. Expresses concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, emphasizes the need to provide the Office with adequate, predictable and stable resources and to ensure their
cost-effective utilization, and requests the Secretary-General, also considering the extension of the mandate of the
standing open-ended intergovernmental working group on improving the governance and financial situation of the
Office, to continue to report, within existing reporting obligations, on the financial situation of the Office and to
continue to ensure that the Office has sufficient resources to carry out its mandates fully and effectively;
32. Invites States and other interested parties to make further voluntary contributions to the United Nations
voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, and to the United Nations
voluntary trust fund on contemporary forms of slavery;
33. Calls upon Member States to intensify national and international efforts to eliminate all forms of
discrimination, including racism, religious intolerance, xenophobia and gender-related discrimination by, inter alia,
raising awareness, developing educational materials and programmes and considering, where appropriate, drafting
and enforcing legislation against discrimination;
34. Emphasizes the importance of protecting vulnerable members of society, regardless of their status, who
may be subject to multiple and aggravated forms of discrimination, and in that regard expresses its concern about the
increase in the activities of transnational and national organized criminal groups and others who profit from crimes
against migrants, especially women and children, without regard for dangerous and inhumane conditions and in
flagrant violation of national laws and international law;
35. Calls upon Member States to implement, when appropriate, the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules),889 bearing in mind their spirit and purpose, and to intensify
their efforts to address the challenge of prison overcrowding through appropriate criminal justice reforms, which
should include, where appropriate, a review of penal policies and practical measures to reduce pretrial detention, to
enhance the use of non-custodial sanctions and measures and to improve access to legal aid to the extent possible, and
requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance to Member States,
upon request, in this respect;
36. Invites Member States to mainstream a gender perspective into their criminal justice systems, including
by the use of non-custodial measures for women, when appropriate, and by improving the treatment of women
prisoners, taking into consideration the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and

_______________
889

Resolution 70/175, annex.

1009

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules),890 and by developing and implementing
national strategies and plans to promote the full protection of women and girls from all acts of violence and to
strengthen the crime prevention and criminal justice response to the gender-related killing of women and girls, in
particular by taking measures to support the practical capacity of Member States to prevent, investigate, prosecute
and punish all forms of such crime, and welcomes in this respect the practical tools recommended by the openended intergovernmental expert group on gender-related killing of women and girls at its meeting held in Bangkok
from 11 to 13 November 2014;891
37. Also invites Member States to integrate child- and youth-related issues into their criminal justice reform
efforts, recognizing the importance of protecting children from all forms of violence, exploitation and abuse,
consistent with the obligations of parties under relevant international instruments, and to develop comprehensive
child-sensitive justice policies focused on the best interests of the child, consistent with the principle that the deprivation
of liberty of children should be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time;
38. Recognizes the efforts made by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to assist Member States in
developing their abilities and strengthening their capacity to prevent and combat kidnapping, and requests the Office
to continue to provide technical assistance, upon request, with a view to fostering international cooperation, in
particular mutual legal assistance, aimed at countering effectively this growing serious crime;
39. Calls upon Member States to consider ratifying or acceding to, and for States parties to effectively
implement, the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,892 to reinforce international cooperation for preventing and
combating the smuggling of migrants and for the prosecution of smugglers, in accordance, as appropriate, with article
6 of the Protocol and with national laws and legislation, while effectively protecting the rights and respecting the
dignity of smuggled migrants, consistent with the principles of non-discrimination and other applicable obligations
under relevant international law, taking into account the special needs of women, children, especially when
unaccompanied, and persons with disabilities and older persons, and in collaboration with international organizations,
civil society and the private sector, and in this regard calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
continue its technical assistance to Member States in accordance with the Protocol;
40. Takes note of the launch of the first United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Global Study on Smuggling
of Migrants, encourages Member States to promote the reliable collection of relevant data and research, at the national
and, as appropriate, the regional and international levels, and invites the Office to systematically collect data and
information from Member States on migrant smuggling routes, the modus operandi of migrant smugglers and the role
of transnational organized crime, and invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources for
this purpose;
41. Encourages Member States to ensure that, in investigating and prosecuting trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants, the concurrent undertaking of financial investigations is a standard practice, with a view to
tracing, freezing and confiscating proceeds acquired through those crimes, and to consider trafficking in persons and
the smuggling of migrants to be predicate offences of money-laundering;
42. Emphasizes the importance of preventing and combating all forms of trafficking in persons, and in this
regard expresses its concern about the activities of transnational and national organized criminal groups and others
who profit from such crimes, including for the purpose of organ removal, and calls upon Member States to consider
ratifying or acceding to, and for States parties, in accordance with their obligations, to fully and effectively implement
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,875 as well as to strengthen national efforts to
combat all forms of trafficking in persons and to protect and assist the victims of trafficking in accordance with all
relevant legal obligations and in collaboration with international organizations, civil society and the private sector, and
in this regard calls upon the United Office on Drugs and Crime to continue its technical assistance to Member States
in accordance with the Protocol;

_______________
890

Resolution 65/229, annex.
See E/CN.15/2015/16.
892
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2241, No. 39574.
891

1010

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

43. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to enhance its technical assistance to Member
States, upon request, to strengthen international cooperation in preventing and combating terrorism, including the
phenomenon of travelling, returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters, especially with regard to extradition and
mutual legal assistance, and its financial sources, through the facilitation of the ratification and implementation of the
universal conventions and protocols related to terrorism, in close consultation and cooperation with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism (the CounterTerrorism Committee) and its Executive Directorate, as well as to contribute to the work of the Office of CounterTerrorism, established in accordance with resolution 71/291, and of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities, and invites Member States to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
with appropriate resources for its mandate;
44. Urges the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide, within its mandate, technical
assistance to Member States, upon their request, to combat money-laundering and the financing of terrorism through
the Global Programme against Money-Laundering, Proceeds of Crime and the Financing of Terrorism, in accordance
with United Nations-related instruments and international standards, including, where applicable, standards and
relevant initiatives of regional, interregional and multilateral organizations and intergovernmental bodies against
money-laundering, inter alia and as appropriate, the Financial Action Task Force, in accordance with national
legislation;
45. Encourages Member States to enhance the effectiveness of countering criminal threats to the tourism
sector, including terrorist threats, through, when appropriate, the activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and other relevant international organizations, in cooperation with the World Tourism Organization and the
private sector;
46. Affirms that attacks intentionally directed against buildings dedicated to religion, education, art, science or
charitable purposes, or historic monuments, or hospitals and places where the sick and wounded are collected, may
amount to war crimes, stresses the importance of holding accountable perpetrators of attacks intentionally directed
against the above-mentioned buildings, provided that they are not military objectives, and calls upon all States to take
appropriate action to this end within their jurisdiction in accordance with applicable international law;
47. Urges States parties to make effective use of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime for broad cooperation in preventing and combating all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural
property and related offences, including money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, especially in returning such
confiscated proceeds of crime or property to their legitimate owners, in accordance with article 14, paragraph 2, of
the Convention;
48. Encourages States parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime to
promptly notify countries of origin when objects that may be cultural property removed from their territory are
identified, and to exchange information and statistical data on all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property
and related offences, and reaffirms in this regard the importance of the International Guidelines for Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences, as
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 69/196;
49. Urges Member States to introduce effective national and international measures to prevent and combat
illicit trafficking in cultural property, including publicizing legislation, international guidelines and related technical
background documents, and offering special training for police, customs and border services, and invites Member
States to make trafficking in cultural property and related offences, including stealing from and looting of
archaeological and other cultural sites, a serious crime, as defined in article 2 (b) of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime;
50. Also urges Member States to take decisive steps at the national level to prevent, combat and eradicate the
illegal trade in wildlife, on both the supply and demand sides, including by strengthening the legislation necessary for
the prevention, investigation and prosecution of such illegal trade, as well as by strengthening enforcement and
criminal justice responses, in accordance with national legislation and international law, acknowledging that the
International Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime can provide valuable technical assistance in this regard;
51. Calls upon Member States to make illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora and other
crimes that affect the environment, such as trafficking in timber, precious metals, stones and other minerals, involving
1011

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

organized criminal groups a serious crime in accordance with their national legislation and with article 2 (b) of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
52. Also calls upon Member States to take appropriate and effective measures to prevent and combat
trafficking in precious metals, stones and other minerals by organized criminal groups, including, where appropriate,
the adoption and effective implementation of the necessary legislation for the prevention, investigation and
prosecution of illicit trafficking in precious metals, stones and other minerals;
53. Encourages Member States to continue to support the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
providing targeted technical assistance, within its existing mandate, to enhance the capacity of affected States, upon
their request, to combat piracy and other forms of crime committed at sea, including by assisting Member States in
creating an effective law enforcement response and strengthening their judicial capacity;
54. Notes with appreciation the fifth meeting of the open-ended intergovernmental Expert Group to Conduct
a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime and the responses to cybercrime by Member States, the international
community and the private sector, and calls upon Member States to support the workplan of the Expert Group and to
explore specific measures and develop possible conclusions and recommendations designed to create a secure and
resilient cyberenvironment, to prevent and counter effectively criminal activities carried out over the Internet, paying
particular attention to identity fraud-related offences, recruitment for the purpose of trafficking in persons and
protecting children from online exploitation and abuse, to strengthen law enforcement cooperation at the national and
international levels, including with the aim of identifying and protecting victims by, inter alia, removing child
pornography and other child sexual abuse material from the Internet, to enhance the security of computer networks
and protect the integrity of relevant infrastructure, and to endeavour to provide long-term technical assistance and
capacity-building to strengthen the ability of national authorities to deal with cybercrime, including the prevention,
detection, investigation and prosecution of such crime in all its forms;
55. Encourages Member States to strengthen their efforts in combating cybercrime and all forms of criminal
misuse of information and communications technologies and to enhance international cooperation involving
electronic evidence in this regard;
56. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to assist Member States, upon request,
in combating the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, and
to support them in their efforts to address the links with other forms of transnational organized crime, through, inter
alia, legislative assistance, technical support, improved data collection and analysis and strengthened national
statistical systems, and in this respect invites Member States to provide the Office with relevant information and
suitably disaggregated data through the regular data collection instrument on firearms trafficking;
57. Urges Member States to exchange good practices and experiences of practitioners who are involved in
combating illicit trafficking in firearms and to consider the use of available tools, including marking and recordkeeping technologies, to facilitate the tracing of firearms and, where possible, their parts and components and
ammunition, in order to enhance criminal investigations into illicit trafficking in firearms;
58. Urges States parties to the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition that import and export parts and components of firearms to reinforce their
control measures in line with the Protocol and other relevant international legal instruments to which they are party,
with a view to preventing and reducing the risks of their diversion, illicit manufacturing and trafficking;
59. Calls upon Member States to intensify all efforts to address the world drug problem, based upon the
principle of common and shared responsibility and through a comprehensive and balanced approach, including
through more effective bilateral, regional and international cooperation among judicial and law enforcement
authorities, to counter the involvement of organized criminal groups in illicit drug production and trafficking and
related criminal activities and to take steps to reduce the violence that accompanies drug trafficking;
60. Recommends that Member States, as appropriate to their national contexts, adopt a comprehensive and
integrated approach to crime prevention and criminal justice reform, based on baseline assessments, regular data
collection and analysis, and focusing on all sectors of the justice system, and develop crime prevention policies,
strategies and programmes, including ones that focus on early prevention by using multidisciplinary and participatory
approaches, in close cooperation with all stakeholders, including civil society, and requests the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide technical assistance, upon request, to Member States for this purpose;

1012

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

61. Reiterates its invitation to Member States to gradually adopt the International Classification of Crime for
Statistical Purposes and to strengthen national statistical systems of criminal justice, requests the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, within its existing mandate, to continue to strengthen the regular collection, analysis and
dissemination of accurate, reliable, timely and comparable data and information, including, as appropriate, data
disaggregated by sex, age and other relevant criteria, and strongly encourages Member States to share such data and
information with the Office;
62. Takes note of the global studies on the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons and intentional
homicide, including on the gender-related killing of women and girls, that have been produced by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and thus provide data-driven analyses in support of policy development at the national
and international levels, and requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to develop, in close
cooperation with Member States, technical and methodological tools and trend analyses and studies to enhance
knowledge of crime trends and support Member States in designing appropriate responses in specific areas of crime,
in particular in their transnational dimension and in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals,863 taking into
account the need to make the best possible use of existing resources;
63. Encourages Member States to take relevant measures, as appropriate to their national contexts, to ensure
the diffusion, use and application of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice,
including the consideration and, where they deem it necessary, dissemination of existing manuals, handbooks and
capacity-building material developed and published by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
64. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in collaboration and close consultation with
Member States and within existing resources, to continue to support the enhancement of capacity and skills in the
field of forensic sciences, including the setting of standards, and the development of technical assistance material for
training, such as manuals, compilations of useful practices and guidelines and scientific and forensic reference
material, for law enforcement officials and prosecution authorities, and to promote and facilitate the establishment
and sustainability of regional networks of forensic science providers in order to enhance their expertise and capacity
to prevent and combat transnational organized crime;
65. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on
the implementation of the mandates of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme,
reflecting also emerging policy issues and possible responses.
RESOLUTION 74/178
Adopted at the 50th plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/402, para. 11)893

74/178. International cooperation to address and counter the world drug problem
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the outcome document of the thirtieth special session of the General Assembly, entitled “Our joint
commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem”,894 in its entirety, and reiterating that
the operational recommendations contained therein are integrated, indivisible, multidisciplinary and mutually
reinforcing and are aimed at a comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach to addressing and countering the
world drug problem,

_______________
893

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, North Macedonia, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, United States of America, Uruguay and Zimbabwe.
894
Resolution S-30/1, annex.

1013

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the 2019 Ministerial Declaration on Strengthening Our Actions at the National, Regional and
International Levels to Accelerate the Implementation of Our Joint Commitments to Address and Counter the World
Drug Problem895 adopted at the ministerial segment of the sixty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
which was held to take stock of the implementation of the commitments made over the past decade to jointly address
and counter the world drug problem,
Reaffirming the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem896 and the Joint Ministerial Statement of the
2014 high-level review by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the implementation by Member States of the
Political Declaration and Plan of Action,897 and recalling the resolutions adopted at the twentieth special session of
the General Assembly,898
Recalling other relevant United Nations resolutions, including General Assembly resolution 73/192 of
17 December 2018,
Recalling also all resolutions adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its sixty-second session,895
Underscoring that the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol,899 the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,900 the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988901 and other relevant international instruments constitute the cornerstone
of the international drug control system,
Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,902 and noting that efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals and to effectively address the world drug problem are complementary and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming its commitment to the goals and objectives of the three international drug control conventions,
including concern about the health and welfare of humankind as well as the individual and public health-related, social
and safety problems resulting from the abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, in particular among
children and young people, and drug-related crime, and reaffirming its determination to prevent and treat the abuse of
such substances and prevent and counter their illicit cultivation, production, manufacturing and trafficking,
Reaffirming its unwavering commitment to ensuring that all aspects of demand reduction and related measures,
supply reduction and related measures, and international cooperation are addressed in full conformity with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,903 with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the principle of
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States, all human rights, fundamental freedoms, the inherent dignity of all
individuals and the principles of equal rights and mutual respect among States,
Recognizing that the world drug problem remains a common and shared responsibility that should be addressed
in a multilateral setting through effective and increased international cooperation and demands an integrated,
multidisciplinary, mutually reinforcing, balanced, scientific evidence-based and comprehensive approach,
Reaffirming the crucial role of Member States in developing an effective and comprehensive approach to
addressing and countering the world drug problem,
Reaffirming also the principal role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as the policymaking body of the
United Nations with prime responsibility for drug control matters, as well as the treaty-mandated functions of the
Commission to consider and make recommendations relating to all matters pertaining to the aims and provisions of

_______________
895

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2019, Supplement No. 8 (E/2019/28), chap. I, sect. B.
Ibid., 2009, Supplement No. 8 (E/2009/28), chap. I, sect. C.
897
Ibid., 2014, Supplement No. 8 (E/2014/28), chap. I, sect. C.
898
Resolutions S-20/1, S-20/2, S-20/3 and S-20/4 A–E.
899
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152.
900
Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.
901
Ibid., vol. 1582, No. 27627.
902
Resolution 70/1.
903
Resolution 217 A (III).
896

1014

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the United Nations drug conventions, reaffirming further the support and appreciation of the General Assembly for
the efforts of the United Nations, in particular those of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as the leading
entity in the United Nations system for addressing and countering the world drug problem, and reaffirming the treatymandated roles of the International Narcotics Control Board and the World Health Organization,
Recognizing the role of the United Nations Development Programme and the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, among other agencies, within their respective mandates,
Recognizing also that civil society, as well as the scientific community and academia, play an important role in
addressing and countering the world drug problem, noting that affected populations and representatives of civil society
entities, where appropriate, should be enabled to play a participatory role in the formulation, implementation and
provision of relevant scientific evidence in support of, as appropriate, the evaluation of drug control policies and
programmes, and recognizing the importance of cooperation with the private sector in this regard,
Reaffirming the determination of Member States to tackle the world drug problem and to actively promote a
society free of drug abuse in order to help to ensure that all people can live in health, dignity and peace, with security
and prosperity, and reaffirming also the determination of Member States to address public health, safety and social
problems resulting from drug abuse,
Reaffirming also the need to address the key causes and consequences of the world drug problem, including
those in the health, social, human rights, economic, justice, public security and law enforcement fields, in line with
the principle of common and shared responsibility, and recognizing the value of comprehensive and balanced policy
interventions, including those in the field of promotion of sustainable and viable livelihoods,
Taking note of Human Rights Council resolution 37/42 of 23 March 2018, entitled “Contribution to the
implementation of the joint commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem with regard
to human rights”,904
Expressing its appreciation for the results already achieved by the initiatives at the bilateral, regional and
international levels, and recognizing that further positive results can be achieved with sustained and collective efforts
through international cooperation in reducing the demand and supply of illicit drugs,
Recognizing that, while tangible progress has been achieved in some fields, the world drug problem continues
to present challenges to the health, safety and well-being of all humanity, and resolving to reinforce national and
international efforts and further increase international cooperation to face those challenges,
Recognizing also, as part of a comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach to addressing and countering
the world drug problem, that appropriate emphasis should be placed on individuals, families, communities and society
as a whole, with a view to promoting and protecting the health, safety and well-being of all humanity,
Recognizing further the need to enhance efforts to strengthen the prevention of drug abuse among children and
youth, also in educational settings, including by promoting the exchange of experiences and good practices, as well
as technical assistance, and recalling Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 61/2 of 16 March 2018 on
strengthening efforts to prevent drug abuse in educational settings,905
Expressing deep concern at the high price paid by society and by individuals and their families as a result of the
world drug problem, and paying special tribute to those who have sacrificed their lives, including law enforcement
and judicial personnel, and to the health-care and civil society personnel and volunteers whose work is dedicated to
countering and addressing this phenomenon,
Noting with concern that the availability of internationally controlled drugs for medical and scientific purposes,
including for the relief of pain and suffering, remains low to non-existent in many countries, and highlighting the need
to enhance national efforts and international cooperation at all levels to address that situation by promoting measures
to ensure their availability, affordability and accessibility for medical and scientific purposes, within the framework
of national legal systems, while simultaneously preventing their diversion, abuse and trafficking, in order to fulfil the
aims and objectives of the three international drug control conventions,

_______________
904
905

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2018, Supplement No. 8 (E/2018/28), chap. I, sect. B.

1015

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Reaffirming equally that reducing drug abuse requires efforts to reduce demand, which must be demonstrated by
sustained widespread demand reduction initiatives that are age- and gender-sensitive and integrate a comprehensive
public health approach spanning the spectrum of prevention, education, early detection and intervention, treatment, care
and related support services, recovery support and the rehabilitation and social reintegration of drug users, in full
compliance with the three international drug control conventions,
Welcoming continued efforts to enhance coherence within the United Nations system at all levels,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other United Nations entities, within their respective mandates, in their efforts to support Member States in the
implementation of international drug control treaties in accordance with applicable human rights obligations and to
promote protection of and respect for human rights and the dignity of all individuals in the context of drug
programmes, strategies and policies,
Taking note of the various contributions made by Member States, United Nations entities, United Nations interagency initiatives aimed at strengthening coordination within the United Nations system, intergovernmental
organizations and other relevant stakeholders to the sixty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
Recognizing that successfully addressing and countering the world drug problem requires close cooperation and
coordination among domestic authorities at all levels, particularly in the health, education, justice and law enforcement
sectors, taking into account their respective areas of competence under national legislation,
Stressing the importance of enhancing international cooperation in the identification and voluntary reporting of
and response to new psychoactive substances and incidents involving such substances,
Noting with grave concern the increased abuse of certain drugs and the proliferation of new substances
worldwide, which are a possible threat to public health and are not controlled under the three international drug control
conventions,
Noting with grave concern also the increasing sophistication of the transnational criminal groups engaged in the
illicit manufacture and distribution of amphetamine-type stimulants worldwide, as well as the proliferation and
diversion of chemical precursors used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
Recognizing the importance of appropriately mainstreaming gender and age perspectives into drug-related
policies and programmes,
Expressing concern that aspects of the world drug problem associated with illicit drug production can cause
serious harm to the environment, including deforestation, soil erosion and degradation, the loss of endemic species,
contamination of the soil, groundwater and waterways, and the release of greenhouse gases,
Reaffirming that alternative development policies are an important component in enhancing development in
States affected by, or in some cases at risk of, the illicit cultivation of crops used for illicit drug production and
manufacture, and that they play an important role in national, regional and international development policies and in
comprehensive policies of poverty reduction and cooperation,
Reaffirming also the commitment to addressing drug-related socioeconomic issues related to the illicit
cultivation of narcotic plants and the illicit manufacture and production of and trafficking in drugs through the
implementation of long-term, comprehensive and sustainable development-oriented and balanced drug control
policies and programmes, including alternative development and, as appropriate, preventive alternative development
programmes, which are part of sustainable crop control strategies,
Reaffirming further the need to mobilize adequate resources to address and counter the world drug problem,
and calling for the enhancement of assistance to developing countries, upon request, in effectively implementing the
Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to
Counter the World Drug Problem and the operational recommendations contained in the annex to resolution S-30/1
of 19 April 2016,
Recognizing that there are persistent, new and evolving challenges that should be addressed in conformity with
the three international drug control conventions, which allow for sufficient flexibility for States parties to design and
implement national drug policies according to their priorities and needs, consistent with the principle of common and
shared responsibility and applicable international law,
1016

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Encouraging Member States to develop and strengthen, as appropriate, mechanisms of domestic coordination
and timely and efficient information-sharing between authorities involved in identifying and countering drug
trafficking, diversion of precursors and related money-laundering, to integrate financial investigations more
thoroughly into interdiction operations so as to identify individuals and companies involved in such activities, and to
encourage, in accordance with national legislation, cooperation with the private sector, including financial institutions,
designated non-financial businesses and professions, as well as providers of money or value transfer services, to
identify suspicious transactions, with a view to further investigating and disrupting the drug trafficking business
model,
1. Reaffirms the 2019 Ministerial Declaration on Strengthening Our Actions at the National, Regional and
International Levels to Accelerate the Implementation of Our Joint Commitments to Address and Counter the World
Drug Problem,895 and emphasizes that the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation
towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,896 the Joint Ministerial Statement
of the 2014 high-level review by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the implementation by Member States of the
Political Declaration and Plan of Action897 and the outcome document of the thirtieth special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem”,894
represent the commitments made by the international community over the preceding decade to counter the world drug
problem and address, in a balanced manner, all aspects of demand reduction and related measures, supply reduction
and related measures, and international cooperation identified in the 2009 Political Declaration, as well as additional
issues elaborated upon and identified in the outcome document of the thirtieth special session of the Assembly, held
in 2016, and recognizes that those documents are complementary and mutually reinforcing;
2. Recalls the thirtieth special session of the General Assembly, held at United Nations Headquarters from
19 to 21 April 2016, at which the Assembly reviewed the progress in the implementation of the Political Declaration
and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World
Drug Problem, including an assessment of the achievements and challenges in countering the world drug problem,
within the framework of the three international drug control conventions and other relevant United Nations
instruments, takes note of the discussions held during the session, and reaffirms in its entirety the outcome document
entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem”;
3. Reaffirms the shared commitment to effectively addressing and countering the world drug problem, which
requires concerted and sustained action at the national and international levels, including accelerating the
implementation of existing drug policy commitments;
4. Reiterates its call upon Member States to take, in a timely manner, the measures necessary to implement
the actions and attain the goals and targets set out in the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, and to address the general challenges and priorities for action identified
in the Joint Ministerial Statement of the 2014 high-level review by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the
implementation by Member States of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action;
5. Reaffirms that addressing and countering the world drug problem is a common and shared responsibility
that must be addressed in a multilateral setting, that it requires an integrated and balanced approach and that it must
be carried out in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and other
provisions of international law, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights903 and the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action906 on human rights and, in particular, with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, for the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and on the basis of the principles of equal rights and mutual respect;
6. Reiterates that the efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and to effectively address and
counter the world drug problem are complementary and mutually reinforcing, recognizes the role of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs in contributing to the global follow-up and in supporting the thematic review of progress on the
Goals related to its mandate, and in this regard encourages the Commission to continue to provide input to the high-

_______________
906

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

1017

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

level political forum on sustainable development, including by providing relevant data, as the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the outcome document of the thirtieth special session of the General Assembly may
contribute to the attainment of the related Goals;
7. Calls upon Member States to engage in effective cooperation and practical action aimed at addressing and
countering the world drug problem on the basis of the principle of common and shared responsibility;
8. Encourages Member States to enhance North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation, in
cooperation with the international development community and other key stakeholders, in order to effectively address
and counter the world drug problem;
9. Reiterates its commitment to promoting the health, welfare and well-being of all individuals, families,
communities and society as a whole and to facilitating healthy lifestyles through effective, comprehensive, scientific
evidence-based demand reduction initiatives at all levels, covering, in accordance with national legislation and the
three international drug control conventions, prevention, early intervention, treatment, care, recovery, rehabilitation
and social reintegration measures, as well as initiatives and measures aimed at minimizing the adverse public health
and social consequences of drug abuse;
10. Also reiterates its commitment to protect the safety and assure the security of individuals, societies and
communities by intensifying efforts to prevent and counter the illicit cultivation, production and manufacture of and
trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, as well as drug-related crime and violence, through, inter
alia, more effective drug-related crime prevention and law enforcement measures, as well as by addressing links with
other forms of organized crime, including money-laundering, corruption and other criminal activities, mindful of their
social and economic causes and consequences;
11. Underlines the need for Member States to cooperate closely with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the World Health Organization, the International Narcotics Control Board and other international and regional
organizations, as well as the scientific community, including academia, in contributing to the scientific assessment of
drug demand and supply reduction policies, drug markets and drug-related crime;
12. Recognizes that transit States continue to face multifaceted challenges, and reaffirms the continuing need
for cooperation and support, including the provision of technical assistance, to, inter alia, enhance their capacities to
effectively address and counter the world drug problem, in conformity with the United Nations Convention against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988;901
13. Urges Member States to address the relevant socioeconomic factors that relate to the world drug problem
through a comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach that incorporates drug policies into a broader
socioeconomic development agenda, in compliance with the three international drug control conventions;
14. Invites Member States to consider strengthening a development perspective as part of comprehensive,
integrated and balanced national drug policies and programmes so as to tackle the related causes and consequences
of the illicit cultivation, manufacture and production of and trafficking in drugs by, inter alia, addressing risk factors
affecting individuals, communities and society, which may include a lack of services, infrastructure needs, drugrelated violence, exclusion, marginalization and social disintegration, in order to contribute to the promotion of
peaceful and inclusive societies;
15. Encourages the development of viable economic alternatives, particularly for communities affected by or
at risk of illicit cultivation of drug crops and other illicit drug-related activities in urban and rural areas, including
through comprehensive alternative development programmes, and to this end encourages Member States to consider
development-oriented interventions, while ensuring that both men and women benefit equally from them, including
through job opportunities, improved infrastructure and basic public services and, as appropriate, access and legal titles
to land for farmers and local communities, which will also contribute to preventing, reducing or eliminating illicit
cultivation and other drug-related activities;
16. Emphasizes the need to strengthen, including through the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and, as
appropriate, its subsidiary bodies, the regular exchange of information, good practices and lessons learned among
national practitioners from different fields and at all levels to effectively implement an integrated and balanced
approach to the world drug problem and its various aspects and the need to consider additional measures to further
facilitate meaningful discussion among those practitioners;
1018

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

17. Reiterates its call to mainstream a gender perspective into and ensure the full and effective participation
of women in all stages of the development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of drug policies and
programmes, to develop and disseminate gender-sensitive and age-appropriate measures that take into account the
specific needs and circumstances faced by women and girls with regard to the world drug problem and, as States
parties, implement the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;907
18. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to support Member States, upon
request, in mainstreaming a gender perspective into their policies and programmes related to the world drug problem,
and invites the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN‑Women) and other
relevant United Nations entities, within their mandates, to cooperate with the Office in this regard;
19. Urges Member States to increase the availability, coverage and quality of scientific evidence-based
prevention measures and tools that target relevant age and risk groups in multiple settings, reaching youth in school
as well as out of school, among others, through drug abuse prevention programmes and public awareness-raising
campaigns, including by using the Internet, social media and other online platforms, to develop and implement
prevention curricula and early intervention programmes for use in the education system at all levels, as well as in
vocational training, including in the workplace, and to enhance the capacity of teachers and other relevant
professionals to provide or recommend counselling, prevention and care services;
20. Encourages Member States to identify and take advantage of opportunities to conduct collaborative
research and continuously share the latest scientific research, taking into account the contributions of the national,
regional and international scientific community, including academia, on the most effective demand and supply
reduction strategies, and to develop improved best practices on interventions to reduce demand for drugs, in
accordance with the three international drug control conventions and other drug policy commitments;
21. Invites Member States to consider enhancing cooperation among public health, education and law
enforcement authorities when developing prevention initiatives;
22. Urges Member States, as part of their comprehensive drug demand reduction measures at the national
level, to strengthen efforts, as appropriate, to prevent drug abuse in educational settings, in both the public and private
sectors, including by providing children and youth with information regarding drug abuse and its harmful effects and
consequences as well as drug use prevention, counselling and skills, resilience and opportunities to choose healthy
lifestyles, and to promote safe and drug-free environments in educational settings;
23. Invites Member States to promote and improve the systematic collection of information and gathering of
evidence as well as the sharing, at the national and international levels, of reliable and comparable data on drug use
and epidemiology, including on social, economic and other risk factors, to promote, as appropriate, through the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the World Health Assembly, the use of internationally recognized standards, such
as the International Standards on Drug Use Prevention, and the exchange of best practices, and to formulate effective
drug use prevention strategies and programmes in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
the World Health Organization and other relevant United Nations entities;
24. Encourages Member States, in their promotion and improvement of the systematic collection of
information and gathering of evidence, to gather scientific data on any damage to health that may be caused by
consuming drugs in vaporized form, and to take appropriate steps to exchange best practices and formulate effective
drug use prevention strategies and programmes, with a particular focus on children and youth;
25. Invites Member States to provide the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with information on best
practices and programmes recently implemented, consistent with the three international drug control conventions, in
order to assess recent developments and current and future challenges;
26. Recognizes drug dependence as a complex, multifactorial health disorder characterized by a chronic and
relapsing nature, with social causes and consequences, that can be prevented and treated through, inter alia, effective
scientific evidence-based drug treatment, care and rehabilitation programmes, including community-based
programmes, and also recognizes the need to strengthen capacity for aftercare for and the rehabilitation, recovery and

_______________
907

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.

1019

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

social reintegration of individuals with substance use disorders, including, as appropriate, through assistance for
effective reintegration into the labour market and other support services;
27. Encourages Member States to promote the prevention and treatment of drug use disorders, using scientific
evidence-based practices, such as those outlined in the International Standards for the Treatment of Drug Use
Disorders, that reflect respect for human rights and dignity, including the right to enjoy the highest attainable standard
of physical and mental health and well-being, promoting, as appropriate, within national and regional contexts,
non-stigmatizing attitudes in the development and implementation of scientific evidence-based policies;
28. Also encourages Member States to promote the inclusion in national drug policies, in accordance with
national legislation and as appropriate, of elements for the prevention and treatment of drug overdose, in particular
opioid overdose, including the use of opioid receptor antagonists, such as naloxone, to reduce drug-related mortality;
29. Invites Member States to promote cooperation with and technical assistance to the States most affected by
the world drug problem in developing and implementing comprehensive and integrated policies to address, where
appropriate, the impact of illicit drug trafficking on increasing drug use in such States, including by reinforcing
national programmes aimed at prevention, early intervention, treatment, care, rehabilitation and social reintegration;
30. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the International Narcotics Control Board
to continue to strengthen cooperation with the World Health Organization and other competent United Nations entities,
within their respective mandates, as part of a comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach to strengthening health
and social welfare measures in addressing the world drug problem, including through effective prevention, early
intervention, treatment, care, recovery, rehabilitation and social reintegration, in cooperation, as appropriate, with civil
society and the scientific community, and to keep the Commission on Narcotic Drugs appropriately updated;
31. Recalls the signing of the memorandum of understanding between the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the World Health Organization in February 2017, which will continue to facilitate increased
collaboration and coordination between these two entities, within their mandates, in advancing efforts to address and
counter the world drug problem, and encourages the Office to continue to strengthen its collaboration with the World
Health Organization and to explore, as appropriate, cooperation arrangements with other relevant United Nations
agencies and entities and to keep the Commission on Narcotic Drugs appropriately updated;
32. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the World Health Organization to continue
their collaboration to address and counter the world drug problem in accordance with their relevant mandates, and
takes note of the input of the World Health Organization, within its treaty-based mandate, in addressing and countering
the world drug problem from a public health dimension;
33. Encourages Member States to involve, as appropriate, policymakers, parliamentarians, educators, civil
society, the scientific community, academia, target populations, individuals in recovery from substance use disorders
and their peer groups, families and other co-dependent people, as well as the private sector, in the development of
prevention programmes aimed at raising public awareness of the dangers and risks associated with drug abuse, and
involve, inter alia, parents, care services providers, teachers, peer groups, health professionals, religious communities,
community leaders, social workers, sports associations, media professionals and entertainment industries, as
appropriate, in their implementation;
34. Also encourages Member States to consider alternatives to incarceration, conviction and punishment,
where appropriate and in accordance with the three international drug control conventions, noting that, in appropriate
cases of a minor nature, States may provide, as alternatives to conviction or punishment, measures such as education,
rehabilitation or social reintegration, as well as, when the offender has a drug use disorder, treatment and aftercare, as
well as support for recovery;
35. Encourages the development, adoption and implementation, with due regard for national, constitutional,
legal and administrative systems, of alternative or additional measures with regard to conviction or punishment in
cases of an appropriate nature, in accordance with the three international drug control conventions and taking into
account, as appropriate, relevant United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice, such
as the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules);908

_______________
908

1020

Resolution 45/110, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

36. Also encourages the consideration of the specific needs and possible multiple vulnerabilities of women
drug offenders when imprisoned, in line with the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules);909
37. Invites Member States to consider reviewing their drug sentencing policies and practices in order to
facilitate collaboration between justice, education and public health authorities in the development and
implementation of initiatives that utilize alternative measures to conviction or punishment for appropriate drug-related
offences of a minor nature, subject to the legal frameworks of Member States;
38. Emphasizes the need to enhance the knowledge of policymakers and the capacity, as appropriate, of
relevant national authorities on various aspects of the world drug problem in order to ensure that national drug policies,
as part of a comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach, fully respect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and protect the health, safety and well-being of individuals, families, vulnerable members of society,
communities and society as a whole, and to that end encourages the cooperation of Member States with, and
cooperation among, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Narcotics Control Board, the
World Health Organization and other relevant United Nations entities, within their respective mandates, including
those relevant to the above-mentioned issues, and relevant regional and international organizations, as well as with
civil society and the private sector, as appropriate;
39. Urges Member States to ensure non-discriminatory access to health, care and social services in prevention,
primary care and treatment programmes, including those offered to persons in prison or pretrial detention, which are
to be on a level equal to those available in the community, and to ensure that women, including detained women, have
access to adequate health services and counselling, including those particularly needed during pregnancy;
40. Encourages Member States to promote effective supervision of drug treatment and rehabilitation facilities
by competent domestic authorities so as to ensure adequate quality of drug treatment and rehabilitation services,
promote non‑stigmatizing attitudes and prevent any possible acts of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, in accordance with domestic legislation and applicable international law;
41. Calls upon Member States to enhance access to treatment for drug use disorders for those who are
incarcerated and promote effective oversight and encourage, as appropriate, self-assessments of confinement
facilities, taking into consideration the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice,
including the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules),910
implement, where appropriate, measures aimed at addressing and eliminating prison overcrowding and violence, and
provide capacity-building to relevant national authorities;
42. Encourages Member States to promote proportionate national sentencing policies, practices and
guidelines for drug-related offences, whereby the severity of penalties is proportionate to the gravity of offences and
both mitigating and aggravating factors are taken into account, including the circumstances enumerated in article 3 of
the 1988 Convention and other relevant and applicable international law, and in accordance with national legislation;
43. Calls for the promotion of bilateral, regional and international cooperation, including through intelligencesharing and cross-border cooperation, aimed at addressing and countering the world drug problem more effectively,
in particular by encouraging and supporting such cooperation by those States most directly affected by illicit crop
cultivation and the illicit production, manufacture, transit, trafficking, distribution and abuse of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;
44. Encourages Member States to develop and implement, as appropriate, comprehensive policies and
programmes that, by fostering social and sustainable development, are aimed at the prevention of crime and violence
and that address the multiple factors that contribute to marginalization, crime and victimization, in close cooperation
with relevant stakeholders, including civil society, and based on scientific evidence and taking into account good
practices;
45. Reaffirms the need for Member States to review and, if necessary, strengthen coordinated measures,
enhance capacity-building to counter money-laundering arising from drug trafficking and improve legal cooperation,

_______________
909
910

Resolution 65/229, annex.
Resolution 70/175, annex.

1021

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

including judicial cooperation, where appropriate, at the national, regional and international levels, to dismantle
organized criminal groups involved in drug trafficking, in order to provide for the prevention, detection, investigation
and prosecution of the perpetrators of such crimes, including cooperation to the fullest extent possible to suppress
illicit traffic by sea in conformity with the international law of the sea;
46. Underlines the need to strengthen regional, subregional and international cooperation in criminal matters,
as appropriate, including judicial cooperation in the areas of, inter alia, extradition, mutual legal assistance and transfer
of proceedings, in accordance with the three international drug control conventions and other international legal
instruments and national legislation, and to strive to provide appropriate resources to national competent authorities,
including through the provision of targeted technical assistance to requesting countries;
47. Reaffirms the importance of an integrated approach in drug policies, including by strengthening
partnerships between the public health, development, human rights, justice and law enforcement fields and by
facilitating inter-agency cooperation and communication, where appropriate;
48. Encourages the promotion, where appropriate, in the framework of international cooperation, of the use
of law enforcement techniques, consistent with national legislation and international law, including applicable human
rights obligations, in order to ensure that drug traffickers are brought to justice and that major criminal organizations
are disrupted and dismantled;
49. Reiterates the strong commitment of Member States to improving access to controlled substances for
medical and scientific purposes by appropriately addressing existing barriers in this regard, including those related to
legislation, regulatory systems, health-care systems, affordability, the training of health-care professionals, education,
awareness-raising, estimates, assessment and reporting, benchmarks for consumption of substances under control and
international cooperation and coordination, while concurrently preventing the diversion and abuse of and trafficking
in such substances;
50. Recognizes the effectiveness of law enforcement measures against organized criminal groups and
individuals involved in drug-related crimes, and the need to place appropriate focus within the respective jurisdictions
of Member States on those responsible for illicit activities of a larger scale or more serious nature;
51. Recalls the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast Track to Accelerating the Fight against
HIV and to Ending the AIDS Epidemic by 2030, adopted by the General Assembly on 8 June 2016;911
52. Invites relevant national authorities to consider, in accordance with their national legislation and the three
international drug control conventions, including in national prevention, treatment, care, recovery, rehabilitation and
social reintegration measures and programmes, in the context of comprehensive and balanced drug demand reduction
efforts, effective measures aimed at minimizing the adverse public health and social consequences of drug abuse,
including appropriate medication-assisted therapy programmes, injecting equipment programmes as well as
antiretroviral therapy and other relevant interventions that prevent the transmission of HIV, viral hepatitis and other
blood-borne diseases associated with drug use, and to consider ensuring access to such interventions, including in
treatment and outreach services, prisons and other custodial settings, and promoting in that regard the use, as
appropriate, of the technical guide for countries to set targets for universal access to HIV prevention, treatment and
care for injecting drug users, issued by the World Health Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS;
53. Urges Member States and other donors to continue to provide bilateral and other funding for the global
drug problem response, including in particular the HIV/AIDS response, including to the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS, and to strive to ensure that such funding contributes to addressing the growing HIV/AIDS
epidemic among people who inject drugs, and HIV/AIDS in prison settings, in the spirit of the pledge made in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development902 to leave no one behind;
54. Acknowledges the continuing efforts made and the progress achieved in countering the world drug
problem, and stresses the need to strengthen and intensify joint efforts at the national, regional and international
levels to tackle the global challenges related to the world drug problem in a more comprehensive manner, in

_______________
911

1022

Resolution 70/266, annex.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

accordance with the principle of common and shared responsibility, including by means of enhanced and bettercoordinated technical and financial assistance;
55. Takes note of the 2018 report of the International Narcotics Control Board912 and the supplementary
reports thereto, and in this regard reaffirms Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 62/8 of 22 March 2019 on
supporting the International Narcotics Control Board in fulfilling its treaty-mandated functions in cooperation with
Member States and in collaboration with the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the World Health Organization;895
56. Invites Member States to strengthen, as appropriate, the proper functioning of national drug control
systems and domestic assessment mechanisms and programmes, in cooperation with the International Narcotics
Control Board, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the World Health Organization and other relevant
United Nations system agencies, to identify, analyse and remove impediments to the availability and accessibility of
controlled substances for medical and scientific purposes, within appropriate control mechanisms, as required by the
three international drug control conventions and taking into account the publication entitled Ensuring Balance in
National Policies on Controlled Substances: Guidance for Availability and Accessibility of Controlled Medicines,
and, for that purpose, to consider the provision of technical and financial assistance, upon request, to developing
countries;
57. Urges all Member States to enact comprehensive measures aimed at stemming the abuse, diversion and
misuse of prescription drugs, in particular through the establishment of awareness-raising initiatives targeting the
general public and health-care providers;
58. Recognizes that it is necessary for Member States, under the three international drug control conventions
and the fundamental principles of their domestic legal systems and national legislation, to consider, where appropriate:
(a) Regularly reviewing and assessing their drug control policies, ensuring that they are effective,
comprehensive, balanced and aimed at promoting the health and well-being of individuals, families, communities and
society as a whole;
(b) Providing, as appropriate, comprehensive, integrated drug demand reduction programmes, based on
scientific evidence and covering a range of measures, including primary prevention, early intervention, treatment,
care, rehabilitation, social reintegration and measures aimed at minimizing the negative public health and social
impact of drug abuse, aimed at promoting health and social well-being among individuals, families and communities
and reducing the adverse consequences of drug abuse for individuals and society as a whole;
59. Also recognizes the continued efforts to promote coordination and cooperation on drug-related matters
within the United Nations system;
60. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the
International Narcotics Control Board, the World Health Organization and other United Nations entities with pertinent
technical and operational expertise, within their mandates, to continue to provide, upon request, advice and assistance
to States that are reviewing and updating their drug policies, in compliance with the three international drug control
conventions, taking into account their national priorities and needs through, among other things, the promotion of the
exchange of information and best practices on scientific evidence-based policies adopted by States;
61. Calls upon Member States to promote and strengthen the exchange of information and, as appropriate,
drug-related criminal intelligence among law enforcement and border control agencies, including through the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime multilateral portals and regional information centres and networks, and to promote
joint investigations and coordinate operations, in conformity with national legislation, and training programmes at all
levels, in order to identify, disrupt and dismantle organized criminal groups operating transnationally that are involved
in any activities related to the illicit production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and
the diversion of their precursors and related money-laundering;
62. Reiterates the commitment of Member States to share relevant information with, as appropriate, and
strengthen the capacity of the World Health Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
International Narcotics Control Board and other relevant international and regional organizations to prioritize the

_______________
912

International Narcotics Control Board, document E/INCB/2018/1.

1023

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

review of the most prevalent, persistent and harmful new psychoactive substances and to facilitate informed
scheduling decisions by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs;
63. Encourages Member States to fully support the efforts of the World Health Organization to review
substances, within its mandate under the three international drug control conventions, particularly through its Expert
Committee on Drug Dependence;
64. Also encourages Member States to enhance the capacity of law enforcement agencies to detect and
identify new psychoactive substances and amphetamine-type stimulants, including methamphetamine, and promote
cross-border cooperation and information-sharing to prevent their abuse and diversion, including through the use of
existing International Narcotics Control Board and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime tools and projects;
65. Further encourages Member States to establish and strengthen partnerships and information exchange
with industries, in particular with chemical and pharmaceutical industries and other relevant private sector entities,
and encourage the use of the Guidelines for a Voluntary Code of Practice for the Chemical Industry, issued by the
International Narcotics Control Board, and the Board’s model memorandum of understanding between Governments
and private sector partners, as and where appropriate, bearing in mind the important role that these industries can play
in addressing and countering the world drug problem;
66. Calls upon Member States to commit themselves to implementing timely, scientific evidence-based
control or regulatory measures within national legislative and administrative systems to tackle and manage the
challenge of new psychoactive substances, and to consider the use of interim steps while substances are under review,
such as provisional measures of control, or to make public health announcements, as well as share information and
expertise on those measures;
67. Invites Member States to support existing research, collection and scientific analysis of data related to
amphetamine-type stimulants through the global Synthetics Monitoring: Analysis, Reporting and Trends (SMART)
programme and relevant International Narcotics Control Board tools, such as Project Prism, and strengthen
cooperation at all levels in tackling synthetic opioids and amphetamine-type stimulants, including methamphetamine;
68. Also invites Member States to promote the use, as appropriate, of relevant existing programmes,
mechanisms and coordinated operations at all levels and continue the development and sharing of best practices and
lessons learned among practitioners with regard to a balanced and integrated approach to the evolving threat of
amphetamine-type stimulants;
69. Calls upon Member States to continue efforts to identify and monitor trends in the composition,
production, prevalence and distribution of new psychoactive substances, as well as patterns of use and adverse
consequences, and assess the risks to the health and safety of individuals and society as a whole and the potential uses
of new psychoactive substances for medical and scientific purposes, and on that basis to develop and strengthen
domestic and national legislative, regulatory, administrative and operational responses and practices by domestic and
national legislative, law enforcement, judiciary, social and welfare, educational and health authorities;
70. Invites Member States to target the illicit cultivation of crops used for the illicit production and
manufacture of drugs and address related factors by implementing comprehensive strategies aimed at alleviating
poverty and strengthening the rule of law, accountable, effective and inclusive institutions and public services and
institutional frameworks, as appropriate, and by promoting sustainable development aimed at enhancing the welfare
of the affected and vulnerable population through licit alternatives;
71. Encourages the promotion of inclusive economic growth and support for initiatives that contribute to
poverty eradication and the sustainability of social and economic development, and encourages Member States to
develop measures for rural development, improving infrastructure and social inclusion and protection, addressing the
consequences of illicit crop cultivation and the manufacture and production of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances on the environment, with the incorporation and participation of local communities, and to consider taking
voluntary measures to promote products stemming from alternative development, including preventive alternative
development, as appropriate, to gain access to markets, consistent with applicable multilateral trade rules and with
national and international law, within the framework of comprehensive and balanced drug control strategies;
72. Expresses concern that the illicit cultivation of crops and illicit manufacture, distribution and trafficking
remain serious challenges in addressing and countering the world drug problem, and recognizes the need for
1024

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

strengthening sustainable crop control strategies that may include, inter alia, alternative development, eradication and
law enforcement measures, for the purpose of preventing and significantly and measurably reducing the illicit
cultivation of crops, and the need to intensify joint efforts at the national, regional and international levels in a more
comprehensive manner, in accordance with the principle of common and shared responsibility, including by means
of appropriate preventive tools and measures, enhanced and better-coordinated financial and technical assistance and
action-oriented programmes, in order to tackle those challenges;
73. Invites Member States to consider elaborating and implementing comprehensive and sustainable
alternative development programmes, including preventive alternative development, as appropriate, that support
sustainable crop control strategies to prevent and significantly, durably and measurably reduce illicit crop cultivation
and other illicit drug-related activities, ensuring the empowerment, ownership and responsibility of affected local
communities, including farmers and their cooperatives, by taking into account the vulnerabilities and specific needs
of communities affected by or at risk of illicit cultivation, in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Labour Organization, the
United Nations Development Programme and other relevant international organizations, bearing in mind national and
regional development policies and action plans, with a view to contributing to the building of peaceful, inclusive and
just societies, consistent with the Sustainable Development Goals and in compliance with relevant and applicable
international and national law;
74. Also invites Member States to strengthen subregional, regional and international cooperation to support
comprehensive and sustainable alternative development programmes, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative
development, as an essential part of successful prevention and crop control strategies to increase the positive outcome
of such programmes, especially in the areas affected by and at risk of illicit cultivation of crops used for the production
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, taking into account the United Nations Guiding Principles on
Alternative Development;913
75. Urges relevant international financial institutions, United Nations entities, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector, as appropriate, to consider increasing their support, including through long-term
and flexible funding, for the implementation of comprehensive and balanced development-oriented drug control
programmes and viable economic alternatives, in particular alternative development, including, as appropriate,
preventive alternative development programmes, based on identified needs and national priorities, for areas and
populations affected by or vulnerable to the illicit cultivation of drug crops, with a view to its prevention, reduction
and elimination, and encourages States to the extent possible to stay strongly committed to financing such
programmes;
76. Urges Member States to promote partnerships and innovative cooperation initiatives with the private
sector, civil society and international financial institutions to create conditions more conducive to productive
investments targeted at job creation in areas and among communities affected by or at risk of illicit drug cultivation,
production, manufacturing, trafficking and other illicit drug-related activities in order to prevent, reduce or eliminate
them, and share best practices, lessons learned, expertise and skills in this regard;
77. Encourages Member States to ensure that measures to prevent the illicit cultivation of and to eradicate
plants containing narcotic and psychotropic substances respect fundamental human rights, take due account of
traditional licit uses, where there is historical evidence of such use, and of the protection of the environment, in
accordance with the three international drug control conventions, and also take into account, as appropriate and in
accordance with national legislation, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples;914
78. Reiterates its commitment to strengthen regional and international cooperation to support sustainable
alternative development programmes, including, as appropriate, preventive alternative development, in close
collaboration with all relevant stakeholders at the local, national and international levels, and to develop and share
best practices towards implementing the United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development, taking into
account all the lessons learned and good practices, in particular by countries with extensive expertise in alternative
development;

_______________
913
914

Resolution 68/196, annex.
Resolution 61/295, annex.

1025

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

79. Welcomes its resolution 72/197 of 19 December 2017, entitled “Promoting the implementation of the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative Development and related commitments on alternative development
and regional, interregional and international cooperation on development-oriented, balanced drug control policy
addressing socioeconomic issues”;
80. Urges Member States to increase cooperation at all levels and enhance measures to prevent and
significantly and measurably reduce or eliminate the illicit cultivation of opium poppy, coca bush and cannabis plant
used for the production of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including through eradication, within the
framework of sustainable crop control strategies and measures;
81. Reiterates its commitment to strengthen specialized, targeted, effective and sustainable technical
assistance, including, where appropriate, adequate financial assistance, training, capacity-building, equipment and
technological know-how, to requesting countries, including transit countries, through and in cooperation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well as the World Health Organization and other relevant United
Nations entities and international and regional organizations, within their respective mandates, so as to help Member
States to effectively address the health, socioeconomic, human rights, justice and law enforcement aspects of the world
drug problem;
82. Encourages Member States to fully implement international commitments on the promotion of the rule
of law at the national and international levels, health and respect for human rights in their drug policies;
83. Calls upon Member States to respond to the serious challenges posed by the increasing links between drug
trafficking, corruption and other forms of organized crime, including trafficking in persons, trafficking in firearms,
cybercrime and money-laundering, and, in some cases, terrorism, including money-laundering in connection with the
financing of terrorism, by using an integrated, multidisciplinary approach, such as through promoting and supporting
reliable data collection, research and, as appropriate, intelligence- and analysis-sharing to ensure effective
policymaking and interventions;
84. Invites Member States to strengthen and utilize existing and relevant regional and, as appropriate,
subregional and international networks for the exchange of operational information to prevent and counter moneylaundering, illicit financial flows and terrorist financing;
85. Encourages Member States to enhance national, regional, subregional, interregional and international
capacity to prevent and counter money-laundering and illicit financial flows stemming from drug trafficking and
related crimes, including, as appropriate, through the detection, investigation and prosecution of such activities, with
a view to effectively addressing safe havens, and to identify and mitigate money-laundering risks linked to new
technologies, as well as emerging money-laundering methods and techniques, by using, inter alia, existing United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime technical assistance tools;
86. Also encourages Member States to strengthen coordinated border management strategies, as well as the
capacity of border control and law enforcement and prosecutorial agencies, including through technical assistance,
upon request, including, and where appropriate, the provision of equipment and technology, along with necessary
training and maintenance support, in order to prevent, monitor and counter trafficking in drugs, trafficking in
precursors and other drug-related crimes, such as trafficking in firearms, illicit financial flows, smuggling of bulk cash
and money-laundering;
87. Further encourages Member States to use existing subregional, regional and international cooperation
mechanisms to combat all forms of drug-related crime, wherever committed, including, in some cases, violent crimes
related to gangs, including by enhancing international cooperation to successfully counter and dismantle organized
criminal groups, including those operating transnationally;
88. Calls upon Member States to also consider, when developing comprehensive policies to tackle the world
drug problem, measures, programmes and actions that address the needs of those affected by drug-related violence
and crime;
89. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its field offices in building
capacity at the local level in the fight against transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, and encourages the
Office to maintain an effective level of support for national and regional efforts in countering and addressing the world
drug problem;

1026

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

90. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to collaborate with relevant
intergovernmental, international and regional organizations involved in addressing and countering the world drug
problem, as appropriate, in order to share best practices and scientific standards and to maximize the benefits from
their unique comparative advantage;
91. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in close cooperation with Member States
and pertinent United Nations entities, intergovernmental and regional organizations and, when appropriate, the
scientific community and civil society, to continue to support Member States, upon request, in strengthening their
capacity to develop their reporting mechanisms, including by identifying gaps in the current drug statistics and by
exploring possibilities to strengthen existing data-collection and analysis tools at the national level;
92. Invites the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in close cooperation with Member States, to reflect
on possibilities for strengthening and streamlining its existing data-collection and analysis tools, including improving
and strengthening the quality, response rate and effectiveness of the annual report questionnaire, and, as requested in
the 2019 Ministerial Declaration on Strengthening Our Actions at the National, Regional and International Levels to
Accelerate the Implementation of Our Joint Commitments to Address and Counter the World Drug Problem, to report
on advancements in this regard, and invites Member States to provide extrabudgetary resources for these purposes;
93. Recalls Statistical Commission decision 48/110 of 10 March 2017 on statistics on drugs and drug use,915
encourages collaboration between the Statistical Commission and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, within their
mandates, to exchange information on the latest data trends on the world drug problem, stresses the need for national
statistical capacity-building to support Member States in improving the quality and availability of drug statistics and
to respond effectively to data-collection requests from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and invites
international and regional organizations to support Member States in this regard, upon their request;
94. Invites Member States to invest, where necessary and taking into account specific needs and available
resources, in capacity-building and quality-enhancing activities for the collection and reporting of information, to
participate in joint cooperation efforts organized by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and by other
national, regional or international organizations and bodies, aimed at the exchange of technical knowledge of experts
in the area of data collection, analysis and evaluation and of practical experience in the area of drug data, and to
regularly report data and information relating to all aspects of the world drug problem to the Office through the annual
report questionnaires, and invites the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the central policymaking body of the United
Nations system on drug-related matters, to strengthen the capacity of the Office to collect, analyse, use and disseminate
accurate, reliable, objective and comparable data and to reflect such information in the World Drug Report;
95. Encourages Member States to promote data collection, research and the sharing of information, as well
as the exchange of best practices on preventing and countering drug-related crime and on drug supply reduction
measures and practices, in order to enhance the effectiveness of criminal justice responses, within the framework of
applicable law;
96. Invites Member States to consider the need to review the set of national drug policy metrics and tools for
the collection and analysis of accurate, reliable, disaggregated, comprehensive and comparable data to measure the
effectiveness of programmes to address all relevant aspects of the world drug problem, including, as appropriate, as
related to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
97. Reiterates the commitment of Member States to improve the availability and quality of statistical
information and analysis of illicit drug cultivation, production and manufacturing, drug trafficking, money-laundering
and illicit financial flows, including for appropriate reflection in reports of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the International Narcotics Control Board, in order to better measure and evaluate the impact of such
crimes and to further enhance the effectiveness of criminal justice responses in that regard;
98. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue its efforts to support States in
establishing, upon request, the operational frameworks essential for communication within and across national
borders and to facilitate the exchange of information on and analysis of drug trafficking trends, with a view to
increasing knowledge about the world drug problem at the national, regional and international levels, recognizes the

_______________
915

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2017, Supplement No. 4 (E/2017/24), chap. I, sect. C.

1027

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

importance of integrating laboratories and providing scientific support to drug control frameworks and of treating
quality analytical data as a primary source of information worldwide, and urges coordination with other international
entities, including the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL);
99. Requests all Member States to provide the fullest possible financial and political support to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by widening its donor base, as appropriate, and increasing voluntary
contributions, in particular general-purpose contributions, so as to enable it to continue, expand, improve and
strengthen, within its mandates, its operational and technical cooperation activities, including with a view to assisting
Member States with the full implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, relevant resolutions
adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the outcome document of the thirtieth special session of the
General Assembly;
100. Expresses concern regarding the overall financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, emphasizes the need to provide the Office with adequate, predictable and stable resources and to ensure their
cost-effective utilization, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report, within existing reporting
obligations, on the financial situation of the Office and to continue to ensure that the Office has sufficient resources to
carry out its mandates fully and effectively;
101. Encourages Member States and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to address the
above-mentioned issues within the mandate of the standing open-ended intergovernmental working group on
improving the governance and financial situation of the Office in order for the Office to fulfil its mandate effectively,
efficiently and with the appropriate resources;
102. Encourages the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the principal policymaking organ of the United
Nations on matters of international drug control and as the governing body of the drug programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the International Narcotics Control Board to continue to strengthen their
work on the control of precursors and other chemicals used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;
103. Calls upon Member States to strengthen national and international action to address the emerging
challenge of new psychoactive substances, including their adverse health consequences, and the evolving threat of
amphetamine-type stimulants, including methamphetamine, underscores the importance of enhancing informationsharing and early warning networks, developing appropriate national legislative, prevention and treatment models
and supporting scientific evidence-based review and scheduling of the most prevalent, persistent and harmful
substances, and notes the importance of preventing the diversion and misuse of pharmaceuticals containing narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances and precursors, while ensuring their availability for legitimate purposes;
104. Urges States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to, and States parties to implement, as
a matter of priority, all the provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972
Protocol,899 the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971,900 the United Nations Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto916 and the United Nations Convention against Corruption;917
105. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to provide, in close collaboration
with the International Narcotics Control Board, as appropriate, adequate support and technical assistance to
Governments in all regions so as to enable them to implement and fully meet their obligations under conventions and
give adequate follow-up to subsequent resolutions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly, including for the strengthening of regulatory authorities and controls, provision
of information and fulfilment of reporting requirements, and urges donors to contribute to the Office for those
purposes;
106. Takes note of the resolutions adopted by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its sixty-second session895
and of the World Drug Report 2019;

_______________
916
917

1028

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

107. Also takes note of the request of the Human Rights Council to the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention,
within its mandate, to prepare a study on arbitrary detention related to drug policies, through its resolution 42/22 of
26 September 2019;918
108. Calls upon Member States to strengthen international and regional cooperation and coordination to
counter the threat to the international community caused by the illicit production of and trafficking in drugs, especially
those in the opioid group, as well as other aspects of the world drug problem, and to continue to take concerted
measures within the framework of the Paris Pact919 and other relevant regional and international initiatives and
mechanisms, in order to strengthen cross-border cooperation and information exchange, with a view to countering
drug trafficking, with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other international and
regional organizations;
109. Urges Member States to continue to actively cooperate with the International Narcotics Control Board in
the exercise of its mandate, and reiterates the need to ensure that an appropriate level of resources is made available
to the Board to enable it to engage with Governments to effectively monitor compliance by States parties with the
three international drug control conventions;
110. Encourages the continued contribution of the meetings of heads of national drug law enforcement
agencies and of the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs to the strengthening of regional and international cooperation, and in this
regard welcomes the discussions conducted in Lisbon from 2 to 5 July 2019, in Balaclava, Mauritius, from 16 to
20 September 2019, in Tashkent from 23 to 27 September 2019, in Lima from 7 to 11 October 2019 and in Bangkok
from 22 to 25 October 2019;
111. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen cooperation in addressing the world drug problem and to seek
effectiveness and comprehensiveness in the strategies and policies undertaken by regional and subregional
organizations and transregional initiatives;
112. Reiterates its call upon the relevant United Nations agencies and entities and other international
organizations, and invites international financial institutions, including regional development banks, to mainstream
efforts to address and counter the world drug problem into their programmes, and calls upon the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to maintain its leading role by providing relevant information and technical assistance;
113. Calls upon Member States to take the steps necessary to accelerate the implementation of all the joint
commitments to address and counter the world drug problem, consistent with the 2019 Ministerial Declaration on
Strengthening Our Actions at the National, Regional and International Levels to Accelerate the Implementation of
Our Joint Commitments to Address and Counter the World Drug Problem, and reiterates its call upon Member States
to take the steps necessary to further implement the operational recommendations set out in the outcome document
of the thirtieth special session of the General Assembly, in close partnership with the United Nations and other
intergovernmental organizations and civil society, the scientific community and academia, and to share with the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the policymaking body of the United Nations with prime responsibility for drug
control matters, timely information on progress made in the implementation of the recommendations and international
commitments;
114. Encourages all relevant United Nations bodies and specialized agencies to identify operational
recommendations in the outcome document of the thirtieth special session of the General Assembly that fall within
their area of specialization and to commence implementing the recommendations made in the outcome document that
are within their existing mandates, in collaboration and cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the International Narcotics Control Board, keeping the Commission on Narcotic Drugs informed of
programmes and progress made to achieve goals set out in the outcome document, and requests the Office to include,
within its existing reporting obligations, a chapter regarding collaboration and coordination across the United Nations
system in the global efforts to implement the recommendations adopted at the thirtieth special session;

_______________
918
919

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
See S/2003/641, annex.

1029

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

115. Encourages the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
further increase cooperation and collaboration with all relevant United Nations entities and international financial
institutions, within their respective mandates, when assisting Member States in designing and implementing
comprehensive, integrated and balanced national drug strategies, policies and programmes;
116. Invites the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to increase efforts to pursue joint initiatives at the
policy and programmatic levels with other relevant United Nations agencies and entities, within their existing
mandates, as well as regional organizations, and to update and report to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on
progress, including on joint initiatives, at its upcoming sessions;
117. Welcomes the follow-up to the implementation of all commitments to address and counter the world drug
problem made since 2009, including the recommendations set out in the outcome document of the thirtieth special
session of the General Assembly, through the intersessional process of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
encourages the Commission to continue to work on and support Member States in their implementation and sharing
of scientific and evidence-based best practices in addressing and countering the world drug problem, and invites the
Commission to continue to examine how its subsidiary bodies can better contribute to the implementation of, inter
alia, the outcome document by ensuring that the Commission is informed of regional and domestic concerns,
developments and best practices arising from all stakeholders, including contributions from the scientific community,
academia and civil society;
118. Encourages the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to keep the General Assembly informed of developments
in the follow-up to the 2019 Ministerial Declaration on Strengthening Our Actions at the National, Regional and
International Levels to Accelerate the Implementation of Our Joint Commitments to Address and Counter the World
Drug Problem, and welcomes the briefings and updates provided by the Commission to Member States and all
relevant stakeholders;
119. Calls upon all Member States to actively participate in the discussions of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs in preparation for its sixty-third session in 2020 to foster an in-depth exchange of information and expertise on
efforts, achievements, challenges and best practices to address and counter the world drug problem, and encourages
all other relevant stakeholders to make contributions in this regard;
120. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,920 and requests that he submit to the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/246
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 134 to 9, with 28 abstentions,*
on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/399/Add.3, para. 47)921
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sudan,

_______________
920

A/74/129.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Arab Emirates (on behalf of the States that are members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, taking into account
also the provisions of General Assembly resolution 73/5 of 16 October 2018), United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America.
921

1030

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against: Belarus, Cambodia, China, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Bhutan, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, India, Japan, Kenya, Lesotho, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Serbia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia

74/246. Situation of human rights of Rohingya Muslims and other minorities in Myanmar
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,922 the
International Covenants on Human Rights923 and other relevant international law and human rights law instruments,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, the most recent of which
being resolutions 73/264 of 22 December 2018 and 72/248 of 24 December 2017, and recalling the resolutions and
decisions of the Human Rights Council, the most recent of which being resolutions 42/3 of 26 September 2019,924
39/2 of 27 September 2018,925 37/32 of 23 March 2018926 and S‑27/1 of 5 December 2017,927 and the presidential
statement issued by the Security Council on 6 November 2017,928 as well as Security Council resolution 2467 (2019)
of 23 April 2019,
Welcoming the work and the reports of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar,
while deeply regretting the decision of the Government of Myanmar to discontinue cooperation with the Special
Rapporteur and to deny her access to the country since January 2018,
Welcoming also the work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar, and encouraging her
further engagement and dialogue with the Government of Myanmar and other relevant stakeholders and affected
populations,
Welcoming further the first report to the General Assembly of the ongoing independent mechanism
established by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 39/2,929 and its operationalization, as well as the
appointment of its head,
Welcoming the work of the independent international fact-finding mission on Myanmar, including its final
report930 and all its other reports, including the reports on the economic interests of the Myanmar military and on
sexual and gender-based violence in Myanmar and the gendered impact of its ethnic conflicts, and furthermore deeply
regretting that the Government of Myanmar did not cooperate with the fact-finding mission,
Recognizing the complementary and mutually reinforcing work of the various United Nations mandate holders
and mechanisms working on Myanmar to improve the situation of human rights in Myanmar,
Noting the importance of the role of regional organizations in efforts to achieve pacific settlement of local
disputes, as stipulated in Chapter VIII of the Charter, while noting that such efforts do not preclude action under
Chapter VI of the Charter,

_______________
922

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI).
924
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. II.
925
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. II.
926
Ibid., Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
927
Ibid., chap. III.
928
S/PRST/2017/22.
929
See A/74/278.
930
A/HRC/42/50.
923

1031

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Acknowledging the efforts of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, alongside relevant international efforts,
aimed at bringing peace and stability to Rakhine State, including through the appointment by the Organization of a
new special envoy to Myanmar,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General,931
Condemning all violations and abuses of human rights in Myanmar, including against Rohingya Muslims and
other minorities in Rakhine, Kachin and Shan States, and expressing deep concern at the reports of ongoing human
rights violations, as also noted by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in her oral update on
10 July 2019, as well as at the ongoing non-cooperation of the Government of Myanmar and the denial of access to
United Nations mechanisms, including the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar and the
Independent Mechanism,
Continuing to underline the need for the security and armed forces of Myanmar to cease all actions that run
counter to the protection of all persons within the country, including those belonging to the Rohingya community, by
respecting international law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian law, and ending
the violence, including sexual violence, and calling for urgent steps to ensure justice in respect of all human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian law so that those displaced by violence are able to voluntarily
return in safety and dignity to their places of origin or to a place of their choice in a sustainable manner,
Calling for an immediate cessation of fighting and hostilities, of targeting of civilians and of all violations and
abuses of international human rights law and international humanitarian law in northern Myanmar, and recognizing
the need for continued de-escalation and an enduring ceasefire, best achieved by dialogue between all parties, as a
necessary means of improving the human rights situation,
Reiterating its grave concern that, in spite of the fact that Rohingya Muslims lived in Myanmar for generations
prior to the independence of Myanmar, they were made stateless by the enactment of the 1982 Citizenship Law and
were eventually disenfranchised, in 2015, from the electoral process,
Reaffirming that the denial of citizenship status and related rights to Rohingya Muslims and others, including
voting rights, is a serious human rights concern,
Reiterating its deep distress at reports that unarmed individuals in Rakhine State have been and continue to be
subjected to the excessive use of force and violations of human rights and international humanitarian law by the
military and security and armed forces, including extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary killings, systematic rape and
other forms of sexual and gender-based violence, arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance and government seizure
of Rohingya lands from which Rohingya Muslims were evicted and their homes destroyed, and remaining concerned
by the previous large-scale destruction of homes and systematic evictions in northern Rakhine State, including the use
of arson and violence, as well as the unlawful use of force by non-State actors,
Recalling the responsibility of States to comply with their relevant obligations, to prosecute those responsible
for violations of international law, including international humanitarian law, international human rights law,
international criminal law and international refugee law, as well as abuses of human rights, and to provide an effective
remedy to any person whose rights have been violated, with a view to ending impunity,
Reiterating the urgent need to ensure that all those responsible for crimes related to violations and abuses of
international law throughout Myanmar, including international human rights law, international humanitarian law and
international criminal law, are held to account through credible and independent national, regional or international
justice mechanisms, while recalling the authority of the Security Council in this regard,
Recalling the establishment of an independent commission of inquiry by the Government of Myanmar on
30 July 2018 with a view to ensuring accountability for the human rights violations and abuses committed in Rakhine
State, reiterating that the commission should conduct its work with independence, impartiality, transparency and
objectivity, and encouraging the commission to issue an initial report and to cooperate with all relevant United Nations
mandate holders,

_______________
931

1032

A/74/311.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also some steps taken by the Government of Myanmar to create the conditions necessary for refugees
and other forcibly displaced persons to return to their places of origin or to a place of their choice voluntarily, in safety
and dignity, but regretting, however, that the situation has not improved in Rakhine State to create the conditions
necessary for refugees and other forcibly displaced persons to return to their places of origin voluntarily, safely and
with dignity,
Expressing concern that in northern Rakhine State, the implementation of policies under the guise of economic
development and reconstruction by the Government of Myanmar and the heavy militarization of the area have resulted
in the alteration of the demographic structure, which further prevents the members of the displaced Rohingya Muslim
population from returning to Rakhine State,
Re-emphasizing the right of all refugees and the importance of internally displaced persons being able to return
home in safety and dignity and in a voluntary and sustainable manner,
Noting the extension for one year of the memorandum of understanding between Myanmar and the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
assistance in the repatriation process of displaced persons from Rakhine State, and calling upon Myanmar to grant
United Nations agencies unfettered access to northern Rakhine State so that they can carry out this assistance,
Expressing deep concern at the continued armed conflict and violence and abuses in a number of areas in
Myanmar affecting tens of thousands of people, most notably in Rakhine State, causing their forced displacement,
and recognizing the need for continued de-escalation and an enduring ceasefire as a necessary means of improving
the human rights situation,
Alarmed by the continued influx to Bangladesh over the last four decades of 1.1 million Rohingya Muslims,
including the 744,000 who arrived since 25 August 2017 in the aftermath of atrocities committed by the security and
armed forces of Myanmar,
Expressing deep concern over the virulent and rapid spread of false news, hate speech and inflammatory
rhetoric, in particular through social media, tolerated by the authorities of Myanmar,
Noting the steps taken by the Government of Myanmar towards establishing a national strategy for the
sustainable closure of camps for internally displaced persons in Myanmar,
Alarmed by the findings of the independent international fact-finding mission on Myanmar of evidence of gross
human rights violations and abuses suffered by Rohingya Muslims and other minorities, perpetrated by the security
and armed forces of Myanmar, which, according to the fact-finding mission, undoubtedly amount to the gravest
crimes under international law,
Underlining the urgency of the call by the Secretary-General for increased efforts to implement the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, to address the root causes of the crisis, including
those on access to citizenship for the Rohingya, freedom of movement, the elimination of systematic segregation and
all forms of discrimination, and inclusive and equal access to health services and education, and birth registration, in
full consultation with all ethnic and minority groups and persons in vulnerable situations, including on matters of
citizenship for Rohingya Muslims,
Welcoming the commitment of the Secretary-General to implementing the recommendations made by the
independent inquiry into the involvement of the United Nations in Myanmar from 2010 to 2018,
Reiterating its urgent call upon the Government of Myanmar to sustain the democratic transition of Myanmar
by bringing all national institutions, including the military, under the democratically elected civilian Government,
Welcoming the involvement of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in addressing the situation in Rakhine
State, including through carrying out humanitarian assessments in northern Rakhine State through its Coordinating
Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management, and recognizing the need for close engagement with
the Rohingya refugee community, while encouraging close cooperation with all relevant United Nations agencies and
international partners and to address the root causes of the conflict, so that affected communities can rebuild their lives
there,
1. Expresses grave concern at continuing reports of serious human rights violations and abuses as well as
violations of international humanitarian law in Myanmar against Rohingya Muslims and other minorities in Kachin,
1033

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Rakhine and Shan States, including those involving arbitrary arrests, deaths in detention, torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, forced labour, deprivation of economic and social rights, the forced
displacement of more than a million Rohingya Muslims to Bangladesh, rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual
and gender-based violence against women and children, as well as restrictions on exercising the rights to freedom of
religion or belief, expression and peaceful assembly;
2. Strongly condemns all violations and abuses of human rights in Myanmar, and calls upon Myanmar, in
particular its security and armed forces, to end immediately all violence and all violations of international law in
Myanmar, to ensure the protection of the human rights of all persons in Myanmar, including of Rohingya Muslims
and persons belonging to other minorities, and to take all measures necessary to provide justice to victims, to ensure
full accountability and to end impunity for all violations and abuses of human rights law and violations of international
humanitarian law, starting with a full, transparent and independent investigation into reports of all these violations;
3. Emphasizes the importance of conducting international, independent, fair and transparent investigations
into the gross human rights violations in Myanmar, including sexual and gender-based violence against women and
children, and of holding accountable all those responsible for brutal acts and crimes against all persons, including the
Rohingya Muslims, in order to deliver justice to victims using all legal instruments and domestic, regional and
international judicial mechanisms;
4. Expresses grave concern about the increasing restrictions on humanitarian access, in particular in Rakhine
State, and urges the Government of Myanmar to cooperate fully with and to grant full, unrestricted and unmonitored
access to all United Nations mandate holders and human rights mechanisms, including the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar, the Independent Mechanism and relevant United Nations agencies, and
international and regional human rights bodies to independently monitor the situation of human rights, and to ensure
that individuals can cooperate without hindrance with these mechanisms and without fear of reprisal, intimidation or
attack, and expresses deep concern that international access to affected areas of northern Rakhine State remains
severely restricted for the international community, including for United Nations agencies, humanitarian actors and
international media;
5. Calls upon the United Nations to ensure that the Independent Mechanism is afforded the flexibility that it
needs in terms of staffing, location and operational freedom so it can deliver as effectively as possible on its mandate;
6. Urges the Independent Mechanism to swiftly advance its work and to ensure the effective use of evidence
of the most serious international crimes and violations of international law collected by the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar;
7. Urges the independent commission of inquiry of Myanmar to deliver tangible results on its work carried
out so far with independence, impartiality, transparency and objectivity in order to promote accountability, and to
deliver a credible report that acknowledges the human rights violations and mass atrocities committed in Rakhine
State and that can lay the groundwork for confidence-building, and encourages the commission to cooperate with all
relevant United Nations mandate holders;
8.

Reiterates the urgent call upon the Government of Myanmar:

(a) To manifest clear political will supported by concrete actions for the safe, dignified, voluntary and
sustainable return and reintegration of Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar;
(b) To take the necessary measures to address the spread of discrimination and prejudice and to combat the
incitement of hatred against Rohingya Muslims and persons belonging to other minorities, and to publicly condemn
such acts and combat hate speech, while fully respecting international human rights law, as well as to promote
interfaith dialogue in cooperation with the international community and encourage political and religious leaders in
the country to work towards reconciliation among communities and national unity through dialogue;
(c) To expedite efforts to eliminate statelessness and the systematic and institutionalized discrimination
against members of ethnic and religious minorities, in particular relating to Rohingya Muslims, by, inter alia,
reviewing the 1982 Citizenship Law, which has led to deprivation of human rights, by ensuring equal access to full
citizenship through a transparent, voluntary and accessible procedure and to all civil and political rights, by allowing
for self-identification, by amending or repealing all discriminatory legislation and policies, including discriminatory
1034

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

provisions of the set of “protection of race and religion laws” enacted in 2015 covering religious conversion, interfaith
marriage, monogamy and population control, and by lifting all local orders restricting rights to freedom of movement
and access to civil registration, health and education services and livelihoods;
(d) To dismantle the camps for internally displaced persons in Rakhine State with a clear timeline and without
further delay, ensuring that the return and relocation of internally displaced persons is carried out in accordance with
international standards and best practices, in cooperation with the United Nations and the international community,
including as set forth in the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement;932
(e) To ensure full protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons in Myanmar,
including Rohingya Muslims and persons belonging to other minorities, in an equal, non-discriminatory and dignified
manner, in order to prevent further instability and insecurity, alleviate suffering, address the root causes of the crisis
and forge a viable, lasting and durable solution;
(f) To build trust among Rohingya Muslims in camps in Bangladesh, through confidence-building measures,
including direct communication between the Rohingya representatives and the Myanmar authorities;
(g) To create the conditions necessary for the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable return of all refugees,
including Rohingya Muslim refugees, particularly in view of the fact that Rohingya Muslims refused to return to
Myanmar on two prior occasions that had been bilaterally set up between Bangladesh and Myanmar for repatriation
to commence, owing to the failure of the Government of Myanmar to create such conditions in Rakhine State;
(h)

To ensure the conduct of credible, inclusive and transparent general elections in 2020;

(i) To fulfil its human rights obligations and commitments to protect the right to freedom of expression,
including online, and the rights to freedom of association and peaceful assembly, to create and maintain a safe and
enabling environment for civil society and independent media;
(j) To fully implement all recommendations of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State to address the
root causes of the crisis;
9. Underscores the importance of providing protection and assistance, including non-discriminatory access
to services such as medical and psychosocial care, specifically tailored to women and girls, especially those who are
victims of sexual and gender-based violence and human trafficking;
10. Reiterates its deep concern at the continued plight of Rohingya Muslim refugees and forcibly displaced
persons living in Bangladesh and in other countries, and appreciates the commitment by the Government of
Bangladesh to provide temporary shelter, humanitarian assistance and protection to them;
11. Notes the establishment of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for the Prevention of the Six Grave Violations
during Armed Conflict on 7 January 2019 by the Government of Myanmar, and of the agreement by Parliament to
the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict,933 invites the Government to continue the implementation of the action plan to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by government forces, and calls upon the Government to engage with the United
Nations in developing, adopting and implementing without undue delay comprehensive action plans addressing
killing, maiming, rape and other sexual violence for which the Tatmadaw, including the integrated border forces, are
listed in the annual report of the Secretary-General;
12. Welcomes the recent extension for one year of the memorandum of understanding between the
Government of Myanmar, the United Nations Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to associate them to the implementation of bilateral arrangements with Bangladesh on
the return of displaced persons from Rakhine State, and emphasizes the need for the Government of Myanmar to
continue to cooperate fully with the Government of Bangladesh and with the United Nations, in particular the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and in consultation with the populations concerned to enable
the safe, voluntary, dignified, sustainable and well-informed return of all refugees and forcibly displaced persons and

_______________
932
933

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2173, No. 27531.

1035

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

internally displaced persons to their places of origin in Myanmar, and to give returnees freedom of movement and
unimpeded access to livelihoods, social services, including health services, education and shelter, and to compensate
them for all losses;
13. Expresses grave concern at the potential retraumatization of survivors of human rights violations and
abuses, particularly child survivors and sexual violence survivors, and calls upon all actors engaging in documentation
to follow the “do-no-harm” principle for evidence-gathering in order to respect the dignity of survivors and to avoid
retraumatization;
14. Encourages Myanmar to continue to work with Bangladesh, in line with the bilateral instruments on
repatriation signed by Bangladesh and Myanmar, in order to expedite the creation of a conducive environment for the
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of the forcibly displaced Rohingya in Bangladesh, with the full
support and meaningful involvement of the international community, including the United Nations and its funds,
programmes and agencies, and stresses the importance of meaningfully engaging with civil society;
15. Encourages the international community to (a) assist Bangladesh in providing humanitarian assistance to
Rohingya refugees and forcibly displaced persons until such time as they are voluntarily repatriated to Myanmar in
safety and dignity; and (b) assist Myanmar in the provision of humanitarian assistance to affected persons of all
communities who have been internally displaced, including those in camps for internally displaced persons within
Rakhine State;
16. Urges the international community to support the 2019 joint response plan for the Rohingya humanitarian
crisis to ensure adequate resources for addressing the humanitarian crisis;
17. Recognizes with appreciation the assistance and support of the international community, including
regional organizations, in particular the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and the countries neighbouring
Myanmar, and encourages support for the Government of Myanmar in the fulfilment of its international human rights
obligations and commitments, the implementation of its democratic transition process, inclusive socioeconomic
development and sustainable peace, as well as its national reconciliation process involving all relevant stakeholders;
18. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to provide his good offices and to pursue his discussions relating to Myanmar, involving all
relevant stakeholders, and to offer assistance to the Government of Myanmar;
(b) To extend the appointment of the Special Envoy on Myanmar and submit the report of the Special Envoy
covering all relevant issues addressed in the present resolution to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
(c) To provide all assistance necessary to enable the Special Envoy on Myanmar to effectively discharge her
mandate and to report to Member States every six months, or as warranted by the situation on the ground;
(d) To identify ways in which the existing mandates can more effectively deliver in their respective areas of
responsibility concerning Myanmar and can complement each other’s work through enhanced coordination;
(e) To call the continued attention of the Security Council to the situation in Myanmar with concrete
recommendations for action towards resolving the humanitarian crisis, promoting the safe, dignified, voluntary and
sustainable return of Rohingya refugees and forcibly displaced persons and ensuring accountability for those
responsible for mass atrocities and human rights violations and abuses;
(f) To fully implement the recommendations contained in the report of the independent inquiry into the
involvement of the United Nations in Myanmar from 2010 to 2018;
19. Requests that the Special Envoy continue to participate by way of interactive dialogue in the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly;
20. Decides to remain seized of the matter, inter alia, on the basis of the reports of the Secretary-General, the
independent international fact-finding mission on Myanmar, the Independent Mechanism, the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Myanmar and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar.

1036

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

RESOLUTION 74/247
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 79 to 60, with 33 abstentions,*
on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/401, para. 13)934
* In favour: Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining: Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Lesotho, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uruguay, Zambia

74/247. Countering the use of information and communications technologies for criminal purposes
The General Assembly,
Noting that information and communications technologies, while having enormous potential for the
development of States, create new opportunities for perpetrators and may contribute to a rise in the levels and
complexity of crime,
Noting also the potential risk of the misuse of emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence, while
recognizing their potential in preventing and combating the use of information and communications technologies for
criminal purposes,
Concerned by the increase in the rate and diversity of crimes committed in the digital world and their impact on
the stability of critical infrastructure of States and enterprises and on the well-being of individuals,
Recognizing that diverse criminals, including traffickers in persons, are taking advantage of information and
communications technologies to carry out criminal activities,
Stressing the need to enhance coordination and cooperation among States in combating the use of information
and communications technologies for criminal purposes, including by providing technical assistance to developing
countries, upon their request, to improve national legislation and frameworks and build the capacity of national
authorities to deal with such use in all its forms, including its prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution, and
emphasizing in this context the role that the United Nations, in particular the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, plays,

_______________
934

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, China, Congo, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua, Niger, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Zimbabwe.

1037

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 22/8 of 26 April 2013,935 in which
the Commission welcomed the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in fulfilling its mandate to
provide technical assistance and capacity-building on cybercrime,
Noting the work carried out by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice under the auspices
of an open-ended intergovernmental expert group which was established to conduct a comprehensive study of the
problem of cybercrime and responses to it by Member States, the international community and the private sector,
Recalling its resolution 65/230 of 21 December 2010, in which the General Assembly endorsed the Salvador
Declaration on Comprehensive Strategies for Global Challenges: Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and
Their Development in a Changing World,
Recalling also the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice into the Wider
United Nations Agenda to Address Social and Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels, and Public Participation,936 adopted at the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015,
Noting the discussions held during the first to fifth meetings of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group,
held in Vienna from 17 to 21 January 2011, 25 to 28 February 2013, 10 to 13 April 2017, 3 to 5 April 2018 and 27 to
29 March 2019, reaffirming the importance of the study and the need to further enhance international discussion on
and cooperation against cybercrime,
Noting also the importance of the international and regional instruments in the fight against cybercrime and the
ongoing efforts to examine options to strengthen existing and propose new national and international legal or other
responses to the use of information and communications technologies for criminal purposes,
Recalling its resolutions 53/70 of 4 December 1998, 54/49 of 1 December 1999, 55/28 of 20 November 2000,
56/19 of 29 November 2001, 57/53 of 22 November 2002, 58/32 of 8 December 2003, 59/61 of 3 December 2004,
60/45 of 8 December 2005, 61/54 of 6 December 2006, 62/17 of 5 December 2007, 63/37 of 2 December 2008,
64/25 of 2 December 2009, 65/41 of 8 December 2010, 66/24 of 2 December 2011, 66/181 of 19 December 2011,
67/27 of 3 December 2012, 68/193 of 18 December 2013, 68/243 of 27 December 2013, 69/28 of 2 December
2014, 70/237 of 23 December 2015, 71/28 of 5 December 2016, 72/196 of 19 December 2017, 73/27 of 5 December
2018 and 73/187 of 17 December 2018,
Recalling also the reports of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information
and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security,937 which is of the view that States should consider
how best to cooperate to prosecute the criminal use of information and communications technologies,
Taking note of Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 26/4 of 26 May 2017,938 in
which the Commission expressed appreciation for the work done by the Expert Group to Conduct a Comprehensive
Study on Cybercrime and requested the Expert Group to continue its work, with a view to examining options to
strengthen existing responses and propose new national and international legal or other responses to cybercrime, and
in this regard reaffirming the role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Taking note also of Economic and Social Council resolution 2019/19 of 23 July 2019, entitled “Promoting
technical assistance and capacity-building to strengthen national measures and international cooperation to combat
cybercrime, including information-sharing”, adopted on the recommendation of the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice,
Recognizing the role of the open-ended intergovernmental Expert Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study
on Cybercrime as an important platform for exchanging information on national legislation, best practices, technical

_______________
935

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (E/2013/30 and E/2013/30/Corr.1),
chap. I, sect. D.
936
Resolution 70/174, annex.
937
A/65/201, A/68/98 and A/70/174.
938
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2017, Supplement No. 10 (E/2017/30), chap. I, sect. D.

1038

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

assistance and international cooperation, with a view to examining options to strengthen existing responses and to
proposing new national and international legal or other responses to cybercrime,
Reaffirming the importance of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the use of information and
communications technologies,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,939 which was prepared pursuant to resolution 73/187;

2. Decides to establish an open-ended ad hoc intergovernmental committee of experts, representative of all
regions, to elaborate a comprehensive international convention on countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes, taking into full consideration existing international instruments
and efforts at the national, regional and international levels on combating the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes, in particular the work and outcomes of the open-ended intergovernmental Expert
Group to Conduct a Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime;
3. Also decides that the ad hoc committee shall convene a three-day organizational session in August 2020,
in New York, in order to agree on an outline and modalities for its further activities, to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session for its consideration and approval;
4. Requests the Secretary General to allocate the necessary resources in order to organize and support the
work of the ad hoc committee within the United Nations programme budget;
5. Invites donor countries to provide assistance to the United Nations in ensuring the active engagement of
developing countries in the work of the ad hoc committee, including by covering travel costs and accommodation
expenses;
6. Decides to examine the question at its seventy-fifth session under the item entitled “Countering the use of
information and communications technologies for criminal purposes”.

_______________
939

A/74/130.

1039

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

*

74/1.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations: requests under
Article 19 of the Charter ....................................................................................................................................1042

74/249.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors ................................1042

74/250.

Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019 ..............................................................................................1044
A.

Final budget appropriations for the biennium 2018–2019 ........................................................................1044

B.

Final income estimates for the biennium 2018–2019 ...............................................................................1047

74/251.

Programme planning .........................................................................................................................................1047

74/252.

Pattern of conferences .......................................................................................................................................1051

74/253.

Enhancing accessibility for persons with disabilities to conferences and meetings of the United Nations
system ................................................................................................................................................................1061

74/254.

Seconded active-duty military and police personnel .........................................................................................1061

74/255.

United Nations common system ........................................................................................................................1062
Resolution A ......................................................................................................................................................1062
Resolution B ......................................................................................................................................................1063

74/256.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services ................................................................1065

74/257.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 48/218 B, 54/244, 59/272, 64/263 and
69/253 ................................................................................................................................................................1067

74/258.

Administration of justice at the United Nations ................................................................................................1068

74/259.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals ....................................................1072

74/260.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti ..............................................................1074

74/261.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur...................................................1075

74/262.

Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for 2020 .......................................................................1076

74/263.

Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for 2020 .............................................................1084

74/264.

Programme budget for 2020 ..............................................................................................................................1105
A.

Budget appropriations for 2020 ................................................................................................................1105

B.

Income estimates for 2020 ........................................................................................................................1107

C.

Financing of appropriations for the year 2020 ..........................................................................................1108

74/265.

Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for 2020 ..............................................................................................1108

74/266.

Working Capital Fund for 2020.........................................................................................................................1109

_______________
*

Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chair or another officer of the Bureau of the Committee.

1041

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/1
Adopted at the 14th plenary meeting, on 10 October 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/483,
para. 6)

74/1.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations: requests under
Article 19 of the Charter
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter V of the report of the Committee on Contributions on its seventy-ninth session,1

Reaffirming the obligation of Member States under Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations to bear the
expenses of the Organization as apportioned by the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its role in accordance with the provisions of Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the advisory role of the Committee on Contributions in accordance with rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly;
2.

Also reaffirms its resolution 54/237 C of 23 December 1999;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to bring to the attention of Member States the deadline
specified in resolution 54/237 C, including through an early announcement in the Journal of the United Nations and
through direct communication;
4. Urges all Member States requesting exemption under Article 19 of the Charter to submit as much
information as possible in support of their requests and to consider submitting such information in advance of the
deadline specified in resolution 54/237 C so as to enable the collation of any additional detailed information that may
be necessary;
5. Agrees that the failure of the Comoros, Sao Tome and Principe and Somalia to pay the full minimum
amount necessary to avoid the application of Article 19 of the Charter was due to conditions beyond their control;
6. Decides that the Comoros, Sao Tome and Principe and Somalia shall be permitted to vote in the General
Assembly until the end of its seventy-fourth session.
RESOLUTION 74/249
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/603, para. 6)

74/249. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/212 B of 31 March 1998 and its decision 57/573 of 20 December 2002,
Recalling also its resolutions 73/268 A of 22 December 2018 and 73/268 B of 3 July 2019,
Having considered, for the period ended 31 December 2018, the financial reports and audited financial
statements and the reports of the Board of Auditors on the United Nations,2 the International Trade Centre,3 the United
Nations University,4 the United Nations Development Programme,5 the United Nations Capital Development Fund,6
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/74/11).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. I (A/74/5 (Vol. I)).
3
Ibid., vol. III and corrigendum (A/74/5 (Vol. III) and A/74/5 (Vol. III)/Corr.1).
4
Ibid., vol. IV (A/74/5 (Vol. IV).
5
Ibid., Supplement No. 5A (A/74/5/Add.1).
6
Ibid., Supplement No. 5B (A/74/5/Add.2).
1
2

1042

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the United Nations Children’s Fund,7 the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East,8 the United Nations Institute for Training and Research,9 the voluntary funds administered by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,10 the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme,11 the United Nations
Population Fund,12 the United Nations Human Settlements Programme,13 the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime,14 the United Nations Office for Project Services,15 the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),16 the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals17 and the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund,18 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the concise summary of
the principal findings and conclusions contained in the reports of the Board of Auditors for the annual financial period
2018,19 the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors
contained in its reports on the United Nations20 and on the United Nations funds and programmes21 for the year ended
31 December 2018, the report of the Secretary of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and the Representative
of the Secretary-General for the investment of the assets of the Fund on the implementation of the recommendations
of the Board of Auditors contained in its report for the year ended 31 December 2018 on the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund22 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,23
1. Takes note of the audit opinions and findings, and endorses the recommendations, contained in the reports
of the Board of Auditors;2–18
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;23
3. Reaffirms that the Board of Auditors shall be completely independent and solely responsible for the
conduct of audits;
4. Decides to consider further the report of the Board of Auditors on the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals17 under the agenda item relating to the Mechanism;
5. Also decides to consider further the report of the Board of Auditors on the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund18 under the agenda item relating to the Pension Fund;
6.
thereof;

Commends the Board of Auditors for the continued high quality of its reports and the streamlined format

7. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Board of Auditors contained in its reports for the year ended 31 December 2018 on the United Nations20 and on the
United Nations funds and programmes;21
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the funds and programmes of
the United Nations to ensure full implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the related
_______________
Ibid., Supplement No. 5C (A/74/5/Add.3).
Ibid., Supplement No. 5D (A/74/5/Add.4).
9
Ibid., Supplement No. 5E (A/74/5/Add.5).
10
Ibid., Supplement No. 5F (A/74/5/Add.6).
11
Ibid., Supplement No. 5G (A/74/5/Add.7).
12
Ibid., Supplement No. 5H (A/74/5/Add.8).
13
Ibid., Supplement No. 5I (A/74/5/Add.9).
14
Ibid., Supplement No. 5J (A/74/5/Add.10).
15
Ibid., Supplement No. 5K (A/74/5/Add.11).
16
Ibid., Supplement No. 5L (A/74/5/Add.12).
17
Ibid., Supplement No. 5O (A/74/5/Add.15).
18
Ibid., Supplement No. 5P (A/74/5/Add.16).
19
A/74/202.
20
A/74/323.
21
A/74/323/Add.1.
22
A/74/329.
23
A/74/528 and A/74/528/Corr.1.
7
8

1043

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt and timely manner, to continue to hold programme
managers accountable for the non-implementation of recommendations and to effectively address the root causes of
the problems highlighted by the Board;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide in his reports on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors a full explanation for the delays in the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board, in particular those recommendations not yet fully implemented that are two or more
years old;
10. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to indicate in future reports an expected time frame for
the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors, as well as the priorities for their implementation
and the office holders to be held accountable.
RESOLUTIONS 74/250 A and B
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/606, para. 6)

74/250. Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019
A
Final budget appropriations for the biennium 2018–2019
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the programme budget for the
biennium 2018–2019,24 and endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,25 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
2.

Resolves that, for the biennium 2018–2019:

(a) The amount of 5,873,652,300 United States dollars appropriated by it in its resolutions 73/280 A of
22 December 2018, 73/279 B of 15 April 2019 and 73/306 of 3 July 2019 shall be as follows:
Amount approved in
resolutions 73/280 A,
73/279 B and 73/306

Increase/ (decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

Section

Part I. Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
1

Overall policymaking, direction and coordination

137 295 900

3 219 000

140 514 900

2

General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management

641 479 700

(18 012 700)

623 467 000

Subtotal, part I

778 775 600

(14 793 700)

763 981 900

Part II. Political affairs
3

Political affairs

1 477 234 300

(45 795 200)

1 431 439 100

4

Disarmament

25 289 400

(1 094 500)

24 194 900

5

Peacekeeping operations

106 125 000

(1 631 700)

104 493 300

6

Peaceful uses of outer space

7 795 700

(237 000)

7 558 700

1 616 444 400

(48 758 400)

1 567 686 000

Subtotal, part II

_______________
24
25

1044

A/74/570.
A/74/583.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Amount approved in
resolutions 73/280 A,
73/279 B and 73/306

Increase/ (decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

Section

Part III. International justice and law
7

International Court of Justice

49 549 200

2 187 900

51 737 100

8

Legal affairs

73 068 200

2 608 300

75 676 500

Subtotal, part III

122 617 400

4 796 200

127 413 600

Part IV. International cooperation for development
9

Economic and social affairs

162 317 700

1 116 700

163 434 400

10

Least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States

10 908 200

427 600

11 335 800

United Nations support for the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development

16 419 000

(1 188 900)

15 230 100

12

Trade and development

135 478 400

1 512 200

136 990 600

13

International Trade Centre

37 354 000

–

37 354 000

14

Environment

40 529 400

3 793 300

44 322 700

15

Human settlements

22 502 900

642 100

23 145 000

16

International drug control, crime and terrorism
prevention and criminal justice

40 788 800

2 317 500

43 106 300

UN-Women

16 544 100

2 027 600

18 571 700

Subtotal, part IV

482 842 500

10 648 100

493 490 600

11

17

Part V. Regional cooperation for development
18

Economic and social development in Africa

164 308 700

(8 354 300)

155 954 400

19

Economic and social development in Asia and the
Pacific

105 246 900

197 800

105 444 700

20

Economic development in Europe

63 683 400

3 438 800

67 122 200

21

Economic and social development in Latin America
and the Caribbean

116 813 100

660 400

117 473 500

22

Economic and social development in Western Asia

73 375 700

(102 100)

73 273 600

23

Regular programme of technical cooperation

65 816 600

(289 000)

65 527 600

Subtotal, part V

589 244 400

(4 448 400)

584 796 000

Part VI. Human rights and humanitarian affairs
24

Human rights

230 021 900

(2 069 900)

227 952 000

25

International protection, durable solutions and
assistance to refugees

86 133 700

170 300

86 304 000

26

Palestine refugees

54 964 300

2 800 200

57 764 500

27

Humanitarian assistance

36 244 700

4 553 800

40 798 500

Subtotal, part VI

407 364 600

5 454 400

412 819 000

Global communications

182 177 200

(709 800)

181 467 400

Subtotal, part VII

182 177 200

(709 800)

181 467 400

Part VII. Public information
28

1045

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Amount approved in
resolutions 73/280 A,
73/279 B and 73/306

Increase/ (decrease)

Final appropriation

(United States dollars)

Section

Part VIII. Common support services
29A (2018)

Office of the Under-Secretary-General for
Management

9 860 200

2 627 000

12 487 200

29B (2018)

Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts

17 195 400

(769 800)

16 425 600

29C (2018)

Office of Human Resources Management

32 062 200

(1 287 500)

30 774 700

29D (2018)

Office of Central Support Services

75 353 100

13 608 400

88 961 500

29E (2018)

Office of Information and Communications
Technology

48 018 400

(1 526 400)

46 492 000

29F

Administration, Geneva

136 724 900

4 111 100

140 836 000

29G

Administration, Vienna

37 467 400

(797 700)

36 669 700

29H

Administration, Nairobi

32 294 800

(222 600)

32 072 200

29A (2019)

Department of Management Strategy, Policy and
Compliance

55 153 600

(199 900)

54 953 700

29B (2019)

Department of Operational Support

96 972 200

(8 648 300)

88 323 900

29C (2019)

Office of Information and Communications
Technology

47 834 300

4 428 500

52 262 800

Subtotal, part VIII

588 936 500

11 322 800

600 259 300

Internal oversight

40 749 000

1 047 700

41 796 700

Subtotal, part IX

40 749 000

1 047 700

41 796 700

Part IX. Internal oversight
30

Part X. Jointly financed administrative activities and
special expenses
31

Jointly financed administrative activities

12 358 800

–

12 358 800

32

Special expenses

131 902 100

18 120 700

150 022 800

Subtotal, part X

144 260 900

18 120 700

162 381 600

Construction, alteration, improvement and major
maintenance

130 057 300

6 455 400

136 512 700

Subtotal, part XI

130 057 300

6 455 400

136 512 700

Safety and security

242 912 700

5 404 700

248 317 400

Subtotal, part XII

242 912 700

5 404 700

248 317 400

Development Account

28 398 800

–

28 398 800

Subtotal, part XIII

28 398 800

–

28 398 800

Staff assessment

518 871 000

5 460 300

524 331 300

Subtotal, part XIV

518 871 000

5 460 300

524 331 300

Total

5 873 652 300

–

5 873 652 300

Part XI. Capital expenditures
33

Part XII. Safety and security
34

Part XIII. Development Account
35

Part XIV. Staff assessment
36

1046

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(b) The Secretary-General shall be authorized to transfer credits between sections of the budget, with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee;
(c) In addition to the appropriations approved under paragraph 2 (a) above, an amount of 75,000 dollars shall
be appropriated for 2020 from the accumulated income of the Library Endowment Fund for the purchase of books,
periodicals, maps and library equipment and for such other expenses of the Library at the Palais des Nations in Geneva
as are in accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment;
3. Takes note of paragraph 15 of the report of the Advisory Committee, decides not to approve a temporary
suspension of the surrender of the unspent appropriations of the regular budget for 2016–2017 for the 2020 financial
year, and requests the Secretary-General to return the amount of 25.19 million dollars to the Member States, in
accordance with regulations 3.2 (d) and 5.4 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;26
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consult delegations on possible austerity measures that could have an
impact on their work in the main organs of the United Nations and to make every effort to mitigate their impact.
B
Final income estimates for the biennium 2018–2019
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the biennium 2018–2019:
(a) The estimates of income of 563,399,800 United States dollars approved by it in its resolutions 73/280 B
of 22 December 2018, 73/279 B of 15 April 2019 and 73/306 of 3 July 2019 shall be increased by 8,654,100 dollars,
as follows:
Approved estimates of income
Income section

Increase/ (decrease)

Final estimates of income

(United States dollars)

1

Income from staff assessment

523 015 000

5 189 100

528 204 100

2

General income

43 674 200

2 415 000

46 089 200

3

Services to the public

(3 289 400)

1 050 000

(2 239 400)

Total

563 399 800

8 654 100

572 053 900

(b) The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
(c) Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, catering and related
services, garage operations, television services and the sale of publications not provided for under the budget
appropriations shall be charged against the income derived from those activities.
RESOLUTION 74/251
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, by a recorded vote of 148 to 2, with 4 abstentions,*
on the recommendation of the Committee (A/74/612, para. 18)
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, North

_______________
26

ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2013/4/Amend.1.

1047

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen
Against: Kazakhstan, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining: Gabon, Lesotho, Mauritania, Zambia

74/251. Programme planning
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/234 of 21 December 1982, 38/227 A of 20 December 1983, 41/213 of
19 December 1986, 55/234 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001, 57/282 of 20 December 2002,
58/268 and 58/269 of 23 December 2003, 59/275 of 23 December 2004, 60/257 of 8 May 2006, 61/235 of
22 December 2006, 62/224 of 22 December 2007, 63/247 of 24 December 2008, 64/229 of 22 December 2009,
65/244 of 24 December 2010, 66/8 of 11 November 2011, 67/236 of 24 December 2012, 68/20 of 4 December 2013,
69/17 of 18 November 2014, 70/8 of 13 November 2015, 71/6 of 27 October 2016, 72/9 of 17 November 2017,
72/266 A of 24 December 2017, 72/266 B of 5 July 2018, section III of its resolution 72/262 C of 5 July 2018 and
its resolution 73/269 of 22 December 2018,
Recalling also the terms of reference of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, as outlined in the
annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976,
Recalling further the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the
Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation,27 by which the relevant programmes and
subprogrammes of the proposed strategic framework shall be reviewed by the relevant sectoral, functional and
regional intergovernmental bodies, if possible during the regular cycle of their meetings,
Having considered the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the work of its fifty-ninth
session28 and the reports of the Secretary-General on the proposed programme budget for 2020: part I, plan outline,29
and part II, programme plan for programmes and subprogrammes and programme performance information,30
Having also considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on strengthening the role of
evaluation and the application of evaluation findings on programme design, delivery and policy directives,31
1. Reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as the main subsidiary organ of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for planning, programming and coordination;
2. Also reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination in verifying that the
programmes of activities of the Organization are implemented in line with the legislative mandates and that the full
implementation of regulations and rules is ensured;
3. Re-emphasizes the role of the plenary and the Main Committees of the General Assembly in reviewing
and taking action on the appropriate recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination relevant
to their work, in accordance with regulation 4.10 of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the
Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation;27
4. Stresses that setting the priorities of the United Nations is the prerogative of the Member States, as reflected
in legislative mandates;
_______________
ST/SGB/2018/3.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/74/16).
29
A/74/6 (Plan outline).
30
A/74/6 (Sect. 2), A/74/6 (Sect. 3), A/74/6 (Sect. 4), A/74/6 (Sect. 5), A/74/6 (Sect. 5)/Corr.1, A/74/6 (Sect. 6), A/74/6 (Sect. 8),
A/74/6 (Sect. 8)/Corr.1, A/74/6 (Sect. 9), A/74/6 (Sect. 10), A/74/6 (Sect. 11), A/74/6 (Sect. 12), A/74/6 (Sect. 13), A/74/6 (Sect. 14),
A/74/6 (Sect. 15), A/74/6 (Sect. 16), A/74/6 (Sect. 17), A/74/6 (Sect. 18), A/74/6 (Sect. 19), A/74/6 (Sect. 20), A/74/6 (Sect. 21),
A/74/6 (Sect. 22), A/74/6 (Sect. 24), A/74/6 (Sect. 25), A/74/6 (Sect. 26), A/74/6 (Sect. 27), A/74/6 (Sect. 28), A/74/6 (Sect. 29),
A/74/6 (Sect. 30), A/74/6 (Sect. 31) and A/74/6 (Sect. 34).
31
A/74/67 and A/74/67/Corr.1.
27
28

1048

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Reiterates the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget preparation process, from its early
stages and throughout the process;
6. Recalls its resolution 72/266 A, in which it approved the change from a biennial to an annual budget period
on a trial basis, beginning with the programme budget for 2020;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to present a report as early as practicable, for the consideration of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, on the impact of the changes to the budgetary cycle on the established
budgetary procedures and practices as they pertain to the agreed sequential nature of the review processes of the
proposed programme budget, and in this regard to present possible options to ensure the preservation of this sequence,
including the possibility of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions preparing its
conclusions and recommendations on the basis of a programme plan approved by the General Assembly in 2021;
8. Recalls paragraph 13 of its resolution 72/266 A, and reaffirms that no changes to the budget methodology,
established budgetary procedures and practices or the financial regulations may be implemented without prior review
and approval by the General Assembly in accordance with established budgetary procedures;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to clearly identify those provisions and rules that are proposed to be
formally suspended or no longer applied during the trial period;
10. Expresses its support for the efforts of the Secretariat to better engage and support programme managers
with the aim of making the Organization more effective, and welcomes the commitment and ongoing efforts of the
Secretariat to improve the programmatic aspects of the programme budget;
11. Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure that objectives, results and performance measures that are put
forward for consideration are strategic, measurable, achievable, realistic and time-bound;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning,
the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation approved
by the General Assembly in its resolutions 70/8 and 72/9 are fully respected, with the exception of regulations and
rules that have been directly impacted by the decisions taken by the Assembly in its resolution 72/266 A;
13. Notes the repeated reference “in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
purposes stipulated in Article 1 of the Charter are embodied by the Sustainable Development Goals” across the
programmes, underscores the primacy of the Charter of the United Nations, and reaffirms that the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development32 are guided by the purposes and principles
of the Charter;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that results and, where possible, performance measures actually
reflect achievements in the implementation of the programmes of the Organization and not those of individual
Member States;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General, while still considering further areas of improvement, to apply the
following guidelines when preparing the next proposed programme plan and programme performance documents for
the remainder of the approved trial period, namely, for 2021 and 2022:
(a) Adhering to a programme plan that contains the required level of detail and information, in particular
keeping the objectives, results and corresponding performance measures at the subprogramme level, in line with the
results-based budgeting framework;
(b) Including a detailed list of deliverables in the proposed programme budget and ensuring that resources are
justified in terms of the requirements to implement deliverables as contributions to the planned results;
(c) Including clear, comprehensive explanations of the approved methodologies to be applied in the context
of the programme budget proposals to be submitted in respect of the 2021 and 2022 budget periods, with reference to
the applicable provisions of relevant General Assembly resolutions, including resolutions 47/212 A of 23 December
1992 and 72/266 A;
_______________
32

Resolution 70/1.

1049

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(d) Enhancing the link between the preceding programme plans and the proposed future plans, with a view
to ensuring consistency and continuity;
(e) Incorporating more general information on programmes and subprogrammes by showing not only
examples of actual and planned results, but also an overview of activities and general strategy that encompasses a
comprehensive overall account of the actual and planned results;
(f) Presenting performance information on a comprehensive set of results, which would allow for enhanced
oversight, transparency and accountability in the implementation of all activities in the programme plan as approved
by the General Assembly;
(g) Providing, in the context of performance measures, at least three prior years of actual performance
information to facilitate a better understanding and assessment of progress made at the programme and subprogramme
levels;
(h)

Including a strategy at both the programme and subprogramme levels;

(i) Incorporating the list of legislative mandates into the published official document and not into the
supplementary document provided informally;
(j) Replacing the proposed section on alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals with concrete
information regarding contributions to the implementation of the Goals by relevant programmes and subprogrammes
in accordance with their specific related intergovernmental mandates;
(k) Using simplified and identifiable numbering to improve the readability and referencing of the proposed
programme plan;
(l)

Reducing the use of accompanying photographs in the foreword to each proposed programme plan;

(m) Ensuring that the use of anecdotal narratives in subprogrammes is only to provide examples of actual and
planned results as referenced in (e) above;
(n) Ensuring that the terms and expressions referenced in the proposed programme plan have been
intergovernmentally agreed;
16. Approves, on an exceptional basis and without creating a precedent, for programmes 5, 8, 10, 12, 13, 16,
17, 19, 22, 27 and 28 of the proposed programme budget for 2020, the programme narrative that is composed solely
of the “Mandates and background”, “Recent developments”, “Strategy and external factors for 2020” and “Evaluation
activities” sections at the programme level and by objective at the subprogramme level;
17. Also approves, on an exceptional basis and without creating a precedent, for programmes 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 9,
11, 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25 and 26 of the proposed programme budget for 2020, a programme narrative that is
composed solely of the list of mandates at the programme level and the objectives approved by the General Assembly
in its resolution 71/6 and the deliverables for 2020 at the subprogramme level;
18. Further approves the programme plan for programme 6, Legal affairs, of the proposed programme budget
for 2020, as contained in the report of the Secretary-General;33
19. Approves, on an exceptional basis and without creating a precedent, in the case of the programmes
mentioned in paragraph 17 above, where new mandates imply changes to the objectives at the subprogramme level
as approved in their agreed formulation under its resolution 71/6, the relevant objectives as updated in the proposed
programme budget for 2020;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the programme plan covers all activities, both substantive
and servicing, including those to be financed partially or fully from extrabudgetary and other assessed resources;
21. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on
evaluation34 contained in its report on the work of its fifty-ninth session, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the timely implementation of the recommendations;
_______________
33
34

1050

A/74/6 (Sect. 8) and A/74/6 (Sect. 8)/Corr.1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/74/16), chap. II, sect. B.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Also endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
on the annual overview report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2018,35
contained in its report on the work of its fifty-ninth session, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the timely
implementation of the recommendations.
RESOLUTION 74/252
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/602, para. 6)

74/252. Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the pattern of conferences, including resolution 73/270 of 22 December 2018,
Recalling also its previous resolutions on multilingualism, in particular resolution 73/346 of 16 September 2019,
reaffirming the provisions relating to conference services, and recognizing that multilingualism, as a core value of the
Organization, contributes to the achievement of the goals of the United Nations, as set out in Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it requested the Secretary-General to ensure
the equal treatment of the official languages of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences for 201936 and the relevant report of the
Secretary-General,37
Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,38
Reaffirming the role of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly in administrative and budgetary matters,
Recalling its resolution 14 (I) of 13 February 1946 and the role of the Advisory Committee as a subsidiary body
of the General Assembly,
I
Calendar of conferences and meetings
1.

Welcomes the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2019;36

2. Approves the draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 2020, as submitted by
the Committee on Conferences,39 taking into account the observations of the Committee and subject to the provisions
of the present resolution;
3. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make any adjustments to the revised calendar of conferences
and meetings of the United Nations for 2020 that may become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by
the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session;
4. Recalls paragraph 40 of its resolution 71/323 of 8 September 2017 and paragraph 40 of its resolution
72/313 of 17 September 2018 on the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly;
5. Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat has taken into account the arrangements referred to in General
Assembly resolutions on the pattern of conferences, including resolutions 53/208 A of 18 December 1998, 54/248 of
23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December 2000, 56/242 of 24 December 2001, 57/283 B of 15 April 2003, 58/250
of 23 December 2003, 59/265 of 23 December 2004, 60/236 A of 23 December 2005, 61/236 of 22 December 2006,
_______________
Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/74/32).
37
A/74/121.
38
A/74/538.
39
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/74/32), annex II.
35
36

1051

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

62/225 of 22 December 2007, 63/248 of 24 December 2008, 64/230 of 22 December 2009, 65/245 of 24 December
2010, 66/233 of 24 December 2011, 67/237 of 24 December 2012, 68/251 of 27 December 2013, 72/19 of
1 December 2017 and 73/270, concerning Orthodox Good Friday and the official holidays of Eid al-Fitr and
Eid al‑Adha, and requests all intergovernmental bodies to observe those decisions when planning their meetings;
6. Also notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat has taken into account the arrangements referred to in
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly regarding the pattern of conferences, including resolution 69/250 of
29 December 2014, concerning Yom Kippur, the Day of Vesak, Diwali, Gurpurab, Orthodox Christmas and Nowruz,
and requests all relevant intergovernmental bodies to continue to observe the applicable decisions when planning their
meetings;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that any modification to the calendar of conferences
and meetings is implemented strictly in accordance with the mandate of the Committee on Conferences and other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
8. Invites Member States to include in new legislative mandates adequate information on the modalities for
the organization of conferences or meetings;
9. Recalls rule 153 of its rules of procedure, and, for resolutions involving expenditure, requests the
Secretary-General to include the modalities of conferences, taking into account the trends of similar meetings, with a
view to mobilizing conference and documentation services in the most efficient and cost-effective manner possible;
10. Reaffirms the need to address the issue of duplications and redundancies in conference servicing, and notes
Economic and Social Council resolution 2018/30 of 24 July 2018;
11. Expresses concern regarding the recurring extension of the work of the Fifth Committee during the second
part of the resumed session of the General Assembly and the impact of such an extension on the services provided by
the Secretariat, including the availability of conference rooms and language services;
II
Utilization of conference-servicing resources
12. Reaffirms the practice that, in the use of conference rooms, priority must be given to meetings of Member
States;
13. Calls upon the Secretary-General and Member States to adhere to the guidelines and procedures contained
in the administrative instruction for the authorization of the use of United Nations premises for meetings, conferences,
special events and exhibits;40
14. Notes that ST/AI/416 of 26 April 1996, which regulates the use of United Nations premises, has been
updated and superseded at Headquarters in New York by ST/AI/2019/4 of 23 September 2019, and encourages the
Directors-General of other conference-servicing duty stations to review and update as necessary their information
circulars governing the use of United Nations premises;
15. Emphasizes that such meetings, conferences, special events and exhibits must be consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations;
16. Notes that the overall interpretation utilization factor for all calendar bodies at the four main duty stations
was 82 per cent in 2018, 81 per cent in 2017 and 80 per cent in 2016, 2015 and 2014, which met the established
benchmark of 80 per cent;
17. Urges those intergovernmental bodies whose average interpretation utilization factor has for the past six
years been below the benchmark of 80 per cent to take that factor into account when planning their future sessions in
order to achieve that benchmark;
18. Reiterates its request to intergovernmental bodies to review their meeting entitlements and to plan and
adjust their programmes of work on the basis of their actual utilization of conference-servicing resources in order to
improve their efficient use and to achieve optimum utilization of conference services;
_______________
40

1052

ST/AI/416.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

19. Urges the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their conference-servicing resources to work
more closely with the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat and to
consider changes to their programmes of work, as appropriate, including adjustments based on previous patterns of
recurring agenda items, with a view to making improvements in their interpretation utilization factors;
20. Recognizes that late starts and unplanned early endings seriously affect the interpretation utilization factor
of those bodies, invites the secretariats and bureaux of the bodies to pay adequate attention in this regard, and
welcomes their efforts to inform the Secretariat in a timely manner of any such changes in order to allow conference
services to be smoothly redeployed to other meetings;
21. Requests the Committee on Conferences to consult those bodies that have consistently utilized less than
the applicable benchmark of their allocated resources for the past six years, with a view to making appropriate
recommendations in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources;
22. Welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General to increase the utilization of conferenceservicing resources, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to enhance the efficiency of conference
servicing and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Member States on initiatives that affect the utilization of
conference services and conference facilities;
24. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to impress upon bodies entitled to meet “as required” the
need to further improve the utilization of conference services, and further requests the Secretary-General to report on
the provision of such services to those bodies to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
25. Recognizes the importance of meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States for the
smooth functioning of the sessions of intergovernmental bodies, requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far
as possible, all requests for conference services for the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member
States are met, and requests the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to inform the
requesters as early as possible about the availability of conference services, including interpretation, as well as about
any changes that might occur before the holding of meetings;
26. Notes the overall increase in the percentage of meetings held by regional and other major groupings of
Member States that were provided with interpretation services at the four main duty stations in 2018, and requests the
Secretary-General to further employ innovative means to address the difficulties arising from the lack of interpretation
services for such meetings and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
27. Once again urges intergovernmental bodies at the planning stage to take into account the meetings of
regional and other major groupings of Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their programmes of
work and to notify the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, well in advance, of any
cancellations so that unutilized conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be reassigned to meetings
of regional and other major groupings of Member States;
28. Recognizes the improvement in the rate of room utilization of the conference centre of the Economic
Commission for Africa and the ongoing efforts aimed at improving the conference facilities at the Commission;
29. Looks forward to receiving the proposal aimed at addressing the deteriorating conditions and the limited
capacity of the conference services facility at the United Nations Office at Nairobi;
30. Recognizes the proactive efforts of the Secretary-General to identify ways to enhance efficiency and
effectiveness in conference services, commends the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management
for its innovative approaches in providing technical secretariat support and in managing meetings and documents, and
encourages the Department to continue its efforts to preserve the high quality of its services while achieving
efficiencies;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts aimed at improving conference servicing at the four
main duty stations, including by addressing or eliminating possible duplication, overlap and redundancy, and
identifying innovative ideas, potential synergies and other cost-saving measures, without compromising quality or
affecting the provision of services, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;

1053

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

32. Reiterates the need to continue to improve all conference facilities, including the videoconferencing
infrastructure, at all four main duty stations, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to report thereon no later
than at the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly;
33. Welcomes the measures taken to ensure access to and use of conference services and conference facilities
for persons with disabilities, including the establishment of the Accessibility Centre, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to address issues related to the accessibility of conference facilities in all four main conferenceservicing duty stations as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
34. Also welcomes the integrated global management rule as an efficient approach, where feasible, to servicing
meetings away from duty stations, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to realize
further efficiencies by rigorously applying the integrated global management rule to applicable meetings, without
jeopardizing the quality of services, and to continue to report thereon to the Committee on Conferences;
III
Enhancing integrated global management, leveraging technology and measuring the quality
of conference services
35. Recalls paragraph 24 of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences41 also recalls
that, in paragraph 81 of its resolution 56/253 of 24 December 2001, it requested the Secretary-General to ensure that
conference services were managed in an integrated manner throughout all duty stations in the Organization, stresses
again that the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management is responsible for the implementation
of policy, the formulation of standards and guidelines, overseeing and coordinating United Nations conference
services and the overall management of resources under the relevant budget section, while the United Nations Offices
at Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi remain responsible and accountable for day-to-day operational activities, as indicated
in section II.B, paragraph 7, of its resolution 57/283 B;
36. Notes the completion of the internal reviews concerning accountability mechanisms and the clear
delineation of responsibility between the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference
Management and the Directors-General of the United Nations Offices at Geneva, Nairobi and Vienna for conference
management policies, operations and resource utilization, requests the Secretary-General to report on the outcome of
the internal reviews to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, and in this regard recalls, inter alia,
paragraph 36 of its resolution 73/270;
37. Welcomes the innovative efforts of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management
to improve conference services with a view to facilitating the decision-making process by intergovernmental bodies,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore technological and other innovations that advance
effectiveness and efficiency in this regard and to report on these efforts during the seventy-fifth session;
38. Notes the initiatives undertaken in the context of the integrated global management concept aimed at
streamlining procedures, achieving economies of scale and improving the quality of conference services, and in this
regard stresses the importance of ensuring the equal treatment of conference-servicing staff, as well as the principle
of equal grade for equal work at the four main duty stations;
39. Acknowledges that the concept of integrated global management has been fully mainstreamed into all
areas of conference services across the four main conference-servicing duty stations, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to keep the General Assembly and the Committee on Conferences apprised of progress made in ensuring
integrated global management and to provide accurate and up-to-date information on new initiatives falling under the
purview of the Committee;
40. Notes with appreciation the progress made in the development and implementation of conference
management software such as gData, gDoc, gMeets and gText, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that they
are implemented as enterprise systems in the context of the Secretariat-wide information and communications
technology strategy, as welcomed by the General Assembly in its resolution 69/262 of 29 December 2014, and to
report on progress made regarding operations, maintenance and harmonization with existing systems, as appropriate;

_______________
41

1054

A/70/122.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

41. Underlines that all the initiatives on leveraging technology, including those introduced on a trial basis,
shall comply with the principle of parity among the official languages of the Organization, with a view to preserving
and enhancing the quality and scope of the services provided by the Secretariat;
42. Reiterates that the satisfaction of Member States is a key performance indicator in conference
management and conference services;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that measures taken by the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management to seek the evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference
services provided to them, as a key performance indicator of the Department, provide equal opportunities to Member
States to present their evaluations in the six official languages of the United Nations and are in full compliance with
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and also requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly,
through the Committee on Conferences, on progress made in this regard;
44. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore best practices and techniques in client
satisfaction evaluations, to seek a larger rate of response to surveys on quality and to report regularly to the General
Assembly on the results achieved;
45. Welcomes the efforts made by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to
seek the evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to them, taking into
consideration comments and complaints raised by Member States either in writing or during meetings, and requests
the Secretary-General to intensify his exploration of innovative ways to systematically capture and analyse feedback
from Member States and Chairs and Secretaries of committees on the quality of conference services and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek evaluation of the quality of the conference services
provided by the Secretariat through meetings held at least once a year, but not exceeding twice a year, guaranteeing
that Member States are able to present their evaluations and seek information equally in any of the six official
languages of the United Nations on any conference-related or language-specific matter;
IV
Matters related to documentation and publications
47. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of the United Nations;
48. Underlines that all the initiatives on the evolution of working methods, including those introduced on a
trial basis, shall comply with the principle of parity among the official languages of the Organization, with a view to
preserving or enhancing the quality and scope of the services provided by the Secretariat;
49. Emphasizes the importance of multilingualism in the activities of the United Nations, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure full parity among the six official languages in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 73/346 and to report thereon to the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
50. Also emphasizes the importance of making use of all the official languages of the United Nations, ensuring
their full and equitable treatment in all the activities of the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat,
with the aim of eliminating the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other official languages,
and in this regard reaffirms its request that the Secretary-General ensure the archiving of official meetings webcasts
in all six official languages on the United Nations website;
51. Welcomes the appointment by the Secretary-General of the Coordinator for Multilingualism, who is
responsible for the overall implementation of multilingualism Secretariat-wide, and calls upon all departments and
offices within the Secretariat to fully support the work of the Coordinator in the implementation of the relevant
mandates on multilingualism;
52. Emphasizes that multilingualism, as a core value of the Organization, entails the active involvement and
commitment of all stakeholders, including all United Nations duty stations and offices away from Headquarters;
53. Welcomes the submission by the Secretary-General, in his report on multilingualism,42 of detailed terms
of reference for the Coordinator for Multilingualism, as requested in resolution 70/9 of 13 November 2015, recalls its
_______________
42

A/71/757.

1055

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

endorsement, in resolution 71/328 of 11 September 2017, of the terms of reference proposed by the Secretary-General,
requests that subsequent updates to the terms of reference be made available to all Member States and Secretariat
entities, and welcomes the efforts made by the Coordinator in this regard;
54. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the consistent and effective implementation of the terms of
reference for the Coordinator for Multilingualism and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session;
55. Emphasizes the role of Member States and their intergovernmental bodies in determining the policies on
conference management;
56. Stresses that proposals to change such policies are to be approved by Member States in their relevant
intergovernmental bodies;
57. Also stresses that matters related to conference management, including documentation, fall within the
purview of the Fifth Committee;
58. Reiterates the importance of the timely submission and issuance of documents for all intergovernmental
bodies, including the Fifth Committee;
59. Notes with concern the recurring late issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee, recalls paragraph 29
of its resolution 70/247 of 23 December 2015, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to take actions for its
effective implementation, taking into account the responsibilities of all stakeholders involved, and to report thereon
in the context of his next report on the pattern of conferences;
60. Welcomes the efforts made by the Secretariat, in particular the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management, regarding the timely issuance of pre-session documentation for the Fifth Committee in the
six official languages of the United Nations, and encourages continued efforts by all stakeholders in this regard;
61. Encourages the Chairs of the Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions to continue to promote cooperation between the two bodies in the sphere of documentation;
62. Notes that accurate, timely and consistent information provided by the Secretariat to the Fifth Committee
during its informal consultations facilitates the decision-making process in the Committee;
63. Reaffirms its decision, in section IV of its resolution 64/230, that all reports adopted by the Working Group
on the Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council shall be issued as documents in all official languages
of the United Nations in a timely manner before their consideration by the Council, in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions 36/117 A of 10 December 1981, 51/211 A to E of 18 December 1996, 52/214 of 22 December
1997, 53/208 A to E of 18 December 1998 and 59/265, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the support
necessary to that effect and to report thereon to the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
64. Reiterates paragraph 8 of the annex to its resolution 2 (I) of 1 February 1946 on the rules of procedure
concerning languages, whereby all resolutions and other important documents shall be made available in all six
official languages and, upon the request of any representative, any other document shall be made available in any or
all of the official languages;
65. Also reiterates the importance of the simultaneous issuance of documents in all official languages and
welcomes the 100 per cent compliance in 2018 with the issuance of documents by all duty stations, and reiterates its
request that the Secretary-General ensure strict respect for the rules concerning the simultaneous issuance of
documents in all six official languages as regards both the distribution of printed copies and the posting of
parliamentary documentation on the Official Document System and the United Nations website;
66. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action on providing the timely and simultaneous
issuance of documents in all six official languages;
67. Notes that workload-sharing has expanded to include text-processing in addition to translation and editing,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek ways to promote workload-sharing among the four main duty
stations and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;

1056

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

68. Emphasizes that the major goals of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management
are to provide high-quality documents in a timely manner in all official languages, in accordance with established
regulations, as well as high-quality conference services to Member States at all headquarters duty stations, and to
achieve those aims as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
69. Also emphasizes the importance of enhancing accountability within the Secretariat for the timely
submission and issuance of documents;
70. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include in the senior managers’ compacts the new standard
managerial indicator related to the timely submission of official documentation for intergovernmental and expert
bodies and to report thereon in future progress reports on accountability;
71. Also requests the Secretary-General to include, in future budget proposals, information related to the
timely submission of documentation needed for meetings of relevant intergovernmental and expert bodies;
72. Reaffirms its decision in section III, paragraph 9, of its resolution 59/265 that the issuance of documents
in all six official languages on planning, budgetary and administrative matters requiring urgent consideration by the
General Assembly shall be accorded priority;
73. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General direct all departments of the Secretariat to include the
following elements in their reports:
(a)

A summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

and its request that all documents submitted to legislative organs, including the Committee on Conferences, by the
Secretariat and intergovernmental and expert bodies for consideration and action have conclusions and
recommendations in bold print;
74. Notes with concern that only 76 per cent of the author departments reached the compliance rate of
90 per cent in the timely submission of their reports to the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to enforce the slotting system more rigorously through a
dedicated focus, such as the interdepartmental task force on documentation, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, urges author departments to fully adhere to deadlines for document submission,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on concrete measures taken;
75. Notes with appreciation the work of the interdepartmental task force on documentation, chaired by the
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, to facilitate the submission of documents by author
departments of the Secretariat;
76. Reiterates its request in paragraph 77 of its resolution 73/270 that the Secretary-General provide
information on the waiver process for documents that are submitted over the word limit;
77. Notes that the Official Document System is the official digital repository of the United Nations, welcomes
its modernization, including the introduction of a portable Official Document System, and its accessibility in all six
official languages of the United Nations, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard;
78. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to upload all important older United Nations
documents on to the United Nations website in all six official languages on a priority basis so that those archives will
also be available to Member States and the general public;
79. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all measures necessary to ensure that the digitization of key
documents in the Dag Hammarskjöld Library and in the main duty stations is completed in a timely manner, as
appropriate;
80. Recalls paragraph 82 of its resolution 73/270, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to entrust
the Department of Global Communications with presenting a proposal for the digitization of important older United

1057

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Nations documents stored at the United Nations Headquarters Dag Hammarskjöld Library for consideration by the
General Assembly through the Committee on Information no later than at the main part of its seventy-fifth session,
outlining, inter alia, the definition of important older United Nations documents, as well as the scope and estimated
quantity, cost and time frame;
81. Expresses concern that the anticipated lengthy digitization project may jeopardize the retention of
historical knowledge and information in view of the delicate state and risk of breakage of many of the related
documents;
82. Requests the Secretary-General to seek additional voluntary contributions for the digitization of important
older United Nations documents, including by broadening the donor base, and to report thereon in the context of the
report requested in paragraph 80 above;
83. Welcomes with appreciation the additional contribution from the Government of Qatar to support the
digitization project;
84. Recalls paragraph 85 of its resolution 73/270, notes the increased use of digital recordings by other
intergovernmental bodies, including the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report to the General
Assembly in this regard;
85. Stresses that verbatim and summary records remain the only official records of the meetings of United
Nations bodies;
86. Reiterates paragraph 87 of its resolution 73/270 related to the transition to digital recordings of meetings
in the six official languages of the Organization as a cost-saving measure;
87. Recalls paragraph 5 of its resolution 49/221 B of 23 December 1994, and stresses that the timely issuance
of verbatim records constitutes an important part of the services provided to Member States;
V
Matters related to language services
88. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure the highest quality of interpretation and
translation services in all six official languages;
89. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to continue to improve the quality of the simultaneous
interpretation and translation services provided, and requests the Secretary-General to take action in this regard;
90. Underlines that the translation of official documents of the Organization must be provided in all required
languages and in due time, in full compliance with the rules of procedure of the respective legislative bodies;
91. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the quality of translation of documents into the six
official languages, giving particular significance to the accuracy of translation;
92. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the terminology used in the translation and
interpretation services reflects the latest linguistic norms and terminology of the official languages in order to ensure
the highest quality;
93. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to maintain and update the global terminology portal
in order to ensure its availability to United Nations staff, Member States and the general public, with a view to
achieving harmonization of the terminology used at all United Nations duty stations;
94. Requests the Secretary-General, as the Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, to continue to invite the heads of participating funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system to consider using official United Nations terminology and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
95. Notes that the pool of language professionals at duty stations is uneven in terms of language combinations,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to develop recruitment, subcontracting and outreach policies
that take full account of those imbalances and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;

1058

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

96. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are
provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving the maximum quality
of services, with full respect for the specificities of the six official languages and taking into account their respective
workloads;
97. Also requests the Secretary-General to take measures to ensure equal treatment of all six official languages
and equal quality of service for Member States, while fully respecting the specificities of each official language and
different levels of benefit from information technology advances for different languages, including by addressing
workload inequities arising from staffing structures and specificities of language, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
98. Reiterates the need for the Secretary-General to ensure the compatibility of technologies used in all duty
stations and to ensure that they are user-friendly in all official languages;
99. Welcomes the development of the computer-assisted translation and machine translation system (eLUNa),
and requests the Secretary-General to report on updates, including cost-benefit analysis and quality preservation and
control, to this system to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
100. Recalls section VII of its resolution 69/274 A of 2 April 2015, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that the implementation of flexible workplace strategies and other potential changes in logistical arrangements take
into account the needs of language staff in order to continue to ensure that the services provided to Member States
meet the highest standard of quality;
101. Reaffirms paragraph 102 of its resolution 73/270, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General,
when recruiting temporary assistance in the language services, including through the use of international or local
contracts, as appropriate, ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are provided with equally
favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of their services, with full
respect for the specificities of each of the six official languages and taking into account their respective workloads;
102. Recalls section IV of its resolution 69/274 A, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the working
conditions of interpreters under review;
103. Requests the Secretary-General to fill vacancies in the language services, in particular in the translation
services and interpretation services, in a timely manner and in full compliance with relevant provisions of the General
Assembly resolutions governing recruitment for language staff, and to report thereon to the Assembly at its seventyfifth session;
104. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to hold competitive examinations for the
recruitment of language staff sufficiently in advance in order to fill current and future vacancies in the language
services in a timely manner and to inform the General Assembly at its future sessions of efforts in this regard;
105. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to enhance access to competitive
examinations for applicants in all regions, including by organizing remote examinations and by bringing, to the extent
possible, examination sites closer to their locations in order to allow the greatest number of potentially qualified
candidates to participate in them, and to report to the General Assembly at its future sessions on progress made in this
regard;
106. Stresses the need to fully ensure the highest possible quality of contractual and in-house translation, and
freelance and in-house interpretation, and requests the Secretary-General to report on measures taken in this regard;
107. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General provide, at all duty stations, adequate staff at the
appropriate level, with a view to ensuring appropriate quality control for external translation;
108. Requests the Secretary-General to apply common standards for the quality control of documents processed
by external translators in all four duty stations in order to ensure high-quality translations in the six official languages
of the United Nations, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its future sessions;
109. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the experience, lessons learned and best practices of the
main duty stations in performing quality control of contractual and in-house translations, including on requirements
1059

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

relating to the number and appropriate level of staff needed to carry out this function, are shared among duty stations
and regional commissions, as appropriate;
110. Notes that the Secretary-General has established globally standardized performance indicators and costing
models aimed at a more cost-effective strategy for the in-house processing of documents, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their effective application at the four main duty stations;
111. Notes with appreciation the measures taken by the Secretary-General, in accordance with its resolutions,
to address the issue of the replacement of retiring staff in the language services, and requests the Secretary-General to
maintain and intensify those efforts, including the strengthening of cooperation with institutions that train language
specialists, in order to meet the needs in the six official languages of the United Nations;
112. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the internship programme, including through
partnerships with organizations that promote the official languages of the United Nations;
113. Welcomes the existing memorandums of understanding between the Organization and 23 universities as
a way to strengthen the training of language professionals in order to improve the recruitment of qualified language
staff, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to assess the appropriate number of memorandums of
understanding in order to fulfil the needs of the Organization;
114. Requests the Secretary-General to make further concerted efforts to promote outreach programmes, such
as traineeships and internships, and to introduce innovative methods to increase awareness of the programmes,
including through partnerships with Member States, relevant international organizations and language institutions in
all regions, in particular to close the wide gap of qualified candidates from Africa and from the Latin American and
Caribbean region, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
115. Notes with appreciation the positive experience with language traineeships in training young professionals
and in attracting them to the United Nations, while enhancing the pool of qualified language professionals in language
combinations that are critical for succession-planning purposes, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts in this regard;
116. Notes that the “African project” has the aim of establishing postgraduate university programmes in
translation, conference interpreting and public service interpreting through centres of excellence on the African
continent, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the achievements of this project;
117. Also notes the difficulties encountered in identifying and retaining qualified language professionals and
the need to replenish the pool of language experts at the main duty stations, particularly New York and Nairobi, in
order to prevent further negative impact on the capacity of the Secretariat to provide services in the six official
languages of the United Nations;
118. Welcomes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to raise awareness among all Member States and the
general public of career opportunities in conference services, including through the increased use of social media;
119. Notes the update provided by the Secretary-General regarding the pilot project related to the outposting to
Vienna of translators from the French Translation Service in New York, and requests the Secretary-General to provide
to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session further updates on this matter, including on the quality of services,
a cost-benefit analysis, information on workload-sharing and lessons learned;
120. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve and strengthen his initiatives related to training and
replenishing the language capacity of the Organization, including through the outreach programmes, in order to ensure
sufficient capacity to address the interpretation and translation requirements of the Organization;
121. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to liaise with permanent missions to identify outreach
opportunities with universities, educational institutions and language learning centres located worldwide in order to
ensure the continued availability of high-quality professional language services in the six official languages of the
United Nations;
122. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve and expand the list of universities having
memorandums of understanding and other collaborative arrangements with the United Nations, ensuring the inclusion
of universities, educational institutions and language learning centres located in all geographical regions, whenever
possible.

1060

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/253
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/613, para. 6)

74/253. Enhancing accessibility for persons with disabilities to conferences and meetings of the United
Nations system
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 62/170 of 18 December 2007, 70/170 of 17 December 2015, 71/262 of 23 December
2016, 72/19 of 1 December 2017, 72/161 and 72/162 of 19 December 2017, 73/270 of 22 December 2018 and 74/144
of 18 December 2019,
Reaffirming the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,43 which it adopted on 13 December 2006
and which entered into force on 3 May 2008, a landmark convention affirming the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of persons with disabilities, and recognizing that it is both a human rights and a development instrument,
Noting with appreciation the United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy launched by the Secretary-General
on 11 June 2019,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General drawing attention to the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on enhancing accessibility for persons with disabilities to conferences and meetings of the United Nations system,44
as well as the comments of the Secretary-General and of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination thereon,45
1. Notes with appreciation the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on enhancing accessibility for persons with
disabilities to conferences and meetings of the United Nations system;44
2.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;45

3. Urges the Secretary-General to implement all 10 recommendations contained in the report of the Unit in
all United Nations facilities, conferences and meetings, as appropriate, in a timely manner, and invites the executive
heads and the legislative bodies of the United Nations system organizations to address the relevant recommendations
in their organizations, without prejudice to the measures taken in the framework of the United Nations Disability
Inclusion Strategy;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-fifth
session a progress report on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 74/254
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/615, para. 6)

74/254. Seconded active-duty military and police personnel
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 67/287 of 28 June 2013, 68/252 of 27 December 2013 and 71/263 of 23 December 2016,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on seconded active-duty military and police personnel46
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,47
_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
A/74/217.
45
A/74/217/Add.1.
46
A/74/546.
47
A/74/584.
43
44

1061

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;46

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,47 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Expresses serious regret that the Secretary-General has not been able to identify solutions for addressing
the conflicts between national legislation and the staff regulations and rules of the United Nations regarding the
secondment of active-duty military and police personnel since 2013;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to engage with Member States and explore all viable
options to resolve the conflicts, and to report on the development of the matter and present his proposals to address
the conflicts to the General Assembly at the first part of its resumed seventy-fourth session;
5. Takes note of paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and, with a view to identifying
solutions to conflicts between national legislation and the staff regulations and rules, decides to authorize the
Secretary-General to extend the exceptional measures regarding seconded active-duty military and police personnel
to 30 June 2020.
RESOLUTIONS 74/255 A and B
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/600, para. 8)

74/255. United Nations common system
A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3042 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, 3357 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974, 44/198 of
21 December 1989, 45/259 of 3 May 1991, 48/224 of 23 December 1993, 51/216 of 18 December 1996, 52/216 of
22 December 1997, 53/209 of 18 December 1998, 54/238 of 23 December 1999, 55/223 of 23 December 2000,
56/244 of 24 December 2001, 57/285 of 20 December 2002, 58/251 of 23 December 2003, 59/268 of 23 December
2004, 60/248 of 23 December 2005, 61/239 of 22 December 2006, 62/227 of 22 December 2007, 63/251 of
24 December 2008, 64/231 of 22 December 2009, 65/248 of 24 December 2010, 66/235 A of 24 December 2011,
66/235 B of 21 June 2012, 67/257 of 12 April 2013, 68/253 of 27 December 2013, 69/251 of 29 December 2014,
70/244 of 23 December 2015, 71/264 of 23 December 2016, 72/255 of 24 December 2017 and 73/273 of
22 December 2018 and its decision 67/551 of 24 December 2012,
Reaffirming its commitment to a single, unified United Nations common system as the cornerstone for the
regulation and coordination of the conditions of service of the United Nations common system,
Emphasizing the importance of, and benefits derived from, maintaining a coherent and unified United Nations
common system,
Reiterating its call for all organizations of the United Nations common system to cooperate with the
International Civil Service Commission on matters relating to salaries, allowances and conditions of service,
Expressing its concern over the inconsistencies in the application of the 2016 post adjustment results at the
Geneva duty station of the United Nations common system,
1. Reaffirms the authority of the International Civil Service Commission to continue to establish post
adjustment multipliers for duty stations in the United Nations common system, under article 11 (c) of the statute of
the Commission;48

_______________
48

1062

Resolution 3357 (XXIX), annex.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Recalls that, in its resolutions 44/198 and 45/259, it abolished the post adjustment scales mentioned in
article 10 (b) of the statute of the Commission, and reaffirms the authority of the Commission to continue to take
decisions on the number of post adjustment multiplier points per duty station, under article 11 (c) of its statute;
3. Urges the member organizations of the United Nations common system to cooperate fully with the
Commission in line with its statute to restore consistency and unity of the post adjustment system as a matter of priority
and as early as practicable;
4. Recalls its resolution 41/207 of 11 December 1986, and reaffirms the importance of ensuring that the
governing organs of the specialized agencies do not take, on matters of concern to the common system, positions
conflicting with those taken by the General Assembly;
5. Also recalls its resolution 48/224, reiterates its request that the executive heads of organizations of the
common system consult with the Commission in cases involving recommendations and decisions of the Commission
before the tribunals in the United Nations system, and once again urges the governing bodies of the organizations to
ensure that the executive heads comply with that request.
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/198 of 21 December 1989, 51/216 of 18 December 1996, 52/216 of 22 December
1997, 53/209 of 18 December 1998, 54/238 of 23 December 1999, 55/223 of 23 December 2000, 56/244 of
24 December 2001, 57/285 of 20 December 2002, 58/251 of 23 December 2003, 59/268 of 23 December 2004,
60/248 of 23 December 2005, 61/239 of 22 December 2006, 62/227 of 22 December 2007, 63/251 of 24 December
2008, 64/231 of 22 December 2009, 65/248 of 24 December 2010, 66/235 A of 24 December 2011, 66/235 B of
21 June 2012, 67/257 of 12 April 2013, 68/253 of 27 December 2013, 69/251 of 29 December 2014, 70/244 of
23 December 2015, 71/264 of 23 December 2016, 72/255 of 24 December 2017 and 73/273 of 22 December 2018
and its decision 67/551 of 24 December 2012,
Having considered the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 2019,49
Reaffirming its commitment to a single, unified United Nations common system as the cornerstone for the
regulation and coordination of the conditions of service of the United Nations common system,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the work of the International Civil Service Commission;

2.

Welcomes the report of the Commission for 2019;49

3. Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in approving conditions of service and entitlements for all staff
serving in the organizations of the United Nations common system, bearing in mind articles 10 and 11 of the statute
of the Commission;50
4. Recalls articles 10 and 11 of the statute of the Commission, and reaffirms the central role of the
Commission in regulating and coordinating conditions of service and entitlements for all staff serving in the organizations
of the United Nations common system;
5. Notes with concern that with regard to the mandatory age of separation for staff having joined the
organizations prior to 1 January 2014, while many of the organizations have implemented the mandatory age of
separation as approved, some organizations have decided to use different implementation dates;
6. Reiterates its request to the Commission to recommend measures to address non-compliance with the
decisions and recommendations of the Commission, and requests the Commission to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
7. Expresses concern at the application of two concurrent post adjustment multipliers in the United Nations
common system at the Geneva duty station, urges the Commission and member organizations to uphold the unified
_______________
49
50

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/74/30).
Resolution 3357 (XXIX), annex.

1063

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

post adjustment multiplier for the Geneva duty station under article 11 (c) of the statute of the Commission as a matter
of priority, and requests the Commission to report on the matter to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
8. Notes with concern that the organizations of the United Nations common system face the challenge of
having two independent administrative tribunals with concurrent jurisdiction among the organizations of the common
system, as highlighted in the report of the Commission, and requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair
of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to conduct a review of the jurisdictional setup
of the common system and submit the findings of the review and recommendations to the General Assembly as soon
as practicable;
9. Invites the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives
Board for Coordination, to make every effort to ensure that decisions of the General Assembly are implemented in
full and without undue delay across the United Nations common system;
10. Invites the Commission to carry out a needs assessment for its communication and legal expertise
functions within its secretariat and in relation to its work and engagement with all relevant stakeholders and to present
proposals in its next report;
I
Conditions of service applicable to both categories of staff
Reaffirming paragraph 1 of section I.B of its resolution 72/255, in which it approved the principles and
guidelines for performance appraisal and management for the recognition of different levels of performance,
Urges the organizations of the United Nations common system to continue to abide by these principles and
guidelines, and requests the Commission to report on their implementation to the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session;
II
Conditions of service of staff in the Professional and higher categories
A
Base/floor salary scale
Recalling its resolution 44/198, by which it established a floor net salary level for staff in the Professional and
higher categories by reference to the corresponding base net salary levels of officials in comparable positions serving
at the base city of the comparator civil service (the United States federal civil service),
Approves, with effect from 1 January 2020, as recommended by the Commission in paragraph 63 of its report,
the revised unified base/floor salary scale and updated pay protection points for staff in the Professional and higher
categories, as contained in annex IV to the report;
B
Evolution of the margin and margin management around the desirable midpoint
Recalling section I.B of its resolution 51/216 and the standing mandate from the General Assembly, in which
the Commission is requested to continue its review of the relationship between the net remuneration of the United
Nations staff in the Professional and higher categories in New York and that of the comparator civil service (the United
States federal civil service) employees in comparable positions in Washington, D.C. (referred to as “the margin”),
1. Reaffirms that the range of 110 to 120 for the margin between the net remuneration of officials in the
Professional and higher categories of the United Nations in New York and officials in comparable positions in the
comparator civil service should continue to apply, on the understanding that the margin would be maintained at a level
around the desirable midpoint of 115 over a period of time;
2. Notes that the margin between net remuneration of the United Nations staff in grades P-1 to D-2 in New
York and that of officials in comparable positions in the United States federal civil service in Washington, D.C., for
the period from 1 January to 31 December 2019 is 113.4;

1064

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Recalls its decision contained in resolution 70/244 that, if the margin trigger levels of 113 or 117 are
breached, the Commission should take appropriate action through the operation of the post adjustment system;
4. Notes the decision of the Commission to continue monitoring the level of the margin and to take the
necessary corrective action under the operation of the post adjustment system should the trigger levels of 113 or 117
be breached;
C
Education grant
Decides to defer consideration of the recommendations of the Commission on the revised sliding reimbursement
scale and the boarding lump sum, and requests the Commission to provide in its next report a detailed review on the
scale and the level of the boarding lump sum, taking into consideration a maximum amount per household;
D
Hardship allowance
Notes the decision of the Commission, in accordance with article 11 (b) of its statute, to increase the amount of
hardship allowance by 2 per cent with effect from 1 January 2020;
E
Mobility incentive
1. Notes the decision of the Commission, in accordance with article 11 (b) of its statute, to set the lower limit
of the mobility incentive to 6,700 United States dollars per year and apply the resulting matrix, as outlined in
paragraph 142 of the report of the Commission, with effect from 1 January 2020;
2. Also notes paragraph 144 of the report of the Commission on its plan for a review of the mobility incentive
in 2021, and urges the Commission to conduct a thorough review of the purpose, effectiveness and efficiency of the
current mobility incentive programme in encouraging the mobility of staff to field duty stations and to report in detail
on the outcome of the review in its report for 2021;
3. Encourages the organizations of the United Nations common system to consider the application of
alternative administrative measures, including non-financial incentives, to promote staff mobility.
RESOLUTION 74/256
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/604, para. 6)

74/256. Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
The General Assembly,
I
Activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December 1999, 59/272 of 23 December 2004,
60/259 of 8 May 2006, 63/265 of 24 December 2008, 64/232 of 22 December 2009, 64/263 of 29 March 2010, 65/250
of 24 December 2010, 66/236 of 24 December 2011, 67/258 of 12 April 2013, 68/21 of 4 December 2013, 69/252
and 69/253 of 29 December 2014, 70/111 of 14 December 2015, 71/7 of 27 October 2016, 72/18 of 1 December 2017
and 73/275 of 22 December 2018,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on its activities for the period from
1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019,51
_______________
51

A/74/305 (Part I) and A/74/305 (Part I)/Add.1.

1065

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.
2.
matters;

Reaffirms its primary role in the consideration of and action taken on reports submitted to it;
Also reaffirms its oversight role and the role of the Fifth Committee in administrative and budgetary

3. Further reaffirms the independence and the separate and distinct roles of the internal and external
oversight mechanisms;
4. Recognizes the important roles and operational independence of the oversight bodies, including the Office
of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat, in contributing to improvements in the effectiveness, transparency
and accountability of the Organization;
5. Recalls that the Office shall exercise operational independence relating to the performance of its internal
oversight functions, under the authority of the Secretary-General, in accordance with the relevant resolutions;
6. Stresses that the independence and objectivity of the Office are vital in ensuring that its internal oversight
functions are carried out in a credible, factual and unbiased manner, and reaffirms the authority of the Office to initiate,
carry out and report on any action to fulfil its oversight functions;
7. Encourages United Nations internal and external oversight bodies to further enhance the level of
cooperation with one another, such as through joint work-planning sessions, without prejudice to the independence
of each;
8. Reaffirms that the Board of Auditors and the Joint Inspection Unit shall continue to be provided with
copies of all reports produced by the Office, and requests that those reports be made available within one month of
their finalization;
9. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on its activities for the period from
1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;51
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the annual reports of the Office continue to include a brief
description of any impairment of its independence;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant resolutions pertaining to the work of the
Office are brought to the attention of the relevant managers;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant resolutions, including those of a crosscutting nature, are brought to the attention of relevant managers and that the Office also takes those resolutions into
account in the conduct of its activities;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the full implementation of the accepted
recommendations of the Office, including those related to accountability mechanisms, cost savings, recovery of
overpayments, organizational efficiency and effectiveness and other improvements, in a prompt and timely manner,
and to provide detailed justifications in cases in which recommendations of the Office are not accepted;
14. Notes with concern the delays in the implementation of the recommendations of the Office, and requests
the Secretary-General to implement the outstanding and critical recommendations of the Office in a timely manner;
15. Calls for the continued focus of the Internal Audit Division on a risk-based approach and a workplan
focused on effectiveness, efficiency, governance and oversight and the investigation of potential fraud;
16. Welcomes the continued efforts of the Office to promote the Organization’s zero-tolerance approach to
fraud, corruption, sexual harassment and sexual exploitation and abuse, and the actions taken in this regard, including
the creation of a specialized team to investigate sexual harassment complaints and the implementation of a procedure
for addressing such complaints, and also welcomes the efforts made to strengthen the investigative capacity of the
Office in the light of the need to improve the average time required to complete the growing number of investigations
into a range of misconduct, including cases of sexual harassment;
17. Notes the average time taken to complete investigations, and encourages the Office to continue to reduce
the average time taken to complete investigations and to report on the measures undertaken in this regard in its next
report;

1066

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Encourages the Office to continue to ensure the oversight, through audits and investigations, of United
Nations peacekeeping missions that are closing and to report thereon in its next report;
19. Recognizes the high level of risk inherent in United Nations procurement activities, and requests the
Secretary-General to entrust the Office with strengthening its focus on the monitoring of such activities, including on
evaluating implementation and existing practice within the Organization regarding restrictions on employment after
separation of staff involved in the procurement process and sanctions for violations, as well as with reporting thereon
in conjunction with the related report of the Secretary-General on procurement;
20. Welcomes the efforts and progress made by the Office in reducing the number of vacant posts, and requests
the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to fill the remaining vacant posts and ensure the retention of
staff, particularly in the Investigations Division, in accordance with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations;
II
Activities of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee
Recalling its resolutions 61/275 of 29 June 2007, 64/263, section II of its resolution 65/250, section II of its
resolution 66/236, section II of its resolution 67/258, section II of its resolution 68/21, section II of its resolution
69/252, section II of its resolution 70/111, section II of its resolution 71/7, section II of its resolution 72/18 and
section II of its resolution 73/275,
Having considered the report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on its activities for the period from
1 August 2018 to 31 July 2019,52
1.

Notes with appreciation the work of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee;

2.

Reaffirms the terms of reference of the Committee, as contained in the annex to its resolution 61/275;

3.

Endorses the observations, comments and recommendations contained in the report of the Committee;52

4. Invites the Committee to continue to examine the operational independence of the Office, including on
budgetary matters;
5. Encourages the Committee to continue its consultations with all relevant bodies in the United Nations,
including on the implementation of its recommendations, as appropriate.
RESOLUTION 74/257
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/605, para. 5)

74/257. Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 48/218 B, 54/244, 59/272, 64/263
and 69/253
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December 1999, 59/272 of 23 December 2004,
64/263 of 29 March 2010 and 69/253 of 29 December 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 61/275 of 29 June 2007,
1.

Reaffirms its resolutions 48/218 B, 54/244, 59/272, 64/263 and 69/253;

2.

Also reaffirms its primary role in the consideration of and action taken on reports submitted to it;

3.
matters;

Further reaffirms its oversight role and the role of the Fifth Committee in administrative and budgetary

_______________
52

A/74/280.

1067

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Reaffirms the independence and the separate and distinct roles of the internal and external oversight
mechanisms;
5. Recognizes the important roles and operational independence of the oversight bodies, including the Office
of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat, in contributing to improvements in the effectiveness, transparency
and accountability of the Organization;
6. Recalls that the Office shall exercise operational independence relating to the performance of its internal
oversight functions, under the authority of the Secretary-General, in accordance with the relevant resolutions;
7. Stresses that the independence and objectivity of the Office are vital in ensuring that its internal oversight
functions are carried out in a credible, factual and unbiased manner, and reaffirms the authority of the Office to initiate,
carry out and report on any action to fulfil its oversight functions;
8. Reaffirms that the purpose of the Office is to assist the Secretary-General in fulfilling his internal oversight
responsibilities in respect of the resources and staff of the Organization;
9. Emphasizes that the implementation of recommendations and the reporting procedures of the Office
should continue as established by the General Assembly;
10. Notes the role of the Management Committee in monitoring closely the implementation of the
recommendations of oversight bodies, and stresses the importance of follow-up with programme managers to ensure
the full implementation of those recommendations in a prompt and timely manner, especially those critical
recommendations whose implementation is overdue;
11. Welcomes the continued efforts of the Office to promote the Organization’s zero-tolerance approach to
fraud, corruption, sexual harassment and sexual exploitation and abuse, and the actions taken in this regard, including
the creation of a specialized team to investigate sexual harassment complaints and the implementation of a procedure
for addressing such complaints, and also welcomes the efforts made to strengthen the investigative capacity of the
Office in the light of the need to improve the average time required to complete the growing number of investigations
into a range of misconduct, including cases of sexual harassment;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take all measures necessary to ensure that the credibility of the
Organization and its staff is protected;
13. Decides to evaluate and review at its seventy-ninth session the functions and reporting procedures of the
Office and any other matter that it deems appropriate, and to that end to include in the provisional agenda of that
session an item entitled “Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 48/218 B, 54/244, 59/272,
64/263, 69/253 and 74/257”.
RESOLUTION 74/258
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/433, para. 6)

74/258. Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001 and its resolutions 57/307 of 15 April 2003, 59/266
of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005, 61/261 of 4 April 2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007, 63/253 of
24 December 2008, 64/233 of 22 December 2009, 65/251 of 24 December 2010, 66/237 of 24 December 2011,
67/241 of 24 December 2012, 68/254 of 27 December 2013, 69/203 of 18 December 2014, 70/112 of 14 December
2015, 71/266 of 23 December 2016, 72/256 of 24 December 2107 and 73/276 of 22 December 2018,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of justice at the United Nations53 and
on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services,54 the report of the Internal
_______________
53
54

1068

A/74/172.
A/74/171.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Justice Council on administration of justice at the United Nations55 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,56 as well as the letter dated 12 November 2019 from the President of the
General Assembly to the Chair of the Fifth Committee,57
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of justice at the United Nations53 and
on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services,54 the report of the Internal
Justice Council on administration of justice at the United Nations55 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;56
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
I
System of administration of justice
3.
justice;

Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in the system of administration of

4. Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the system of administration of justice,
regardless of their duty station;
5. Acknowledges the evolving nature of the system of administration of justice and the need to carefully
monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains within the parameters set out by the General Assembly;
6. Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of its resolution 61/261, to establish a new, independent,
transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent
with the relevant rules of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to ensure respect for
the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability of managers and staff members alike;
7. Welcomes the ongoing outreach efforts, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to implement the
outreach strategy, with a view to continuing to raise awareness of the role and functioning of the various parts of the
system and the possibilities that it offers to address work-related complaints, paying particular attention to field
missions and offices;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure a strong culture of accountability throughout the
Secretariat and that all categories of personnel who may have been subjected to prohibited conduct in a work-related
situation have access to effective remedies;58
9. Notes the ongoing efforts to continuously strengthen the policy on protection against retaliation for
reporting misconduct and for cooperating with duly authorized audits or investigations,59 and in this regard requests
the Secretary-General to report, in the context of his next report on the system of administration of justice, on progress
made in protecting staff members who lodge cases before the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal against retaliation;
10. Reiterates that retaliation against complainants or staff appearing as witnesses constitutes misconduct, and
notes with appreciation the policy on protection against retaliation for reporting misconduct and for cooperating with
duly authorized audits or investigations as well as the efforts to continuously improve the framework for protection
from retaliation;
11. Encourages the Secretary-General, in his capacity as the Chair of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, to promote protection against retaliation across the system;
_______________
A/74/169.
A/74/7/Add.10.
57
A/C.5/74/10.
58
ST/SGB/2019/8.
59
ST/SGB/2017/2/Rev.1.
55
56

1069

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Underscores the inherent and explicit authority of the Dispute and Appeals Tribunals to issue protective
orders, consistent with their statutes, rules of procedure and code of conduct, in order to protect complainants and
witnesses against retaliation, stresses the importance of fully implementing such orders, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on the application thereof;
II
Informal system
13. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an efficient and effective option both
for staff who seek redress of grievances and for the participation of managers;
14. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of the system of administration of
justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be made of the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary litigation,
without prejudice to the basic right of staff members to access the formal system, and encourages recourse to the
informal resolution of disputes;
15. Also reaffirms the importance of the informal dispute resolution process in the Organization, which
represents an effective method of dispute resolution as compared with the formal process, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to include recommendations to address the current underservice of staff in the field in his next report;
16. Notes the efforts of the Mediation Service of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services to ensure that timely and high-quality mediation processes are available to address the diverse needs of the
Organization, including through the Secretary-General’s civility campaign, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to provide detailed information on the mediation activities of the Office, including measures to increase the
utilization of these services;
17. Welcomes the continued analysis of the root causes of conflict included in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, stresses the
importance of improving management performance and staff communication, urges the Secretary-General to
continue to address the direct feedback and systemic issues identified in the report in order to mitigate and prevent
work-related conflicts, including through the improvement of the policies and procedures of the Organization, and
requests the Secretary-General to provide information on progress resulting from the actions taken in the context of
his next report;
18. Notes the need for the Organization to develop and employ a holistic managerial approach, including
management training for addressing conflict, including efforts to identify and address inappropriate behaviour that
affects staff even when it does not amount to misconduct, and requests the Secretary-General to provide an update on
the actions taken in the context of his next report;
19. Encourages the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services to continue its outreach
activities, especially in the field, in order to promote informal dispute resolution;
20. Notes the five initiatives of the Secretary-General to improve the prevention and resolution of disputes
involving non-staff personnel, and requests the Secretary-General to provide in his next report detailed information
on the ongoing initiatives, mentioned in his report;53
21. Requests the Secretary-General to submit new proposals, bearing in mind the need for budgetary
discipline, in the context of his next report, on reviewing formal policies and issuances concerning dispute resolution
with consultants and individual contractors, including but not limited to drawing on more cost-effective features of
the expedited arbitration procedures for consultants and individual contractors;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with a view to informing the discussion at the seventyfifth session of the General Assembly, an overview on the functioning of the pilot project to offer access to informal
dispute-resolution services to non-staff personnel up to the time of reporting, including on the nature of conflicts,
average length of time spent on cases, rate of resolution and disaggregated data on each category of non-staff
personnel, and the results of the pilot project on resolving disputes with respect for the principles of the Office of the
United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services;

1070

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

III
Formal system
23. Recognizes the ongoing positive contribution of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance to the system of
administration of justice;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure the accountability of managers whose decisions have
been established to be grossly negligent, according to the applicable Staff Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations,60 and which have led to litigation and subsequent financial loss, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
25. Commends the Secretary-General for the creation of the toolkits for self-represented applicants,
encourages the Secretary-General to continue to provide assistance to self-represented applicants and enhance their
understanding and ability to utilize the system and mitigate efficiency concerns, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to continue to monitor the issue of self-representation and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
26. Notes with concern the dual presidency of the Dispute Tribunal and its impact on case disposal, stresses
that the Dispute Tribunal is an independent judiciary, which is expected to manage its affairs in accordance with its
statute, rules of procedure and code of conduct, and requests the Secretary-General to examine recommendations 11,
12 and 13 contained in the report of the Internal Justice Council, with a view to improving the accountability of the
Tribunal, for consideration during the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly;
27. Welcomes recommendation 9 on judicial efficiency and accountability contained in the report of the
Internal Justice Council, and urges the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal to review and amend their respective
rules of procedure subject to the approval of the General Assembly, with a view to streamlining and harmonizing their
approach to case management, including by ensuring that the first judicial action in a case is taken no later than 90 days
from the date on which an application is filed;
28. Notes the large number of pending cases and of ageing cases at the Dispute Tribunal, acknowledges the
efforts made by the Dispute Tribunal and the Principal Registrar of the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal to
develop and implement a case disposal plan, as requested in its resolution 73/276, and the reduction in the number of
cases pending in 2019, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the implementation of the case
disposal plan at its seventy-fifth session;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the Internal Justice Council to provide its views on the
implementation of the system of administration of justice, including the timely delivery of judgments, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
30. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to track the data on the number of cases received by the
Management Evaluation Unit and the Dispute Tribunal in order to identify any emerging trends and to include his
observations on those statistics in future reports;
31. Requests that the judicial directions of the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal that are of general
application be posted online and thus made available to all stakeholders, and requests the Secretary-General to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
32. Recalls paragraph 32 of its resolution 73/276 and that half-time judges are to be deployed only as required
by caseload, encourages the Dispute Tribunal to make full use of telecommuting in the deployment of half-time judges
so as to promote efficiencies, and requests the Secretary-General to review and report on the use of the six half-time
judges to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
33. Notes the overall trend of increase in the workload of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance, expresses its
satisfaction that the majority of requests for legal assistance received by the Office were settled or otherwise
disposed of without recourse to any formal mechanism, and acknowledges that the Office should be adequately
resourced;
_______________
60

ST/SGB/2018/1.

1071

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

34. Also notes the continuing high opt-out rates from the voluntary staff funding mechanism, and in this regard
encourages the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen incentives for staff not to opt out, particularly in locations
and United Nations entities where the participation rate is low;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to provide further analysis and clarification on the proposed amendments
to articles 2 and 7 of the statute of the Appeals Tribunal on pension matters,61 and invites the Sixth Committee to
consider the legal aspects of the report of the Secretary-General on the administration of justice, without prejudice to
the role of the Fifth Committee as the Main Committee of the General Assembly responsible for administrative and
budgetary matters;
IV
Other issues
36. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report to be submitted by the SecretaryGeneral, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with responsibilities
for administrative and budgetary matters;
37. Stresses that the Internal Justice Council can help to ensure independence, professionalism and
accountability in the system of administration of justice, and requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Council
with including the views of both the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal in its reports;
38. Welcomes further views of the Internal Justice Council in its next report to the General Assembly on
possible ways to improve judicial and operational efficiency;
39. Recalls paragraphs 36 and 37 of its resolution 62/228, and requests the Secretary-General to provide an
overview of and recommendations on the conditions of service and appointment requirements of the members of the
Internal Justice Council, in particular professional qualifications, for consideration by the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 74/259
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/601, para. 6)

74/259. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
The General Assembly,
I
Second performance report on the budget of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for the biennium 2018–2019
Having considered the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2018–2019,62 the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,63 the financial report and audited financial statements for the
year ended 31 December 2018 and the report of the Board of Auditors on the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals64 and the recommendations contained therein,
Recalling its resolution 66/240 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/277
of 22 December 2018,
_______________
See A/73/217/Add.1.
A/74/566.
63
A/74/593.
64
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 5O (A/74/5/Add.15).
61
62

1072

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Takes note of the second performance report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2018–2019;62
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in section II of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;63
3. Resolves that, for the biennium 2018–2019, the amount of 195,720,600 United States dollars gross
(174,690,800 dollars net) approved in its resolution 73/277 for the financing of the Mechanism shall be adjusted by
the amount of 10,292,300 dollars gross (8,668,900 dollars net), for a total amount of 185,428,300 dollars gross
(166,021,900 dollars net);
II
Budget for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for 2020
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the proposed budget for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for 202065 and on the revised estimates arising from the effect of changes in rates
of exchange and inflation,66
Having also considered the related reports of the Advisory Committee,67
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the proposed budget for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for 202065 and on the revised estimates arising from the effect of changes in rates
of exchange and inflation;66
2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee;67

3. Decides to establish one temporary P-4 (Budget and Finance) post in the Arusha branch, within existing
resources;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mechanism makes every effort to promptly complete
its remaining work;
5. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals a total amount of 96,924,500 dollars gross (86,911,800 dollars net) for 2020, as detailed in the annex to the
present resolution;
6. Also decides that the total assessment for 2020 under the Special Account amounting to 86,632,200 dollars
shall consist of:
(a)

96,924,500 dollars, being the estimated appropriation approved for the period;

(b) Less 10,292,300 dollars, being the decrease in the final appropriation for the biennium 2018–2019,
approved by the General Assembly in paragraph 3 of section I above;
7. Further decides to apportion the amount of 43,316,100 dollars gross (39,121,450 dollars net) among
Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations
for 2020;
8. Decides to apportion the amount of 43,316,100 dollars gross (39,121,450 dollars net) among Member
States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations
for 2020;
9. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 7 and 8 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated staff assessment income in the amount of 8,389,300
dollars approved for the Mechanism for 2020.

_______________
A/74/355 and A/74/355/Corr.1.
A/74/586.
67
A/74/593 and A/74/7/Add.31.
65
66

1073

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for 2020

Gross

Net of staff
assessment

(United States dollars)

Estimated appropriation for 2020 (A/74/355 and A/74/355/Corr.1)

106 054 900

94 793 800

(3 488 400)

(2 967 900)

(5 642 000)

(4 914 100)

–

–

96 924 500

86 911 800

Requirements for 2020

96 924 500

86 911 800

Requirements arising from the final appropriation for the biennium 2018–2019

(10 292 300)

(8 668 900)

Net contributions assessed on Member States for 2020

86 632 200

78 242 900

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2020

43 316 100

39 121 450

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations for 2020

43 316 100

39 121 450

Revised estimates: effect of changes in rates of exchange and inflation
a

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Recommendations of the Fifth Committee
Estimated initial appropriation for 2020
Total assessment for 2020

Including:

a

Reflect amounts after recosting.

RESOLUTION 74/260
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/608, para. 6)

74/260. Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti68 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69
Recalling Security Council resolution 2350 (2017) of 13 April 2017, by which the Council established the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti as a follow-on peacekeeping mission in Haiti, for an initial period
of six months from 16 October 2017 until 15 April 2018, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was 2466 (2019) of 12 April 2019, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission for a final period of six months, until 15 October 2019,
Recalling also its resolution 72/260 A of 24 December 2017 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/317 of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision
73/555 of 3 July 2019,
_______________
68
69

1074

A/74/532.
A/74/589.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
2. Recalls paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to settle
all outstanding reimbursements in a timely manner;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020
3. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
the amount of 49,122,900 United States dollars for the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020, which supersedes
the authority of the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount not exceeding 49,450,100 dollars
previously authorized for the Mission for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2019 under the terms of its
resolution 73/317;
Financing of the appropriation
4. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission shall be credited
with their respective share of the amount of 327,200 dollars, representing the difference between the amount of
49,122,900 dollars and the amount of 49,450,100 dollars already apportioned under the terms of its resolution 73/317,
in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018, and taking into account the scale
of assessments for 2019 and 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
5. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, their
respective share of the amount of 327,200 dollars shall be set off against their outstanding obligations, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 4 above;
6. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the credits to Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 4 and 5 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 289,300 dollars, representing the decrease in the estimated staff assessment
income, compared with the amount of 1,412,100 dollars approved for the Mission;
7. Decides to keep under review, during its seventy-fourth session, the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 74/261
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/607, para. 6)

74/261. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on the financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur for the period from 1 January to 31 March 202070 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,71
Recalling Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, by which the Council established the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for an initial period of 12 months from 31 July 2007, and
_______________
70
71

A/74/562.
A/74/592.

1075

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was
resolution 2495 (2019) of 31 October 2019, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until
31 October 2020,
Recalling also its resolution 62/232 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the Operation and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 73/278 B of 3 July 2019, as well as its decision
73/555 of 3 July 2019,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,71 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
2.

Decides to abolish one vacant post of Human Rights Officer (P-3);

Estimates for the period from 1 January to 31 March 2020
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur in an amount not exceeding 130,227,800 United States dollars for the period from 1 January to
31 March 2020;
Financing of the commitment authority
4. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 130,227,800 dollars for the period from
1 January to 31 March 2020, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 73/272 of 22 December 2018,
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2020, as set out in its resolution 73/271 of 22 December 2018;
5. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 4 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,796,800 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the Operation for the period from 1 January to 31 March 2020;
6. Further decides to keep under review, during its seventy-fourth session, the item entitled “Financing of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”.
RESOLUTION 74/262
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/614, para. 60)

74/262. Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for 2020
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 42/211 of 21 December 1987, 45/248 B, section VI,
of 21 December 1990, 55/231 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001, 58/269 and 58/270 of
23 December 2003, 59/276, section XI, of 23 December 2004, 60/283 of 7 July 2006, 61/263 of 4 April 2007, 62/236
of 22 December 2007, 63/262 of 24 December 2008, 64/243 of 24 December 2009, 65/259 of 24 December 2010,
66/246 of 24 December 2011, 68/246 of 27 December 2013, 70/247 of 23 December 2015, 71/272 A of 23 December
2016, 72/261 and 72/266 A of 24 December 2017, 72/266 B of 5 July 2018 and 73/281 of 22 December 2018,
Reaffirming also the respective mandates of the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in the consideration of the proposed programme budget,
Reaffirming further the role of the General Assembly, through the Fifth Committee, in carrying out a thorough
analysis and approval of posts and financial resources, as well as of human resources policies,
Recognizing the detrimental effect of the withholding of assessed contributions on the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations and its ability to implement mandates and programmes,

1076

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recognizing also that late payments of assessed contributions, bearing in mind the special situation of certain
Member States, have adversely affected the financial situation of the United Nations and resulted in a liquidity crisis
that has affected the delivery of mandates,
Recalling its resolution 72/266 A and the decision of the General Assembly to approve the proposed change
from a biennial to an annual budget period on a trial basis,
Having considered the proposed programme budget for 2020,72 the eleventh progress report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of projects financed from the Development Account,73 the report of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee on internal oversight: proposed programme budget for 202074 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,75
1. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted
with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters, and reaffirms the role of the Fifth Committee in
carrying out a thorough analysis and approving human and financial resources and policies, with a view to ensuring
full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of
policies in this regard;
2.

Also reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

3. Further reaffirms the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of
the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation;76
4. Reaffirms the established budgetary procedures and methodologies, based on its resolutions 41/213
and 42/211;
5.

Also reaffirms the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;77

6.

Further reaffirms its resolution 74/251 of 27 December 2019;

7. Stresses that finance serves as a foundation of and an important element underpinning United Nations
governance;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,75 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
9. Stresses that all Member States should fulfil their financial obligations as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations on time, in full and without conditions;
10. Notes the progress made in implementing the management reforms agreed in resolutions 72/266 A,
72/266 B and 73/281 on shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations;
11. Also notes that organizational reforms should contribute to greater efficiency and effectiveness in
delivering on the Organization’s mandated programmes and activities without negatively affecting their full
implementation, and requests the Secretary-General to provide results and examples in this regard in the context of
his next budget submission;
_______________
A/74/6 (Introduction), A/74/6 (Sect. 1), A/74/6 (Sect. 2), A/74/6 (Sect. 3), A/74/6 (Sect. 4), A/74/6 (Sect. 5), A/74/6 (Sect. 5)/Corr.1,
A/74/6 (Sect. 6), A/74/6 (Sect. 7), A/74/6 (Sect. 8), A/74/6 (Sect. 8)/Corr.1, A/74/6 (Sect. 9), A/74/6 (Sect. 10), A/74/6 (Sect. 11),
A/74/6 (Sect. 12), A/74/6 (Sect. 13), A/74/6 (Sect. 14), A/74/6 (Sect. 15), A/74/6 (Sect. 16), A/74/6 (Sect. 17), A/74/6 (Sect. 18),
A/74/6 (Sect. 19), A/74/6 (Sect. 20), A/74/6 (Sect. 21), A/74/6 (Sect. 22), A/74/6 (Sect. 23), A/74/6 (Sect. 24), A/74/6 (Sect. 25),
A/74/6 (Sect. 26), A/74/6 (Sect. 27), A/74/6 (Sect. 28), A/74/6 (Sect. 29), A/74/6 (Sect. 29A), A/74/6 (Sect. 29B), A/74/6 (Sect. 29C),
A/74/6 (Sect. 29E), A/74/6 (Sect. 29F), A/74/6 (Sect. 29G), A/74/6 (Sect. 29H), A/74/6 (Sect. 30), A/74/6 (Sect. 31), A/74/6 (Sect. 32),
A/74/6 (Sect. 33), A/74/6 (Sect. 34), A/74/6 (Sect .35), A/74/6 (Sect. 36), A/74/6 (Income sect. 1), A/74/6 (Income sect. 2) and
A/74/6 (Income sect. 3).
73
A/74/85.
74
A/74/92.
75
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/74/7).
76
ST/SGB/2018/3.
77
ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2013/4/Amend.1.
72

1077

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Reaffirms that no changes to the budget methodology, to established budgetary procedures and practices
or to the financial regulations may be implemented without prior review and approval by the General Assembly, in
accordance with established budgetary procedures;
13. Reiterates the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget preparation process, from its early
stages and throughout the process;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to strengthen internal controls in programme planning,
budgeting, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting;
15. Emphasizes the importance of comprehensive budgetary performance in the management of the
programme budget, and requests the Secretary-General to clearly link the budget inputs to tangible results;
16. Stresses that results-based budgeting and results-based management are mutually supportive management
tools and that improved implementation of results-based budgeting enhances both management and accountability in
the Secretariat, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard;
17. Decides that a vacancy rate of 9.1 per cent for Professional staff and 7.4 per cent for General Service staff
shall be used as a basis for the calculation of the budget for 2020;
18. Also decides that the staffing table for 2020 shall be as set out in the annex to the present resolution;
19. Bears in mind the rules governing the duration and extension of special post allowances and that the
granting of such benefits should be restricted to exceptional cases only, and requests the Secretary-General to comply
with those rules and review the existence of posts that have been vacant or encumbered through special post
allowances for more than one year and to report thereon in his next budget proposal;
20. Decides to reduce non-post resources for programme support components by 2 per cent;
21. Also decides to reduce the budget for information and communications technology capital expenditures
by 4 million United States dollars;
22. Further decides to reduce resources for furniture and equipment by 12.5 per cent;
23. Reiterates that the use of consultants should be kept to a minimum and that the Organization should use
its in-house capacity to perform core activities or to fulfil functions that are recurrent over the long term;
24. Recalls paragraph 70 of its resolution 65/247 of 24 December 2010, notes the continued use of consultants
in the core activities of the Organization, and in this regard decides to reduce the proposed resources for consultants
by 10 per cent, in addition to the reductions recommended by the Advisory Committee;
25. Decides to reduce resources for contractual services by 5 per cent;
26. Also decides to reduce resources for travel of staff by 10 per cent;
27. Expresses concern at the low rate of compliance with the advance purchase policy directive, and requests
the Secretary-General to make stronger efforts to further enhance the rate of compliance with the advance purchase
policy directive across all travel categories, taking into account the patterns and nature of official travel and the reasons
for non-compliance by each department, office and field mission;
28. Decides that only the Secretary-General, the President of the General Assembly, the President of the
International Court of Justice and heads of delegations of least developed countries shall be entitled to first-class
accommodation for air travel;
29. Also decides to modify the Travel and Subsistence Regulations of the International Court of Justice
contained in the annex to its resolution 37/240 of 21 December 1982 by replacing “first-class accommodation” with
“accommodation in the class immediately below first class” in article 1, paragraph 2 (a), and requests the SecretaryGeneral to further extend the scope of the advance purchase policy to include the International Court of Justice to
secure further savings from business-class bookings;
30. Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General to strengthen training and development provided to staff in
support of the decentralization and delegation of decision-making authority;

1078

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

31. Stresses that all extrabudgetary posts must be administered and managed with the same rigour as regular
budget posts;
32. Also stresses that extrabudgetary resources shall be used in consistency with the policies, aims and
activities of the Organization, and requests the Secretary-General to provide information on the financial and human
resource implications of the use of extrabudgetary resources in the Organization in his next proposed programme
budget;
33. Decides to reduce resources for document printing for the formal meetings of the Fifth Committee by
5 million dollars in the respective sections, to contribute to greening the United Nations;
Part I
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
Section 1
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
34. Decides that answers provided to the Advisory Committee by the Secretariat shall be made available to
the General Assembly, as supplementary information;
35. Recalls paragraph I.23 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and looks forward to the annual report of
the Secretary-General foreseen in resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018;
36. Takes note of paragraphs I.15 and I.16 of the report of the Advisory Committee, decides not to approve
the proposed establishment of one P-5 post to support the office of the President of the General Assembly, and decides
to maintain the transitionary period of one month;
Section 2
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management
37. Emphasizes the importance of the initiatives related to the accessibility of persons with disabilities to
conference services and facilities;
38. Recalls paragraph I.48 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to establish one P-4 post and
one P-3 post (Translator) in the Chinese Translation Section in Geneva;
Part II
Political affairs
Section 3
Political affairs
39. Recalls paragraphs 87, 88 and II.15 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish
the post of Political Affairs Officer (P-3) in the Central and Southern Africa Division in the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs;
Section 5
Peacekeeping operations
40. Recognizes the important role of peacekeeping and special political missions at the national, subregional,
regional and international levels, as appropriate, in maintaining peace and security in fulfilment of their mandates;
Section 6
Peaceful uses of outer space
41. Notes the increased workload in the Office for Outer Space Affairs, and requests the Secretary-General to
review resourcing for the Office in future budget proposals;

1079

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Part III
International justice and law
Section 7
International Court of Justice
42. Decides not to approve upward reclassifications in the International Court of Justice;
43. Also decides to reduce the resources for consultants for members of the Court by 143,300 dollars;
Section 8
Legal affairs
44. Recalls paragraph III.35 of the report of the Advisory Committee, decides not to approve the conversion
of 58 general temporary assistance positions to temporary posts, and decides to reduce resources accordingly;
45. Takes note of paragraphs III.47, III.48, III.49, III.52, III.53, III.54, III.55 and III.56 of the report of the
Advisory Committee;
46. Decides that regular budget resources for the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 under section 8, Legal affairs, for 2020 amount to
17,806,200 dollars before recosting;
Part IV
International cooperation for development
Section 10
Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States
47. Reaffirms the importance of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,78 the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development79 and other intergovernmentally agreed outcomes, including the political
declaration of the high-level midterm review of the Samoa Pathway adopted on 10 October 2019,80 and encourages
the Secretary-General to continue to support small island developing States through the Small Island Developing
States Unit in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the Office of the High Representative for the Least
Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States;
48. Notes the planned deliverables of subprogramme 2, Landlocked developing countries, and
subprogramme 3, Small island developing States, for the period 2018–2020, regrets the inadequate resources for these
subprogrammes, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to ensure that additional
post and non-post resources are allocated to these subprogrammes in the context of the proposed programme budget
for 2021 to enable them to effectively carry out their increased mandates;
Section 11
United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
49. Recalls that the development of Africa is an established priority of the United Nations, and reaffirms its
commitment to address the unique needs of Africa;
50. Requests the Secretary-General to fill the four vacant posts in the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa
as expeditiously as possible;
_______________
Resolution 69/15, annex.
Resolution 70/1.
80
Resolution 74/3.
78
79

1080

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Section 14
Environment
51. Reaffirms the mandate contained in its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it
established the United Nations Environment Programme, and other relevant resolutions that reinforce its mandate, as
well as the Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of the United Nations Environment Programme
of 7 February 1997,81 the Malmö Ministerial Declaration of 31 May 200082 and the Nusa Dua Declaration of
26 February 2010;83
Section 16
International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice
52. Decides to establish one post of Legal Adviser (P-3) in the secretariat of the International Narcotics Control
Board;
Part V
Regional cooperation for development
Section 20
Economic development in Europe
53. Takes note of paragraph V.49 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to establish one
post of Chief of Service (D-1);
54. Also takes note of paragraphs V.50 and V.54 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to retain
one post of Associate Population Affairs Officer (P‑2), one post of Senior Administrative Assistant (General Service
(Principal level)) and one post of Team Assistant (General Service (Other level));
Section 21
Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean
55. Welcomes the initiative of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean to digitize its
library and documentation systems, as well as the approach taken to increase the electronic distribution of its
publications while ensuring the availability of alternatives in areas with limited Internet access;
56. Also welcomes the efforts of the Commission in reducing the costs of printing and disseminating
publications as well as the progress made in expanding outreach and increasing the dissemination of its publications,
and encourages the Secretary-General to conduct an analysis to determine whether the systems and strategies of the
Commission can be replicated at other regional commissions and in United Nations departments and offices, and to
provide an update on the matter in his next budget proposal;
57. Recalls paragraphs 88 and V.69 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish one
post of Associate Programme Management Officer (P‑2) in subprogramme 3, Macroeconomic policies and growth,
and one post of Associate Programme Management Officer (P-2) in subprogramme 8, Natural resources and
infrastructure, at the Commission;
Part VI
Human rights and humanitarian affairs
Section 24
Human rights
58. Recalls its resolution 68/268 of 9 April 2014, and decides to allocate a maximum of four official working
languages for the work of the human rights treaty bodies, with the inclusion, on an exceptional basis, of a fifth official
_______________
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/52/25), annex, decision 19/1, annex.
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/55/25), annex I, decision SS.VI/1, annex.
83
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/65/25), annex I, decision SS.XI/9.
81
82

1081

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

language, when necessary to facilitate communication among the members, as determined by the committee
concerned, taking into account that these measures will not constitute a precedent, given the special nature of the treaty
bodies, and without prejudice to the right of each State party to interact with the treaty bodies in any of the six official
languages of the United Nations;
59. Decides not to redeploy one post of Human Rights Officer (P-3);
Part VII
Global communications
Section 28
Global communications
60. Notes the ongoing reform of the Department of Global Communications, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on how the reform can contribute to improving the full, effective and efficient implementation of its
mandate both at Headquarters and in the field;
61. Recalls paragraph 165 of its resolution 72/261, requests the Secretary-General to report on the
maintenance and improvement of the quality and accuracy of official meeting coverage and press releases, and also
requests the Secretary-General to report on the qualitative and quantitative benefits of those efforts in the context of
the next budget proposals;
62. Takes note of paragraph VII.11 of the report of the Advisory Committee, decides to establish six general
temporary assistance positions in the United Nations Information Service at Geneva, comprising one post of Webcast
Officer (P-3), one post of Associate Webcast Officer (P-2) and four posts of Webcast Assistant (General Service (Other
level)), and decides not to establish one post of National Professional Officer in the United Nations Information Centre
in Colombo;
63. Decides to establish one P-3 post in the Hindi Unit of UN News;
64. Also decides to establish one P-3 post in the Urdu Unit of United Nations Radio;
65. Further decides to reduce the proposed non-post resources by 600,000 dollars;
Part VIII
Common support services
Section 29A
Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance
66. Recalls paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 of its resolution 72/266 B, underlines the crucial role of training in
accompanying reform through organizational and cultural change, takes note of paragraphs VIII.16, VIII.17 and
VIII.20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to reduce the proposed training resources by 700,000
dollars;
Section 29B
Department of Operational Support
67. Recalls paragraphs 9 and 10 of its resolution 72/266 B, and underlines the crucial role of training in
accompanying reform through organizational and cultural change;
68. Takes note of paragraph VIII.33 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
Section 29C
Office of Information and Communications Technology
69. Approves an additional appropriation in the amount of 199,500 dollars for improving accessibility for
persons with disabilities and others to United Nations premises in New York through the development of a way-finder
program, under section 29C, Office of Information and Communications Technology;

1082

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Section 29E
Administration, Geneva
70. Recalls paragraph VIII.70 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to approve the upward
classification of one post of Chief of the Information and Communications Technology Service (P-5) as a D-1 in
subprogramme 4, Information and communications technology operations;
71. Decides to further reduce resources by 100,100 dollars;
Section 29G
Administration, Nairobi
72. Recalls paragraph VIII.98 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to approve the
reclassification of one post of Procurement Officer (P-3) as a P-4 post and one post of Travel Officer (P-2) as a P-3 post;
73. Decides not to abolish one post of Procurement Assistant (Local level) (subprogramme 3, Support
services);
Part IX
Internal oversight
Section 30
Internal oversight
74. Takes note of paragraph IX.12 of the Advisory Committee, and decides to establish three general
temporary assistance positions of Investigator (1 P-4 and 2 P‑3) in the Vienna Investigations Office;
Part XII
Safety and security
Section 34
Safety and security
75. Decides not to abolish 10 posts of Security Officer (Local level) in the Security and Safety Service in
Beirut and to apply a 50 per cent vacancy rate;
76. Recalls paragraph XII.22 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to approve resources for
the malicious acts insurance policy for 2020 in the amount 3,996,107 dollars;
Income section 3
Services to the public
77. Decides to reduce non-post resources for catering operations by 250,000 dollars, and also decides not to
allocate resources for the renovation of the Vienna Café.
Annex
Staffing table for 2020
Category

Number of posts

Professional and higher
Deputy Secretary-General

1

Under-Secretary-General

36

Assistant Secretary-General

32

D-2

116

D-1

298

1083

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Category

Number of posts

P-5

902

P-4

1 532

P-3

1 445

P-2/1

522
Subtotal

4 884

General Service and related
Principal level

271

Other level

2 313

Subtotal

2 584

Security Service

307

Local level

1 908

Field Service

107

National Professional Officer

87

Trades and Crafts

95

Subtotal

2 504

Total

9 972

Other

RESOLUTION 74/263
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/614, para. 60)

74/263. Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for 2020
The General Assembly,
I
Request for a subvention to the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research resulting
from the recommendations of the Board of Trustees of the Institute on the work programme
of the Institute for 2020
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on the request for a subvention to the United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research resulting from the recommendations of the Board of Trustees of the Institute on
the work programme of the Institute for 202084 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,85
1.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;84

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;85
3. Approves the request for a subvention to the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research of
275,000 United States dollars (before recosting) from the regular budget of the United Nations, for which the provision
has already been included under section 4, Disarmament, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;

_______________
84
85

1084

A/74/339.
A/74/7/Add.9.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

II
Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Economic and Social
Council at its 2019 session
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General86 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,87
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;86

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;87

3. Welcomes with appreciation the generous offer of the Government of Qatar to host the Fifth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, in Doha in 2021;
III
International Trade Centre
Recalling its resolution 74/262 of 27 December 2019 on questions relating to the proposed programme budget
for 2020,
Decides to approve resources in the amount of 18,861,800 dollars (the United Nations share equivalent to
50 per cent of 36,739,000 Swiss francs at the exchange rate of 0.9739 Swiss francs to 1 dollar) proposed for 2020
under section 13, International Trade Centre, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;
IV
Administrative and financial implications of the decisions and recommendations contained
in the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 2019
Having considered the statement submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly88 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,89
1.

Recalls its resolution 74/255 B of 27 December 2019;

2.

Takes note of the statement submitted by the Secretary-General;88

3.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;89

4.

Decides not to approve the request for an additional post of Communications Officer (P-4);

V
Request for a subvention to the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
Recalling section I of its resolution 68/247 B of 9 April 2014, section I of its resolution 69/274 A of 2 April
2015, section IV of its resolution 70/248 A of 23 December 2015, section II of its resolution 71/272 A of
23 December 2016, section IX of its resolution 72/262 A of 24 December 2017 and section IV of its resolution
73/279 A of 22 December 2018,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the request for a subvention to the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia90 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,91
Having also considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the international
component of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia,92
_______________
A/74/347.
A/74/7/Add.12.
88
A/C.5/74/2.
89
A/74/7/Add.7.
90
A/74/359.
91
A/74/7/Add.16.
92
A/74/281.
86
87

1085

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;90

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;91

3. Recalls paragraph 30 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia to report on the status of implementation of the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services in the next report of the Secretary-General;
4.

Reaffirms the high priority accorded to the work of the Extraordinary Chambers;

5. Notes with appreciation the sustained contributions of the Government of Cambodia, as the host country,
for the Extraordinary Chambers;
6. Encourages the Extraordinary Chambers to continue to adopt appropriate measures for achieving
operational savings and efficiencies, and to properly complete the judicial mandate in a transparent, accountable and
cost-effective manner;
7. Notes the steps taken by the Secretary-General to develop a framework for the completion of the work of
the Extraordinary Chambers and the identification of possible residual functions, and requests the Secretary-General
to expedite the finalization of the framework;
8. Recalls paragraph 25 of the report of the Advisory Committee, in which the Committee reiterates the
ongoing need for intensified fundraising efforts, including by broadening the donor base, and encourages all Member
States to provide continuing and additional voluntary support for both the international and national components of
the Extraordinary Chambers in support of the expeditious completion of the mandate of the Chambers;
9. Also recalls paragraphs 28 and 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to inform the General Assembly of the revised terms and conditions, to provide further justification for the
remuneration level of the international judges and the international prosecutors and to review the differences with the
remuneration levels of other comparable senior level officials of the United Nations in his next report;
10. Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an exceptional measure, to enter into commitments in an amount not
exceeding 7 million dollars to supplement the voluntary financial resources of the international component of the
Extraordinary Chambers for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2020, so as to enable the Chambers to carry
out its judicial mandate, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the use of the commitment authority in the
context of his next report;
VI
Request for a subvention to the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone
Recalling its resolution 58/284 of 8 April 2004, section VII of its resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004,
section II of its resolution 59/294 of 22 June 2005, section XII of its resolution 65/259 of 24 December 2010,
section IX of its resolution 66/247 of 24 December 2011, section I of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012,
section VII of its resolution 70/248 A, section III of its resolution 71/272 A, section VIII of its resolution 72/262 A and
section III of its resolution 73/279 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the use of the commitment authority and request for
a subvention to the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone93 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,94
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;93

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;94

3.

Reaffirms the high priority accorded to the work of the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone;

4. Welcomes the in-kind support provided by the Government of Sierra Leone to the Residual Special Court,
including support for the sub-office of the Court in Freetown and for the provision of security personnel;
_______________
93
94

1086

A/74/352.
A/74/7/Add.21.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Also welcomes the support provided by several countries, including voluntary contributions, pro bono
services and in-kind support in housing the archives of the Residual Special Court and prisoners of the Court;
6.

Encourages all Member States to provide voluntary support to the Residual Special Court;

7. Expresses serious concern over the adverse financial situation facing the Residual Special Court, and in
this regard requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to seek voluntary contributions, including through
broadening the donor base and holding regular consultations with the key stakeholders, as well as to implement
innovative fundraising approaches, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-fifth
session;
8. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed 2,537,000 dollars
to supplement the voluntary financial resources of the Residual Special Court for the period from 1 January to
31 December 2020, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly, at the main part of its
seventy-fifth session, on the use of the commitment authority;
VII
Strategic heritage plan of the United Nations Office at Geneva
Recalling part XI of its resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009, section VII of its resolution 66/247, section V
of its resolution 68/247 A of 27 December 2013, sections III and VII of its resolution 69/262 of 29 December 2014,
section X of its resolution 70/248 A, section XVIII of its resolution 71/272 A, section XVI of its resolution 72/262 A
and section XIII of its resolution 73/279 A,
Having considered the sixth annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the strategic heritage plan of the
United Nations Office at Geneva95 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,96
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;95

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;96

3.

Welcomes the continued support of the Government of Switzerland for the construction project in Geneva;

4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the strategic heritage plan is fully completed within the
project scope and overall cost approved in its resolution 70/248 A without further delays;
5. Reaffirms paragraph 19 of section XIII of its resolution 73/279 A, and reiterates its request to preserve the
historical heritage of the Palais des Nations;
6. Also reaffirms the proposed project scope, schedule and estimated cost of the strategic heritage plan in the
maximum amount of 836,500,000 Swiss francs;
7. Stresses the importance of effective governance, oversight, transparency and accountability in the
management of the project to ensure that the project objectives are achieved on time and within budget;
8. Also stresses the importance of close coordination between the strategic heritage plan project team and the
Secretariat in New York, in particular the Global Asset Management Policy Service, to ensure success in all aspects
of the project;
9. Expresses concern at the six-month delay, increased costs and risks to the project schedule and cost plan,
as well as the decreasing level of confidence, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure rigorous risk and project
management and close monitoring of the areas of risk and vulnerability and to take all mitigation measures necessary
in a timely manner in order to alleviate potential risks of further delays and cost overruns, and to report thereon in his
next progress report;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to avoid budget increases through the application of
sound project management practices and to ensure that the strategic heritage plan is completed within the approved
budget and the envisaged schedule;

_______________
95
96

A/74/452.
A/74/7/Add.13.

1087

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the recommendations of the Board of Auditors are
implemented fully and expeditiously;
12. Notes the progress that has been made and the completion of some of the project activities;
13. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure business continuity of conferences
through a temporary conference facility available throughout the duration of the renovation works, and requests the
Secretary-General to absorb the expenditure of the facility within the approved budget of the project;
14. Reaffirms paragraph 10 of section XIII of its resolution 73/279 A;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the procurement of goods and services for the
construction project is carried out in strict compliance with the existing regulations, rules and relevant provisions of
General Assembly resolutions governing procurement in the United Nations;
16. Recalls paragraph 16 of its resolution 69/273 of 2 April 2015, reaffirms the importance of transparency in
the procurement process, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the project team takes vendors from
developing countries and countries with economies in transition fully into account when contracting and
subcontracting and to report on the specific steps taken and progress achieved in the context of increasing procurement
opportunities for vendors from developing countries and countries with economies in transition in the implementation
of the strategic heritage plan;
17. Notes that the strategic heritage plan will reach its midpoint at the end of 2019 and will enter into
significant high-value, multi-year construction contracts, and in this regard emphasizes the necessity of a predictable
and secure funding mechanism for the project;
18. Decides to continue to use the multi-year construction-in-progress account established within the regular
budget for expenditures related to the strategic heritage plan in 2020;
19. Also decides to revert to the establishment of an assessment scheme and currency of appropriation and
assessment for the strategic heritage plan at the main part of its seventy-fifth session, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide updated detailed information on these issues;
20. Further decides to revert to the establishment of the multi-year special account for the strategic heritage
plan at the main part of its seventy-fifth session;
21. Decides that the annual repayments of the loans to the host country will be funded under the regular budget
until decided otherwise by the General Assembly;
22. Appreciates the existing voluntary contributions received from Member States to finance the strategic
heritage plan, and requests the Secretary-General to remain proactive in seeking both voluntary and in-kind
contributions from Member States, as well as donations by private entities, in full compliance with all relevant rules
and regulations of the Organization and agreements related to donations for the strategic heritage plan, and to provide
detailed information on this matter in the context of his next progress report;
23. Reiterates that all income from the rental or valorization of land owned by the Organization in Geneva
will be reflected under income section 2, General income, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;
24. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue to explore the possibility of attracting additional
United Nations entities to be accommodated at the renovated Palais des Nations;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in maximizing the long-term generation of
income through long-term, community-oriented leasing arrangements for United Nations-owned land in Geneva, and
in this regard requests the Secretary-General to present detailed plans on the valorization strategy and preparatory
works, including the scope, duration and resource requirements for the preparatory works, for the consideration of the
General Assembly as early as practicable;
26. Decides to appropriate the amount of 36,799,600 dollars (equivalent to 36,505,200 Swiss francs) for 2020,
under section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, of the proposed programme budget
for 2020;

1088

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

VIII
Administrative expenses of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
Recalling its resolution 70/238 A of 23 December 2015, section XV of its resolution 72/262 A and its resolution
73/274 of 22 December 2018,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board on the administrative expenses of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board on the work
of its sixty-sixth session,97 the report of the Secretary-General on the administrative and financial implications arising
from the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board,98 the financial report and audited financial statements
for the year ended 31 December 2018 and report of the Board of Auditors on the Pension Fund99 and the
recommendations contained therein, the report of the Secretary of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and
the Representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of the assets of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report for the year
ended 31 December 2018 on the Pension Fund100 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,101
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board97 and the report of the SecretaryGeneral;98
2. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and the
Representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of the assets of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund;100
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,101
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
4.

Emphasizes the existing prerogative of the General Assembly on matters pertaining to the Pension Fund;

A
Report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board on the work of its sixty‑sixth session
5. Stresses the importance of continuing to achieve the necessary 3.5 per cent annual real rate of return on a
long-term basis for the future solvency of the Pension Fund;
6. Reiterates the importance of the implementation of all the recommendations of the Board of Auditors by
the secretariat of the Pension Fund, the Pension Board and the Representative of the Secretary-General in full and in
a timely manner, and of reporting thereon in the next report to the General Assembly;
7. Recalls paragraph 13 of its resolution 73/274, and decides that the head of the pension administration shall
have the title of Chief Executive of Pension Administration and to amend the relevant articles in the regulations of the
Pension Fund accordingly;
8. Requests the Chief Executive of Pension Administration, drawing on the expertise of the Procurement
Division of the Secretariat, to engage promptly, through a transparent and competitive procurement process, an
independent external entity with expertise in pension fund governance matters to conduct a comprehensive and
objective analysis, giving due regard to best practice standards of pension funds, with recommendations on:
(a)

Size, composition and frequency of meetings;

(b)

Allocation of seats;

(c) Implementation of a review and rotation scheme for the adjustment of the composition of the Pension
Board on a regular basis, to allow eligible member organizations to share rotating seats in a fair and equitable manner;
_______________
A/74/331 and A/74/331/Corr.1.
A/C.5/74/3.
99
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 5P (A/74/5/Add.16).
100
A/74/329.
101
A/74/7/Add.14.
97
98

1089

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(d)
interest;

Terms of reference for the Chair and all members of the Pension Board, including the issue of conflict of

(e) Self-evaluation methodology and any appropriate restrictions or limitations of the Pension Board and its
Standing Committee;
9. Requests the Pension Board to submit the report of the external entity, along with the comments of the
Board, in the context of the next report of the Pension Board;
10. Decides that the work of the Fund Solvency and Assets and Liabilities Monitoring Committee will pertain
solely to asset-liability matters;
11. Stresses that the Secretary of the Pension Board shall be fully independent from the Chief Executive of
Pension Administration and the Representative of the Secretary-General, in this regard decides that the Secretary shall
be selected and evaluated by the Succession Planning Committee of the Board in accordance with relevant staff
regulations and rules, while noting the redeployment of the D-1 from the Geneva Office as a temporary arrangement
beginning in January 2020, requests the Board, through the Committee, to expedite the selection and nomination
process, and decides that the Secretary shall report directly to the Board, while being provided with administrative
support from the Pension Administration and the Office of Investment Management, as necessary;
12. Requests the Pension Board to provide further information on measures taken to ensure the independence
of the Secretary of the Board from the Chief Executive of Pension Administration and to report thereon in the context
of its next report;
13. Decides that alternates should be entitled to attend Pension Board sessions only when principal Board
members cannot attend, with the exception of the elected alternates of the General Assembly, and requests the Board
to implement this recommendation beginning at the next meeting of the Board;
14. Emphasizes that the Office of Internal Oversight Services shall remain the sole internal oversight body of
the secretariat of the Pension Fund and its investments, in line with the mandate of the Office, as set out by the General
Assembly its resolution 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, and stresses that any change to the mandate in this regard remains
the sole prerogative of the Assembly;
15. Recalls paragraph 31 of its resolution 73/274, regrets that the Secretary-General and the Pension Board
did not provide an update, and reiterates its request that they ensure that the staff composition of the Office of
Investment Management and in the Pension Administration is based on as wide a geographical coverage as possible,
bearing in mind Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, and to make every effort to provide an
update on progress achieved in the context of their next reports;
16. Decides to defer the amendment to article 6 of the Regulations of the Pension Fund, recalls paragraph 25
of its resolution 73/274, and urges the Pension Board to finalize the development of a comprehensive code of conduct
applicable to all Board members and observers, drawing from the code of conduct of the International Civil Service
Commission, to develop appropriate regulations and procedures to address all questions of ethics, including
confidentiality matters, on the requested changes to the Regulations of the Fund, including on article 6, and to report
thereon in its next report;
17. Also decides to defer the amendment to article 48 of the Regulations of the Pension Fund, and requests
the Pension Board to provide further analysis of and clarification on the proposed amendment, in particular to examine
the possible impact on the access of staff members and participants in the Fund to justice in the United Nations Appeals
Tribunal and its possible legal consequences, and to report thereon in the context of its next report;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide further analysis of and clarification on proposed amendments
to the statute of the Appeals Tribunal on pension matters, and invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects
in the context of the next report of the Secretary-General on the administration of justice without prejudice to the role
of the Fifth Committee as the Main Committee of the General Assembly responsible for administrative and budgetary
matters;
19. Requests the Pension Administration to continue to adhere to the target of 15 business days for benefit
processing and to report thereon in the context of the next report of the Pension Board;
1090

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

20. Also requests the Pension Administration to make every effort to reduce the number of open workflows,
with a dedicated effort to address non-processable cases, to establish and implement benchmarks to measure progress
in their reduction and to report thereon in the context of the next report;
21. Welcomes the implementation of a monthly reconciliation process by all member organizations of the
Pension Fund to facilitate the timely payment of benefits, and requests an update on progress made in the context of
the next report of the Pension Board;
22. Requests the Pension Board to extend the mandate and membership of the Governance Working Group,
which should adhere to the tripartite structure of the Board, until its next session;
23. Highlights the fact that the investment strategy of the Pension Fund should be guided by its annualized
real rate of return target, and calls upon the Secretary-General to continue intensive efforts towards meeting the
investment policy objectives;
24. Reaffirms that the Secretary-General serves as fiduciary for the investment of the assets of the Pension
Fund;
25. Requests the Secretary-General, as fiduciary for the investment of the assets of the Pension Fund, to
continue to diversify its investments among developed, developing and emerging markets, wherever this serves the
interests of the participants and the beneficiaries of the Fund, and also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
decisions concerning the investments of the Fund in any market are implemented prudently, taking fully into account
the four main criteria for investment, namely, safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility;
26. Notes that emerging and frontier markets, including markets in Africa, are increasingly important to the
investment strategy of the Pension Fund;
27. Also notes the planned audit by the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the governance of the Office
of Investment Management, and requests the submission of the audit report, along with the comments of the Pension
Board, in the context of the next report of the Board;
28. Encourages the Secretary of the Pension Board to restructure and streamline the report of the Board with
the aim of making it more concise and to the point and presenting the rationale of financial and administrative
proposals in a more comprehensive manner;
29. Highlights the importance attached by the General Assembly to continuing to ensure unfaltering
accountability by the Pension Board, and requests the Board to provide detailed follow-up on all aspects of the
implementation of the present resolution, including information on the implementation of the recommendations of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services agreed to by the Board, in the context of its report to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
B
Administrative expenses of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
30. Notes that the Pension Fund is funded in part through contributions from its member organizations and
participating staff members, whereby the contributions of member organizations are resourced by Member States
through the United Nations regular budget, extrabudgetary contributions and the budget of other participating member
organizations;
31. Also notes that the Pension Fund is administered by the Pension Board, which, as a subsidiary organ,
reports to the General Assembly, and calls upon the Board to operate in a more efficient way, utilizing technology and
other means to reduce its operating costs;
32. Stresses the important role of the Pension Board in ensuring the sustainability of the Pension Fund by
managing expenses prudently, setting cost benchmarks and monitoring the cost per participant and beneficiary, and
calls upon the Board to report on progress made in the context of its next report;
33. Recalls paragraph 33 of the report of the Advisory Committee, notes the proposed increase in posts for
the Office of Investment Management, and decides to retain the general temporary assistance resources for the Office
in 2020 at the level approved for 2019;
1091

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

34. Requests the Pension Fund and the Secretary-General to find appropriate solutions in 2020 to resolve the
situation of the P-4 and P-5 posts in the Executive Office, and requests the Pension Administration to report thereon
in the context of the next report of the Pension Board;
35. Stresses the importance of having a consistent benefit processing rate and of maintaining the quality of
service provided to clients in Europe, West Asia and Africa, and in this regard requests the Chief Executive of Pension
Administration to maintain appropriate parallel characteristics of the Geneva Office and to provide updates on the
issue in the context of the next report of the Pension Board;
36. Approves the changes to the staffing table as set out in the table below:
A.

Pension Board secretariat

Action

Title of post

Category

Redeployment (from Pension Administration)

Programme Management Officer

P-4

1

Redeployment (from Pension Administration)

Meeting Services Assistant

GS-OL

1

Redeployment (from Pension Administration)

Secretary of the Pension Board

D-1

1

Total net changes

B.

3

Pension Administration

Action

Title of post

Category

New post

Human Resources Officer (recruitment)

P-3

1

New post

Administrative Assistant

GS-OL

1

New post

Benefits Assistant, Nairobi regional office (CS)

LL

1

New post

Benefits Assistant, Bangkok regional office (CS)

LL

1

New post

Information Systems Officer (Chief of Pension
Interface Unit)

P-4

1

New post

Information Systems Assistant

GS-OL

2

Total new posts

Number

7

Conversion

Benefits Officer, Nairobi regional office (CS)

P-3

1

Conversion

Benefits Officer, Bangkok regional office (CS)

P-3

1

Total conversion

1092

Number

2

Redeployment (to Pension Board secretariat)

Programme Management Officer

P-4

-1

Redeployment (to Pension Board secretariat)

Meeting services Assistant

GS-OL

-1

Redeployment (to Pension Board secretariat)

Chief of Geneva Office

D-1

-1

Redeployment (to Office of Investment
Management)

Information Systems Officer

P-4

-1

Redeployment (to Office of Investment
Management)

Information Systems Assistant

GS-OL

-1

Total outward redeployment

-5

Total net changes

4

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

C.

Office of Investment Management

Action

Title of post

Category

Number

New post

Senior Legal Officer

P-5

1

New post

Legal Assistant

GS-OL

1

New post

Investment Officer – Private Equity

P-3

1

New post

Investment Officer – North America

P-3

1

New post

Senior Risk Officer – Head of Market
Risk

P-5

1

New post

Risk Officer – Private Market

P-4

1

New post

Risk Officer – Portfolio Construction

P-4

1

New post

Risk Officer – Operational and Fraud

P-3

1

New post

Risk Officer – Performance and
Reporting

P-3

1

New post

Risk Officer – Credit Risk

P-3

1

New post

Administrative Assistant – Risk and
Compliance

GS-OL

1

New post

Information System Officer – Systems
Analyst

P-3

1
12

Total new posts
Conversion

Programme Management Officer

P-4

1

Conversion

Information System Officer – Service
Desk Manager

P-3

1

Conversion

Information System Officer –
Business Analyst

P-3

2

Conversion

Information System Assistant –
Service Desk Assistant

GS-OL

2

Conversion

Programme Management Assistant

GS-OL

1

Conversion

Information System Officer –
Business Continuity Manager

P-3

1

Conversion

Associate Accountant

P-2

2

Conversion

Senior Accounting Assistant

GS-PL

1
11

Total conversions
Redeployment (from Pension Administration)

Information Systems Officer

P-4

1

Redeployment (from Pension Administration)

Information Systems Assistant

GS-OL

1

Total inward redeployment

2

Total net changes

25

Abbreviations: CS, Client Services; GS-OL, General Service (Other level); GS-PL, General Service (Principal level); LL, Local level.

37. Also approves the revised estimates of 184,916,800 dollars for the biennium 2018–2019 for the
administration of the Pension Fund;
38. Further approves expenses, chargeable directly to the Pension Fund, totalling 92,899,100 dollars net
for 2020;

1093

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

39. Approves the amount of 7,782,200 dollars as the United Nations share of the cost of the administrative
expenses of the Pension Fund for 2020, of which 4,863,900 dollars would represent the share of the regular budget
and the balance of 2,918,300 dollars would represent the share of the funds and programmes;
40. Also approves the decrease of 2,306,300 dollars in the United Nations share of the cost of the
administrative expenses of the central secretariat of the Pension Fund under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction
and coordination, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;
41. Authorizes the Pension Board to supplement the voluntary contributions to the Emergency Fund for 2020
by an amount not to exceed 112,500 dollars;
IX
Progress in the implementation of a flexible workplace at United Nations Headquarters
Recalling section V of its resolution 67/246, section III of its resolution 67/254 A of 12 April 2013, section IV
of its resolution 68/247 B, section VII of its resolution 69/274 A, section XVI of its resolution 71/272 A, section XI
of its resolution 72/262 A and section VI of its resolution 73/279 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General102 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,103
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;102

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;103

3. Reaffirms that flexible workplace strategies in the United Nations should be aimed at improving the overall
productivity and efficiency of the Organization, as well as the staff workplace environment;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full compliance with its decisions and full cooperation with the
implementation plan for the project, while meeting the needs of staff and ensuring their well-being and productivity;
5. Recalls paragraph 5 of section XVI of its resolution 71/272 A, and reiterates its request that the Office of
Human Resources of the Secretariat assess in detail the impact of the flexible workplace on productivity and provide
reliable qualitative and quantitative benefit indicators as well as other factors for the improvement of overall
productivity and staff well-being, and report thereon in the context of the next progress report;
6. Also recalls section VII of its resolution 69/274 A, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
implementation of flexible workplace strategies and other potential changes in logistical arrangements takes into
account the needs of language staff in order to continue to ensure that the services provided to Member States meet
the highest standard of quality;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide detailed information with respect to the planning and costs of
rental leases, including rental savings from all vacated rental buildings and spaces, in the context of his next report;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue with the implementation of flexible workplace strategies
in New York in 2020, with the full utilization of maximum occupancy per floor, and to report thereon at the main part
of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to closely monitor and manage the remaining works to ensure
completion of the flexible workspace project in the third quarter of 2020, and stresses the need to ensure completion
of the project on time and within the estimated cost;
10. Recalls paragraph 28 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides that future reports of the
Secretary-General should continue to include the unit costs of goods and services procured under the construction and
systems furniture categories;
11. Also recalls paragraph 27 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
seek further efficiencies in this regard and to include detailed information and explanations for the cost changes for
each completed floor in his next report;
_______________
102
103

1094

A/74/345.
A/74/7/Add.18.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Approves the continuation of three temporary positions (1 P-5, 1 P-4 and 1 General Service (Other level))
for the project team;
13. Appropriates an amount of 6,795,948 dollars for the project costs under section 29B, Department of
Operational Support, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;
X
Progress in the renovation of Africa Hall and the construction of new office facilities at the Economic
Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa
Recalling its resolution 56/270 of 27 March 2002, section IX of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007,
section I of its resolution 63/263 of 24 December 2008, its resolution 64/243, section III of its resolution 65/259,
section VII of its resolution 66/247, section II of its resolution 67/246, section III of its resolution 68/247 A, section V
of its resolution 69/262, section IX of its resolution 70/248 A, section V of its resolution 71/272 A, section XII of its
resolution 72/262 A and section VIII of its resolution 73/279 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General104 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,105
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;104

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;105

3. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Ethiopia, as the host country, for its continued support for
the construction of additional office facilities, as well as the renovation of Africa Hall, including conference rooms, at
the Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa;
4. Welcomes the close-out of the construction project of the new office facilities (Zambezi Building) and its
ancillary works, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue to engage with the host country in the preservation
of the environment, including the greening of the compound and public spaces in its vicinity;
5. Appreciates the financial contribution of the Government of Mali, the in‑kind contribution from the
Government of Ethiopia and a pledge by the Government of Switzerland, and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to continue to seek both voluntary and in-kind contributions from Member States, in full compliance with all
relevant regulations and rules of the Organization, and to provide detailed information in the context of the next
progress report;
6. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to utilize local knowledge, material, technology and
capacity throughout the implementation of construction and renovation projects at the Economic Commission for
Africa in Addis Ababa, as appropriate;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make additional efforts to raise global awareness of the historic Africa
Hall and the African heritage that it represents, and to cultivate partnerships with regional and international academic
and research institutions, including universities and museums, specializing in African history and culture;
8. Appreciates the continued commitment of the Secretary-General to ensure the preservation of the
historical and architectural integrity of Africa Hall, and underlines the need to continue to engage key stakeholders,
including the host Government, the African Union and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, in safeguarding the heritage conservation objective;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a comprehensive assessment of the number of possible visitors
annually to the renovated Africa Hall and its visitors’ centre, and to propose different admission options for visitors of
various income brackets, including a fee exemption for children, students and those above the age of 65, as well as a
more refined outreach strategy, following the completion of the renovation of Africa Hall and its visitors’ centre, and
to report his findings thereon in his next progress report;
_______________
104
105

A/74/328.
A/74/7/Add.19.

1095

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Stresses the importance of governance, effective oversight, transparency and accountability in the
management of the project to ensure that the objectives of the project are achieved within the approved budget and
time schedule;
11. Emphasizes the need for the Office of Internal Oversight Services to continue to provide oversight on the
renovation of Africa Hall, as appropriate, and to continue to include information on key findings;
12. Emphasizes that the Global Asset Management Policy Service should continue to be actively involved in
overseeing the project to ensure the central supervision of capital projects, including risk management and alignment
with lessons learned, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue to engage with the Stakeholders Committee,
the Advisory Board and the host country to improve coordination efforts in the implementation of the project;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at the main part of its
seventy-fifth session, a progress report on the implementation of the construction projects and the renovation of the
conference facilities, including Africa Hall and its visitors’ centre, outlining, inter alia, project expenditure and total
costs;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to engage with the host country and to provide, in his next
progress report, an update on the construction of a parking lot on the parcel of land provided by the Government of
Ethiopia;
15. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to continue to take appropriate measures to mitigate
potential risks and to monitor closely the Africa Hall renovation project in order to avoid any further delay;
16. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to include an update on the management of the main risks
and the related mitigation measures, with a view to keeping the approved time frame of the project, to avoiding cost
overruns and to ensuring the delivery of the project within the scope, budget and timeline, as approved by the General
Assembly, and requests an update in the context of his next progress report;
17. Recalls paragraph 21 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
include in his next progress report detailed information on the envisaged renewable energy efficiency measures,
wastewater treatment, solid waste management and water management in the context of the Africa Hall renovation
project, drawing from best practices and lessons learned from other United Nations construction projects, as
appropriate;
18. Welcomes the steps taken by the Secretary-General to ensure conformity of Africa Hall and its visitors’
centre with relevant building codes and standards, as well as best practices for persons with disabilities;
19. Appropriates an amount of 8,434,100 dollars for the project for 2020, comprising 752,000 dollars under
section 18, Economic and social development in Africa, 7,577,100 dollars under section 33, Construction, alteration,
improvement and major maintenance, and 105,000 dollars under section 34, Safety and security, of the proposed
programme budget for 2020, which would represent a charge against the contingency fund;
XI
Progress on the renovation of the North Building at the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean in Santiago
Recalling section VII of its resolution 69/274 A, section VI of its resolution 70/248 B of 1 April 2016, section V
of its resolution 72/262 A and section X of its resolution 73/279 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General106 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,107
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;106

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;107

_______________
106
107

1096

A/74/330.
A/74/7/Add.11.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Acknowledges the important role played by the host countries in facilitating the maintenance and
construction of United Nations facilities, and stresses the value of continued collaboration with host countries in this
regard;
4. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Chile, as the host country, for its continued efforts in
supporting and facilitating the work of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean;
5. Recalls paragraph 4 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to remain
proactive in seeking both voluntary and in-kind contributions from Member States, in full compliance with all relevant
regulations and rules of the Organization, and to provide detailed information on the matter in the context of his next
progress report;
6. Stresses the importance of governance, effective oversight, transparency and accountability in the
management of the project to ensure that its objectives are achieved within the scope, budget and timeline approved
by the General Assembly;
7. Emphasizes that the Global Asset Management Policy Service should continue to be actively involved in
overseeing the project to ensure the central supervision of capital projects, including risk management and alignment
with lessons learned;
8. Recalls paragraphs 8 and 10 of the report of the Advisory Committee, requests the Secretary-General to
closely monitor and mitigate all project risks and take all measures necessary to ensure the delivery of the project
within the scope, budget and timeline, as approved by the General Assembly, and also requests the Secretary-General
to include information on risk management and mitigation measures taken in his next progress report;
9. Welcomes the wastewater treatment plans under way, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly in his next report in this regard;
10. Recalls paragraph 21 of the report of the Advisory Committee, welcomes the planned renovation of the
North Building at the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean as a sustainable and energyefficient building where the total amount of energy used by the building on an annual basis is equal to or less than the
amount of renewable energy generated on site;
11. Also recalls paragraphs 14 and 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide more detailed information regarding the planned seismic mitigation measures in his future reports
on the renovation of the North Building at the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean;
12. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the project delivers renovation works that
conform to relevant building codes and standards, including provisions for persons with disabilities concerning
accessibility, technology and workplace safety;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to annually review the role and funding ratio of the position of Project
Coordinator (P-3), jointly funded by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and the United
Nations Office at Nairobi, and provide detailed information in his next report;
14. Appropriates an amount of 389,100 dollars for the project in 2020, comprising 285,800 dollars under
section 21, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, and 103,300 dollars under
section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, of the proposed programme budget
for 2020;
XII
Seismic mitigation retrofit and life-cycle replacements project at the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific premises in Bangkok
Recalling section XII of its resolution 70/248 A, section IV of its resolution 71/272 A, section XIII of its
resolution 72/262 A and section VII of its resolution 73/279 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General108 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,109
_______________
108
109

A/74/317.
A/74/7/Add.8.

1097

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;108

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;109

3. Welcomes the continued efforts of the Government of Thailand, as the host country, in facilitating the work
of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok;
4. Also welcomes the positive steps taken towards engaging with the host country, and encourages the
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific to continue the discussions on cooperation with the host
country in this regard;
5. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to include local knowledge, technology and
capacity throughout the implementation of the construction project, as appropriate;
6. Recalls paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and welcomes the steps taken by the
Secretary-General to make the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific building conform to
relevant building standards and best practices for persons with disabilities;
7. Stresses the importance of governance, effective oversight, transparency and accountability in the
management of the project to ensure that the objectives of the project are achieved within budget and in a timely
manner;
8. Emphasizes that the Global Asset Management Policy Service should continue to be actively involved in
overseeing the project to ensure the central supervision of capital projects, including risk management and alignment
with lessons learned;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take into account lessons learned and best practices from
past construction and renovation projects and, in particular, to draw from experience and knowledge acquired from
other capital projects;
10. Recalls paragraph 9 of section VII of its resolution 73/279 A, and reiterates that unused contingency funds
must be carried over to subsequent years and that all remaining unused contingency funds must be returned to Member
States at the conclusion of the project, in 2023;
11. Also recalls paragraph 21 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
proactively manage and mitigate risks identified to ensure the successful delivery of the project within the scope,
budget and timeline approved by the General Assembly, and to provide an update on relevant measures taken in his
next report;
12. Further recalls paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General
to continue to ensure the implementation of the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to remain proactive in seeking both voluntary and in-kind
contributions from Member States, in full compliance with all relevant rules and regulations of the Organization, and
to provide detailed information on the matter in the context of his next report;
14. Approves the establishment of three temporary positions, (1 Safety Project Officer (Local level),
1 Information Technology Assistant (Local level) and 1 Security Officer (Local level)), effective 1 January 2020, in
the project team, under section 19, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific, of the proposed
programme budget for 2020;
15. Appropriates an amount of 6,410,700 dollars for project activities in 2020, comprising 907,200 dollars
under section 19, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific, and 5,503,500 dollars under section 33,
Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, of the proposed programme budget for 2020, which
would represent a charge against the contingency fund;
XIII
Progress on the replacement of office blocks A to J at the United Nations Office at Nairobi
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 72/262 A and section IX of its resolution 73/279 A,

1098

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General110 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,111
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;110

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;111

3. Acknowledges the important role played by the host country in facilitating the maintenance and
construction of United Nations facilities in Nairobi, and stresses the value of continued collaboration with the host
country in this regard;
4. Expresses its gratitude to the host country for its continued support for the United Nations Office at
Nairobi, and trusts that the Secretary-General will continue to engage, as appropriate, with the host country as has
been the practice with respect to other construction projects at the Office;
5. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to include local knowledge, technology, material
and capacity, in particular the use of materials available and/or manufactured locally, throughout the implementation
of the replacement of office blocks A to J at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, as appropriate;
6. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to remain proactive in seeking both voluntary and in-kind
contributions from Member States, in full compliance with all relevant rules and regulations of the Organization, and
to provide detailed information on the matter in the context of his next progress report;
7. Stresses the importance of governance, effective oversight, transparency and accountability in the
management of the project to ensure that the objectives of the project are achieved within the approved budget and
time schedule;
8. Emphasizes that the Global Asset Management Policy Service should continue to be actively involved in
overseeing the project to ensure the central supervision of capital projects, including risk management and alignment
with lessons learned;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, through the Global Asset Management Policy Service, to take into
account lessons learned and best practices from similar past construction and renovation projects in the planning,
design and implementation of the proposed replacement of office blocks A to J;
10. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort in implementing measures
against slippages in the timeline of the project, and to mitigate their potential impact on project costs and
completion time;
11. Recalls paragraph 10 of section IX of its resolution 73/279 A, and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral for an updated proposal, including refined information on the full scope, maximum overall cost and
implementation strategy;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure conformity with relevant building codes and standards, as well
as best practices for persons with disabilities, in the design, construction and renovation of United Nations Office at
Nairobi facilities;
13. Recalls paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
incorporate the envisaged renewable energy efficiency measures, wastewater treatment, solid waste management and
water management into the design and construction of the United Nations Office at Nairobi project on office blocks
A to J, including lessons learned from other construction projects;
14. Appropriates an amount of 10,490,100 dollars, comprising 1,095,400 dollars under section 29G,
Administration, Nairobi, 9,169,600 dollars under section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement and major
maintenance, and 225,100 dollars under section 34, Safety and security, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;

_______________
110
111

A/74/343.
A/74/7/Add.15.

1099

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

XIV
Addressing the deteriorating conditions and limited capacity of the conference services facilities
at the United Nations Office at Nairobi
Recalling its resolution 73/270 of 22 December 2018,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General112 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,113
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;112

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;113

3. Recalls paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
conduct a needs assessment and explore options that maximize efficiency and cost-effectiveness, taking into
consideration the future needs of the United Nations Office at Nairobi conference facilities, and to submit a report to
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session;
4. Appropriates an amount of 470,000 dollars under section 29G, Administration, Nairobi, of the proposed
programme budget for 2020, which would represent a charge against the contingency fund;
XV
Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council
at its fortieth, forty-first and forty-second sessions
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General114 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,115
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;114

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;115

3. Approves the establishment, effective 1 January 2020, of 18 posts under section 24, Human rights, of the
proposed programme budget for 2020, comprising 6 posts to support the activities mandated by the Human Rights
Council in its resolutions 40/13 of 22 March 2019,11642/20 and 42/22 of 26 September 2019 and 42/23 of
27 September 2019117 and 12 posts for the establishment of the country office in the Sudan, as mandated in resolution
42/35 of 27 September 2019;117
4. Appropriates an additional amount of 20,198,300 dollars, comprising 1,701,200 dollars under section 2,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management, 18,488,700 dollars under
section 24, Human rights, and 8,400 dollars under section 29E, Administration, Geneva, of the proposed programme
budget for 2020;
5. Also appropriates an amount of 866,000 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by an
equivalent amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;
XVI
Revised estimates relating to the programme budget for 2020 under section 27, Humanitarian
assistance, and section 36, Staff assessment, for the Office of the United Nations Emergency
Ebola Response Coordinator
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General118 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,119
_______________
A/74/471.
A/74/7/Add.22.
114
A/74/529.
115
A/74/7/Add.26.
116
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/74/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
117
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
118
A/74/544.
119
A/74/7/Add.27.
112
113

1100

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;118

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,119
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Recalls paragraph 6 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and welcomes the development of the
“getting to zero” strategy to address the fluctuating nature of the Ebola virus in the region;
4.

Takes note of paragraphs 17 and 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

5. Appropriates an additional amount of 6,325,500 dollars for the Office of the United Nations Emergency
Ebola Response Coordinator for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2020 under section 27, Humanitarian assistance,
of the proposed programme budget for 2020, representing a charge against the contingency fund;
6. Also appropriates an amount of 351,200 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by an
equivalent amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the proposed programme budget
for 2020;
XVII
Enterprise resource planning project, Umoja
Recalling section II of its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006, section II of its resolution 63/262 of 24 December
2008, its resolution 64/243, section II.A of its resolution 65/259, its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011, section III
of its resolution 66/263 of 21 June 2012, section III of its resolution 67/246, its resolution 68/246 of 27 December
2013, sections IV and VI of its resolution 69/274 A, section XVII of its resolution 70/248 A, section XIV of its
resolution 71/272 A, section XXI of its resolution 72/262 A and section XVII of its resolution 73/279 A,
Having considered the eleventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the enterprise resource planning
project,120 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the eighth annual progress report of the Board of Auditors
on the implementation of the United Nations enterprise resource planning system121 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee,122
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General120 and the note by the Secretary-General;121

2. Also takes note of the findings of the report of the Board of Auditors,121 and endorses the recommendations
contained therein;
3.
4.
dollars;

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;122
Approves the resource requirements for the completion of the project in 2020, in the amount of 34,316,700

Programme budget
5. Approves an amount of 3,237,400 dollars under the proposed programme budget for 2020 under
component 1, Enterprise resource planning project, of subsection 29A, Department of Management Strategy, Policy
and Compliance, representing the additional regular budget share for the Umoja project costs for 2020;
Support account for peacekeeping operations
6. Notes that resource requirements in the amount of 13,381,300 dollars will be included in the subsequent
requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial period from 1 July 2020 to
30 June 2021;

_______________
A/74/478.
A/74/153.
122
A/74/7/Add.17.
120
121

1101

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Extrabudgetary resources
7. Notes that requirements in the amount of 4,964,000 dollars will be funded from extrabudgetary resources
in the financial year 2020;
XVIII
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General123 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee,124
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;123

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee,124
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
security;

Affirms that special political missions play a critical role in the maintenance of international peace and

4. Expresses its concern at the late consideration of the budgets of special political missions, particularly as
part of the annual budgeting, and reiterates the importance of the Advisory Committee considering the budgets of
special political missions in sufficient time to allow the General Assembly the time necessary to make considered
decisions;
5. Recalls paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee,125 and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to present future budget proposals for special political missions no later than the last week of October;
6. Stresses that finance serves as the foundation of and an important element underpinning United Nations
governance;
7. Notes that, pursuant to its resolution 72/266 A of 24 December 2017, it had approved the earlier
submission of budget proposals for special political missions to ensure alignment with the rest of the proposed annual
budget, also notes that, with this change, the envelope for special political missions within the biennium programme
budget was discontinued, given that budgets are produced annually, and further notes that the resource requirements
of the individual special political missions were included as a special subject in addenda 1 to 6 to section 3, Political
affairs, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;
8. Stresses the importance of developing a comprehensive performance management system, and requests
the Secretary-General to develop qualitative and quantitative indicators to help missions to measure progress in
mandate implementation and to report thereon in the context of his next report;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to promote the nationalization of positions,
whenever appropriate, as well as to build local capacity within the special political missions and to report thereon in
the context of future budget submissions;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to promptly complete the recruitment process for those positions
presently encumbered by the use of special post allowances and to include information on temporary assignments
with special post allowances, including the length of those assignments and the recruitment status of the related posts,
in the context of special political mission budget proposals in 2020;
11. Recalls its stipulation that the use of external consultants should be kept to an absolute minimum and that
the Organization should utilize its in-house capacity to perform core activities or to fulfil functions that are recurrent
over the long term;
_______________
A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.1, A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.2, A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.3, A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.4, A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.5,
A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.5/Corr.1, A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.6, A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.6/Corr.1, A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.7 and A/74/6 (Sect. 3)/Add.8.
124
A/74/7, A/74/7/Add.1, A/74/7/Add.2, A/74/7/Add.3, A/74/7/Add.4, A/74/7/Add.5, A/74/7/Add.6, A/74/7/Add.7, A/74/7/Add.23 and
A/74/7/Add.24.
125
A/74/7/Add.1.
123

1102

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Also recalls paragraph 39 of the report of the Advisory Committee,125 and requests the Secretary-General
to report the ratios of allocations of vehicles and information technology equipment and to provide specific
justification for higher allocations by missions in the context of future budget submissions;
13. Further recalls paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee,125 and encourages the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that the cost-sharing arrangements will be enhanced, with a view to maximizing efficiency;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in his next budget submission, to summarize the justification and link of
the appropriation and use of travel expenses to support the implementation of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015)
of 20 July 2015 and to present the role of the Secretariat in preparing reports on the resolution, as guided by the
mandate of the Council;
15. Reaffirms its commitment to considering the review of the arrangements on the funding and backstopping
of the special political missions and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee, and expresses its commitment
to considering this matter, with a view to making a decision, without prejudging the outcome, at the main part of its
seventy-fifth session;
Thematic cluster III: Regional offices, offices in support of political processes and other missions
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
16. Recalls paragraph 28 of section XIV of its resolution 73/279 A, and decides to retain one position of
Finance and Budget Assistant (Local level) as a general temporary assistance position until 31 December 2020;
17. Decides to further reduce resources by 77,100 dollars;
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
18. Decides to further reduce resources by 700,000 dollars;
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
19. Takes note of paragraph 19 of the report of the Advisory Committee,126 and decides to establish one
position of Electoral Officer (P-4) in New York in the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs;
20. Decides to further reduce resources by 1,176,100 dollars;
United Nations support for the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
21. Decides to further reduce resources by 43,000 dollars;
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
22. Decides to further reduce resources by 42,300 dollars;
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
23. Decides to establish one position of Contract Management Officer (National Professional Officer);
24. Also decides to further reduce resources by 35,300 dollars;
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
25. Decides to further reduce resources by 123,800 dollars;
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
26. Decides to further reduce resources by 430,800 dollars;
_______________
126

A/74/7/Add.4.

1103

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement
27. Decides to further reduce resources by 794,000 dollars;
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
28. Takes note of the request of the Secretary-General, and decides to establish a position of Principal Human
Rights Officer (D-1) as a general temporary assistance position;
29. Decides to further reduce resources by 177,600 dollars;
30. Approves the budgets in the amount of 710,210,400 dollars for the 39 continuing special political missions
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council and an amount of 1,424,400 dollars for the share of
special political missions in the budget of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda, for 2020, of which
639,877,900 has been included under section 3, Political affairs, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;
31. Decides to appropriate an additional amount of 71,756,900, dollars under section 3, Political affairs, of the
programme budget for 2020 for the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement and the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, under the procedures provided for in paragraph 11 of annex I to resolution 41/213
of 19 December 1986;
32. Also decides to appropriate the related staff assessment portion in the amount of 2,768,400 dollars under
section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff
assessment, of the proposed programme budget for 2020;
XIX
Gross jointly financed budget of the Joint Inspection Unit
Approves the gross budget for the Joint Inspection Unit for 2020 in the amount of 7,049,000 dollars;
XX
Gross jointly financed budget of the International Civil Service Commission
Approves the gross budget for the International Civil Service Commission for 2020 in the amount of 9,729,700
dollars;
XXI
Gross jointly financed budget of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination
Notes the gross budget for the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination for 2020 in the
amount of 3,192,200 dollars;
XXII
Gross jointly financed budget of the Department of Safety and Security
Approves the gross jointly financed budget of the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat for 2020
in the amount of 139,658,100 dollars, broken down as follows:
(a)

Field Security Operations: 124,169,400 dollars;

(b)

Security and Safety Services at the United Nations Office at Vienna: 15,488,700 dollars;

XXIII
Effects of changes in rates of exchange and inflation
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the revised estimates resulting from changes in rates
of exchange and inflation127 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,128
_______________
127
128

1104

A/74/585.
A/74/7/Add.31.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Takes note of the revised estimates arising from recosting owing to changes in the rates of exchange and
inflation;
XXIV
Contingency fund
Notes that a balance of 8,200 dollars remains in the contingency fund.
RESOLUTIONS 74/264 A – C
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/614, para. 60)

74/264. Programme budget for 2020
A
Budget appropriations for 2020
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for 2020:
1. Appropriations totalling 3,073,830,500 United States dollars are hereby approved for the following
purposes:
Amount
(United States
dollars)

Section
Part I. Overall policymaking, direction and coordination
1

Overall policymaking, direction and coordination

77 087 600

2

General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management

326 641 800

Subtotal, part I

403 729 400

Part II. Political affairs
3

Political affairs

773 224 100

4

Disarmament

13 245 000

5

Peacekeeping operations

52 602 800

6

Peaceful uses of outer space

3 921 300

Subtotal, part II

842 993 200

Part III. International justice and law
7

International Court of Justice

28 145 500

8

Legal affairs

58 453 700

Subtotal, part III

86 599 200

Part IV. International cooperation for development
9

Economic and social affairs

83 293 400

10

Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States

5 886 200

11

United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development

7 985 900

1105

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Amount
(United States
dollars)

Section
12

Trade and development

68 087 900

13

International Trade Centre

18 861 800

14

Environment

23 364 300

15

Human settlements

12 508 400

16

International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice

21 627 100

17

UN-Women

9 741 400

Subtotal, part IV

251 356 400

Part V. Regional cooperation for development
18

Economic and social development in Africa

81 888 100

19

Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific

55 526 800

20

Economic development in Europe

33 290 000

21

Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean

57 591 800

22

Economic and social development in Western Asia

36 518 000

23

Regular programme of technical cooperation

35 577 600

Subtotal, part V

300 392 300

Part VI. Human rights and humanitarian affairs
24

Human rights

115 119 300

25

International protection, durable solutions and assistance to refugees

40 098 900

26

Palestine refugees

32 365 500

27

Humanitarian assistance

25 124 000

Subtotal, part VI

212 707 700

Part VII. Global communications
28

Global communications

94 692 400

Subtotal, part VII

94 692 400

Part VIII. Common support services
29A

Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance

52 921 400

29B

Department of Operational Support

93 025 600

29C

Office of Information and Communications Technology

49 959 800

29E

Administration, Geneva

69 736 400

29F

Administration, Vienna

18 088 400

29G

Administration, Nairobi

18 048 800

Subtotal, part VIII

301 780 400

Part IX. Internal oversight
30

1106

Internal oversight

20 509 900

Subtotal, part IX

20 509 900

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Amount
(United States
dollars)

Section
Part X. Jointly financed administrative activities and special expenses

–

31

Jointly financed administrative activities

6 245 800

32

Special expenses

76 163 600

Subtotal, part X

82 409 400

Part XI. Capital expenditures
33

Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance

71 046 100

Subtotal, part XI

71 046 100

Part XII. Safety and security
34

Safety and security

124 181 700

Subtotal, part XII

124 181 700

Part XIII. Development Account
35

Development Account

14 199 400

Subtotal, part XIII

14 199 400

Part XIV. Staff assessment
36

Staff assessment

267 233 000

Subtotal, part XIV

267 233 000

Total

3 073 830 500

2. The Secretary-General shall be authorized to transfer credits between sections of the budget, with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
3. In addition to the appropriations approved under paragraph 1 above, an amount of 75,000 dollars is
appropriated for 2020 from the accumulated income of the Library Endowment Fund for the purchase of books,
periodicals, maps and library equipment and for such other expenses of the Library at the Palais des Nations in Geneva
as are in accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment.
B
Income estimates for 2020
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for 2020:
1. Estimates of income other than assessments on Member States totalling 295,590,700 United States dollars
are approved as follows:
Amount
Income section

(United States dollars)

1.

Income from staff assessment

273 171 400

2.

General income

21 744 000

3.

Services to the public
Total

675 300
295 590 700

1107

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. The income from staff assessment shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955;
3. Direct expenses of the United Nations Postal Administration, services to visitors, the sale of statistical
products, catering operations and related services, garage operations, television services and the sale of publications
not provided for under the budget appropriations shall be charged against the income derived from those activities.
C
Financing of appropriations for the year 2020
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for 2020:
1. Budget appropriations consisting of 3,073,830,500 United States dollars approved for 2020 by the General
Assembly in paragraph 1 of resolution A above, plus 61,854,500 dollars, being the increase in appropriations for the
biennium 2018–2019 approved by the Assembly in its resolutions 73/279 B of 15 April 2019 and 73/306 of 3 July
2019, shall be financed in accordance with regulations 3.1 and 3.2 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the
United Nations,129 as follows:
(a) 25,884,300 dollars, consisting of 22,419,300 dollars for the estimated income other than staff assessment
income approved for 2020 under resolution B above, plus 3,465,000 dollars, being the increase in income other than
staff assessment income for the biennium 2018–2019 approved by the Assembly in its resolution 74/250 B of
27 December 2019;
(b)

25,192,422 dollars credited from the cancellation of prior-period obligations for the biennium 2016–2017;

(c) 3,084,608,300 dollars, being the assessment on Member States in accordance with Assembly resolution
73/271 of 22 December 2018 on the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations;
2. There shall be set off against the assessment on Member States, in accordance with the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in
the total amount of 279,273,000 dollars, consisting of:
(a) 273,171,400 dollars, being the estimated staff assessment income approved for 2020 in paragraph 1 of
resolution B above;
(b) 912,500 dollars, being the increase in income from staff assessment for the biennium 2018–2019 approved
by the Assembly in its resolutions 73/279 B and 73/306;
(c) 5,189,100 dollars, being the increase in income from staff assessment for the biennium 2018–2019
approved by the Assembly in its resolution 74/250 B.
RESOLUTION 74/265
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/614, para. 60)

74/265. Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for 2020
The General Assembly
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and subject to the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations130
_______________
129
130

1108

ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2013/4/Amend.1.
ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2013/4/Amend.1.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and the provisions of paragraph 3 below, to enter into commitments in the year 2020 to meet unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses arising either during or subsequent to the year, provided that the concurrence of the Advisory
Committee shall not be necessary for:
(a) Such commitments not exceeding a total of 8 million United States dollars as the Secretary-General
certifies relate to the maintenance of peace and security;
(b) Such commitments as the President of the International Court of Justice certifies relate to expenses
occasioned by:
(i) The designation of ad hoc judges (Statute of the International Court of Justice, Article 31), not exceeding
a total of 100,000 dollars;
(ii) The calling of witnesses and the appointment of experts (Statute, Article 50) and the appointment of
assessors (Statute, Article 30), not exceeding a total of 25,000 dollars;
(iii) The maintenance in office for the completion of cases of judges who have not been re-elected (Statute,
Article 13, paragraph 3), not exceeding a total of 20,000 dollars;
(iv) The payment of pensions and travel and removal expenses of retiring judges and travel and removal
expenses and installation grants of members of the Court (Statute, Article 32, paragraph 7), not exceeding a total
of 205,000 dollars;
(v) The work of the Court or its Chambers away from The Hague (Statute, Article 22), not exceeding a total
of 12,500 dollars;
(c) Such commitments not exceeding a total of 500,000 dollars in the year 2020 as the Secretary-General
certifies are required for security measures pursuant to section XI, paragraph 6, of General Assembly resolution
59/276 of 23 December 2004;
2. Resolves that the Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory Committee and to the General Assembly
at its seventy-sixth session all commitments made under the provisions of the present resolution, together with the
circumstances relating thereto, and shall submit supplementary estimates to the Assembly in respect of such
commitments;
3. Decides that, for the year 2020, if a decision of the Security Council results in the need for the SecretaryGeneral to enter into commitments relating to the maintenance of peace and security in an amount exceeding
10 million dollars in respect of the decision, that matter shall be brought to the General Assembly, or, if the Assembly
is suspended or not in session, a resumed or special session of the Assembly shall be convened by the SecretaryGeneral to consider the matter.
RESOLUTION 74/266
Adopted at the 52nd (resumed) plenary meeting, on 27 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/74/614, para. 60)

74/266. Working Capital Fund for 2020
The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. The Working Capital Fund shall be established for the year 2020 in the amount of 150 million United
States dollars;
2. Member States shall make advances to the Working Capital Fund in accordance with the scale of
assessments adopted by the General Assembly for contributions of Member States to the budget for 2020;
3.

There shall be set off against this allocation of advances:

(a) Credits to Member States resulting from transfers made in 1959 and 1960 from the surplus account to the
Working Capital Fund in an adjusted amount of 1,025,092 dollars;

1109

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(b) Cash advances paid by Member States to the Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2018–2019 in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 72/265 of 24 December 2017;
4. Should the credits and advances paid by any Member State to the Working Capital Fund for the biennium
2018–2019 exceed the amount of that Member State’s advance under the provisions of paragraph 2 above, the excess
shall be set off against the amount of the contributions payable by the Member State in respect of the year 2020;
5.

The Secretary-General is authorized to advance from the Working Capital Fund:

(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending the receipt of contributions;
sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts from contributions are available for that purpose;
(b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments that may be duly authorized under the provisions
of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, in particular resolution 74/265 of 27 December 2019 relating to
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the year 2020; the Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget
estimates for reimbursing the Working Capital Fund;
(c) Such sums as may be necessary to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous self-liquidating
purchases and activities, which, together with net sums outstanding for the same purpose, do not exceed 200,000
dollars; advances in excess of 200,000 dollars may be made with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
(d) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee, such sums as may be required to finance payments
of advance insurance premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond the end of the year in which payment
is made; the Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget estimates of each year, during the life of the related
policies, to cover the charges applicable to each year;
(e) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending the accumulation of credits; such advances shall be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund;
6. Should the provision in paragraph 1 above prove inadequate to meet the purposes normally related to the
Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is authorized to utilize, in the year 2020, cash from special funds and
accounts in his custody, under the conditions approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 1341 (XIII) of
13 December 1958, or the proceeds of loans authorized by the Assembly.

1110

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

74/180.

Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts .................................................................................1112

74/181.

Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission ....................................................1113

74/182.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its fifty-second session ..................................................................................................................................1119

74/183.

Model Legislative Provisions on Public-Private Partnerships of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law ...............................................................................................................................1124

74/184.

Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law ...............................................................................................................................1125

74/185.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law ....................................................................................................................1126

74/186.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-first session .....................................1130

74/187.

Crimes against humanity ...................................................................................................................................1135

74/188.

Diplomatic protection ........................................................................................................................................1135

74/189.

Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss
in the case of such harm ....................................................................................................................................1136

74/190.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization .........................................................................................................................1137

74/191.

The rule of law at the national and international levels .....................................................................................1140

74/192.

The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction .................................................................1143

74/193.

The law of transboundary aquifers ....................................................................................................................1144

74/194.

Measures to eliminate international terrorism ...................................................................................................1145

74/195.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country ..........................................................................1150

74/196.

Observer status for the Group of Seven Plus in the General Assembly.............................................................1152

1111

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/180
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/421, para. 10)1

74/180. Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001, the annex to which contains the text of the articles on
responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, recalling also the report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its fifty-third session,2 and recalling further its resolutions 59/35 of 2 December 2004, 62/61 of
6 December 2007, 65/19 of 6 December 2010, 68/104 of 16 December 2013 and 71/133 of 13 December 2016
commending the articles to the attention of Governments,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts is of major importance in
relations between States,
Noting with appreciation the compilation of decisions of international courts, tribunals and other bodies referring
to the articles, prepared by the Secretary-General,3
Noting the discussion on whether Member States should examine all procedural options regarding possible
action on the basis of the articles,
Noting also the informal substantive dialogue among Member States during the period between the seventyfirst and the seventy-fourth sessions of the General Assembly,
1. Continues to acknowledge the importance and usefulness of the articles on responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts,4 and commends them once again to the attention of Governments, without prejudice to
the question of their future adoption or other appropriate action;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments to submit further written comments on any future
action regarding the articles;
3. Takes note of the comments and observations of Governments5 and the discussions held in the Sixth
Committee, at the fifty-sixth, fifty-ninth, sixty-second, sixty-fifth, sixty-eighth, seventy-first and seventy-fourth
sessions of the General Assembly, on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts;
4. Acknowledges that a growing number of decisions of international courts, tribunals and other bodies refer
to the articles;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to update the technical report listing, in a tabular format, the references to
the articles contained in the compilation of decisions of international courts, tribunals and other bodies referring to the
articles prepared since 2001, as well as references to the articles made in submissions presented by Member States
before international courts, tribunals and other bodies since 2001, and further requests the Secretary-General to submit
such material during its seventy-seventh session;
6. Acknowledges the possibility of requesting, at its seventy-seventh session, the Secretary-General to
provide the General Assembly with information on all procedural options regarding possible action on the basis of
the articles, without prejudice to the question of whether such possible action is appropriate;
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Brazil on behalf of the Bureau.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (A/56/10 and A/56/10/Corr.1).
3
See A/62/62, A/62/62/Corr.1, A/62/62/Add.1, A/65/76, A/68/72, A/71/80, A/71/80/Add.1 and A/74/83.
4
Resolution 56/83, annex.
5
See A/62/63, A/62/63/Add.1, A/65/96, A/65/96/Add.1, A/68/69, A/68/69/Add.1, A/71/79 and A/74/156.
1
2

1112

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

7. Requests the Secretary-General to update the compilation of decisions of international courts, tribunals
and other bodies referring to the articles and to invite Governments to submit information on their practice in this
regard, and also requests the Secretary-General to submit such material well in advance of its seventy-seventh session;
8. Acknowledges the constructive dialogue in the context of the working group of the Sixth Committee
during the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, and encourages all Member States to continue the
substantive dialogue on an informal basis during the period prior to the seventy-seventh session of the Assembly;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session the item entitled
“Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts” and to further examine, within the framework of a working
group of the Sixth Committee and with a view to taking a decision, the question of a convention on responsibility of
States for internationally wrongful acts or other appropriate action on the basis of the articles.
RESOLUTION 74/181
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/422, para. 8)6

74/181. Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/281 of 29 March 2005, in which it endorsed the recommendation of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations that the Secretary-General make available to the United Nations
membership a comprehensive report on the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations,7
Recalling also that the Secretary-General, on 24 March 2005, transmitted to the President of the General
Assembly a report of his Adviser concerning sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel,8
Recalling further its resolution 59/300 of 22 June 2005, in which it endorsed the recommendation of the Special
Committee that a group of legal experts be established to provide advice on the best way to proceed so as to ensure
that the original intent of the Charter of the United Nations can be achieved, namely, that United Nations staff and
experts on mission would never be effectively exempt from the consequences of criminal acts committed at their duty
station, nor unjustly penalized, without due process,9
Underlining the importance of a zero-tolerance policy for misconduct and the commission of crimes by United
Nations officials and experts on mission,
Recognizing the valuable contribution of United Nations officials and experts on mission towards the fulfilment
of the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Honouring the heroic work of tens of thousands of United Nations officials and experts on mission,
underscoring that the United Nations should not let the actions of a few tarnish the achievements of the whole, and
commending the Member States that have taken steps to prevent, investigate and hold accountable their personnel for
criminal conduct, such as that involving sexual exploitation and abuse,
Reaffirming the need to promote and ensure respect for the principles and rules of international law,
Reaffirming also that the present resolution is without prejudice to the privileges and immunities of United
Nations officials and experts on mission and the United Nations under international law,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the Bureau.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part one, chap. III, sect. D, para. 56.
8
See A/59/710.
9
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1), part two, chap. II, sect. N, para. 40 (a).
6
7

1113

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Reaffirming further the obligation of United Nations officials and experts on mission to respect the national laws
of the host State, as well as the right of the host State to exercise, where applicable, its criminal jurisdiction, in accordance
with the relevant rules of international law and agreements governing operations of United Nations missions,
Underlining the importance of appropriate training of United Nations officials and experts on mission to prevent
any criminal conduct,
Deeply concerned by reports of criminal conduct, and conscious that such conduct, if not investigated and, as
appropriate, prosecuted, would create the negative impression that United Nations officials and experts on mission
operate with impunity,
Reaffirming the need to ensure that all United Nations officials and experts on mission function in a manner that
preserves the image, credibility, impartiality and integrity of the United Nations,
Emphasizing that crimes committed by such persons are unacceptable and have a detrimental effect on the
fulfilment of the mandate of the United Nations, in particular with respect to the relations between the United Nations
and the local population in the host country,
Conscious of the critical importance of providing expeditious support and protecting the rights of victims of
criminal conduct perpetrated by United Nations officials and experts on mission, as well as of ensuring adequate
protection for witnesses, and recalling the adoption of its resolution 62/214 of 21 December 2007 on the United
Nations Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United
Nations Staff and Related Personnel, as well as of its resolution 71/297 of 30 June 2017 on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and abuse,
Emphasizing that genuine accountability rests on the cooperation of the Member States,
Emphasizing also the need to enhance international cooperation to ensure the criminal accountability of United
Nations officials and experts on mission,
Taking note of the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations on uniting our strengths for
peace: politics, partnership and people,10 and of the subsequent report of the Secretary-General entitled “The future
of United Nations peace operations: implementation of the recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations”,11
Taking note also of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on fraud prevention, detection and response in United
Nations system organizations,12 the Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption Framework of the United Nations Secretariat of
September 201613 and the report of the Secretary-General on his practice in disciplinary matters and cases of possible
criminal behaviour for 2018,14
Recalling its resolution 61/29 of 4 December 2006, by which it established the Ad Hoc Committee on criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission,
Having considered at its previous sessions the report of the Group of Legal Experts established by the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to its resolution 59/30015 and the reports of the Ad Hoc Committee,16 as well as the note by the
Secretariat17 and the reports of the Secretary-General18 on criminal accountability of United Nations officials and
experts on mission,
_______________
See A/70/95-S/2015/446.
A/70/357-S/2015/682.
12
A/71/731.
13
ST/IC/2016/25, annex.
14
A/74/64.
15
See A/60/980.
16
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 54 (A/62/54); and ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement
No. 54 (A/63/54).
17
A/62/329.
18
A/63/260, A/63/260/Add.1, A/64/183, A/64/183/Add.1, A/65/185, A/66/174, A/66/174/Add.1, A/67/213, A/68/173, A/69/210, A/70/208,
A/72/121, A/72/126, A/72/205, A/73/128, A/73/129 and A/73/155.
10
11

1114

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling its resolutions 62/63 of 6 December 2007, 63/119 of 11 December 2008, 64/110 of 16 December
2009, 65/20 of 6 December 2010, 66/93 of 9 December 2011, 67/88 of 14 December 2012, 68/105 of 16 December
2013, 69/114 of 10 December 2014, 70/114 of 14 December 2015, 71/134 of 13 December 2016, 72/112 of
7 December 2017 and 73/196 of 20 December 2018,
Recalling also its decision that, bearing in mind its resolutions 62/63 and 70/114, the consideration of the report
of the Group of Legal Experts, in particular its legal aspects, taking into account the views of Member States and also
noting the inputs by the Secretariat, would be continued during its seventy-fifth session in the framework of a working
group of the Sixth Committee,
Convinced of the continuing need for the United Nations and its Member States to urgently take strong and
effective steps to ensure the criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission in the interest
of justice,
Emphasizing that the development of harmonized United Nations standards of investigation of crimes allegedly
committed by United Nations officials and experts on mission can be critical to strengthening the United Nations
system of accountability,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General,19 in particular annexes I and II to the report submitted
pursuant to paragraphs 31 and 32 of its resolution 73/196,20 which provide additional information on the nature of the
allegations and information received from States on all referrals since 1 July 2007 and notifications received from
States with respect to investigations or prosecutions of crimes allegedly committed by United Nations officials or
experts on mission since 1 July 2016;
2. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse,21 as well as the findings of the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat in its
evaluation report of 15 May 2015, including on the issue of underreporting;22
3. Welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to refer credible allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse to the Member State of the United Nations officials or experts on mission for appropriate action;
4. Also welcomes the work of the Special Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse, and requests the Secretary-General to regularly update Member States on progress with
respect to the implementation of the mandate of the Special Coordinator;
5. Expresses its concern with respect to all alleged crimes on the part of United Nations officials and experts
on mission, including allegations of fraud, corruption and other financial crimes, and in that regard welcomes the
reaffirmation by the Secretary-General that there will be no tolerance for any corruption at the United Nations;
6. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that his zero-tolerance policy for criminal activities,
such as sexual exploitation and abuse, fraud and corruption, is made known to all United Nations officials and experts
on mission at all levels, especially those in managerial positions, and is fully implemented in a coherent and
coordinated manner throughout the United Nations, including funds and programmes, and calls upon all entities in
the United Nations to inform and to cooperate fully with the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in all cases
involving allegations that a crime may have been committed by a United Nations official or expert on mission;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure greater quality and consistency in investigations by investigative
entities of the Organization through the development of harmonized standards of investigation, including verification
of allegations and information received;
8. Expresses its concern with respect to the low rate of response from States to referred allegations and to
requests for information on their provisions addressing the establishment of jurisdiction over crimes, as urged in its
_______________
A/74/142 and A/74/145.
A/74/145.
21
A/73/744.
22
“Evaluation of the enforcement and remedial assistance efforts for sexual exploitation and abuse by the United Nations and related
personnel in peacekeeping operations”, as reissued on 12 June 2015.
19
20

1115

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

resolution 73/196, and in particular expresses its deep concern with regard to the significant number of instances
where States to which allegations have been referred have failed to advise the United Nations of any steps taken in
response to such referrals, and also with regard to the failure to acknowledge such referrals;
9. Strongly urges States to take all appropriate measures to ensure that crimes by United Nations officials
and experts on mission do not go unpunished and that the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice, without
prejudice to the privileges and immunities of such persons and the United Nations under international law, and in
accordance with international human rights standards, including due process;
10. Strongly urges all States to consider establishing, to the extent that they have not yet done so, jurisdiction
over crimes, particularly those of a serious nature, as known in their existing national criminal laws, committed by
their nationals while serving as United Nations officials or experts on mission, at least where the conduct as defined
in the law of the State establishing jurisdiction also constitutes a crime under the laws of the host State, and, further,
urges States and appropriate international organizations to provide technical and other appropriate assistance in
developing such legal measures to States requesting such support;
11. Encourages all States and the United Nations to cooperate with each other in the exchange of information
and in facilitating the conduct of investigations and, as appropriate, the prosecution of United Nations officials and
experts on mission who are alleged to have committed crimes of a serious nature, in accordance with their national
law and applicable United Nations rules and regulations, fully respecting due process rights, as well as to consider
strengthening the capacities of their national authorities to investigate and prosecute such crimes;
12. Encourages all States:
(a) To afford each other assistance in connection with criminal investigations or criminal or extradition
proceedings in respect of crimes of a serious nature committed by United Nations officials and experts on mission,
including assistance in obtaining evidence at their disposal, in accordance with their national law or any treaties or
other arrangements on extradition and mutual legal assistance that may exist between them;
(b) In accordance with their national law, to explore ways and means of facilitating the possible use of
information and material obtained from the United Nations for purposes of criminal proceedings initiated in their
territory for the prosecution of crimes of a serious nature committed by United Nations officials and experts on
mission, bearing in mind due process considerations;
(c) In accordance with their national law, to provide effective protection for victims of, witnesses to and others
who provide information in relation to crimes of a serious nature alleged to have been committed by United Nations
officials and experts on mission and to facilitate access of victims to victim assistance programmes, without prejudice
to the rights of the alleged offender, including those relating to due process;
(d) In accordance with their national law, to explore ways and means of responding adequately to requests
by host States for support and assistance in order to enhance their capacity to conduct effective investigations in
respect of crimes of a serious nature alleged to have been committed by United Nations officials and experts on
mission;
13. Requests the Secretariat to continue to ensure that requests to Member States seeking personnel to serve
as experts on mission make States aware of the expectation that persons who serve in that capacity should meet high
standards in their conduct and behaviour and be aware that certain conduct may amount to a crime for which they
may be held accountable, and also requests the Secretariat to take all appropriate measures to continue to ensure that
all such personnel, as well as United Nations officials, are properly vetted by the States contributing personnel and by
the Organization for any prior misconduct while serving with the United Nations;
14. Urges the Secretary-General to make Member States contributing personnel to serve as experts on mission
aware of the necessity of providing appropriate conduct-related training prior to deployment, and also urges the
Secretary-General to continue to take such practical measures as are within his authority to strengthen existing training
on United Nations standards of conduct, including through predeployment and in-mission induction training for
United Nations officials and experts on mission;
15. Reiterates its decision that, bearing in mind its resolutions 62/63 and 63/119, the consideration of the report
of the Group of Legal Experts,15 in particular its legal aspects, taking into account the views of Member States and
1116

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

also noting the inputs by the Secretariat, shall be continued during its seventy-fifth session in the framework of a
working group of the Sixth Committee, and, for that purpose, invites further comments from Member States on that
report, including on the question of future action;
16. Takes note of the briefings by the Secretariat during the seventieth to seventy-fourth sessions, and decides
to organize another briefing at the seventy-fifth session with a view to furthering discussion on measures that could
be taken to help to ensure the accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission and prevent future
crimes;
17. Recognizes the efforts of Member States towards devising concrete proposals to ensure the accountability
of United Nations officials and experts on mission, and encourages all Member States to redouble their efforts
informally during the intersessional period, with the support of the Secretariat, in particular through the organization
of informal briefings;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to bring credible allegations that reveal that a crime may have been
committed by a United Nations official or expert on mission to the attention of the States against whose nationals such
allegations are made and to request from those States updates, as set out in paragraph 20 below, on the status of their
efforts to investigate and, as appropriate, prosecute crimes of a serious nature, as well as the types of appropriate
assistance that States may wish to receive from the Secretariat for the purposes of such investigations and
prosecutions;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to seek, from all States that have notified the United Nations with
respect to investigations or prosecutions of crimes allegedly committed by United Nations officials or experts on
mission, updates on the status of their investigations or prosecutions, provided that this would not prejudice national
investigations or national proceedings;
20. Urges the States referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above to provide to the Secretary-General periodic
updates on their handling of the allegations, in order to demonstrate that Member States are taking steps to ensure
accountability for crimes committed by United Nations officials and experts on mission, in particular by informing
the Secretary-General of whether any disciplinary or criminal proceedings have been brought and of the outcome of
any such proceedings or the reasons for not initiating them, provided that this would not be contrary to national laws
or prejudice national investigations or national proceedings, and requests the Secretary-General to continue and
undertake the necessary follow-up with the States concerned, by all appropriate forms of communication, with a view
to encouraging those States to respond;
21. Encourages all States to provide to the Secretary-General a point of contact in order to strengthen and
enable efficient communication and cooperation between the United Nations and Member States, and requests the
Secretary-General to maintain and update a list of points of contact;
22. Requests the United Nations, when its investigations into allegations suggest that crimes of a serious nature
may have been committed by United Nations officials or experts on mission, to consider any appropriate measures
that may facilitate the possible use of information and material for purposes of criminal proceedings initiated by States,
bearing in mind due process considerations;
23. Encourages the United Nations, when allegations against United Nations officials or experts on mission
are determined by a United Nations administrative investigation to be unfounded, to take appropriate measures, in the
interests of the Organization, to restore the credibility and the reputation of such officials and experts on mission;
24. Urges the United Nations to continue to cooperate with States exercising jurisdiction in order to provide
them, within the framework of the relevant rules of international law and agreements governing activities of the United
Nations, with information and material for purposes of criminal proceedings initiated by States;
25. Recalls the Secretary-General’s bulletin on protection against retaliation for reporting misconduct and for
cooperating with duly authorized audits or investigations,23 underlines the importance of a culture in which individuals
are encouraged and supported by the Organization to report alleged crimes, emphasizes that the United Nations, in
_______________
23

ST/SGB/2017/2/Rev.1.

1117

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

accordance with the applicable rules of the Organization, should take no action that would retaliate against or
intimidate United Nations officials and experts on mission who report allegations concerning crimes of a serious
nature committed by United Nations officials and experts on mission, and stresses the need for appropriate safeguards
against retaliation;
26. Stresses the critical importance of ensuring that victims of criminal conduct perpetrated by United Nations
officials and experts on mission are made aware of available victim assistance and support, including from a gender
perspective, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Sixth Committee on available victim assistance and
support during the briefing at its seventy-fifth session;
27. Takes note with appreciation of the information provided by Governments in response to its resolutions
62/63, 63/119, 64/110, 65/20, 66/93, 67/88, 68/105, 69/114, 70/114, 71/134, 72/112 and 73/196, and urges
Governments to continue to take the measures necessary for the implementation of those resolutions, including their
provisions addressing the establishment of jurisdiction over crimes, particularly those of a serious nature, as known
in their existing national criminal laws, committed by their nationals while serving as United Nations officials or
experts on mission, as well as cooperation among States, and to provide specific details thereon, in particular with
respect to paragraph 10 above, in the information provided to the Secretary-General;
28. Recalls its request in resolution 73/196 for Governments to provide specific details on the measures taken,
as necessary, for the implementation of its resolutions 62/63, 63/119, 64/110, 65/20, 66/93, 67/88, 68/105, 69/114,
70/114, 71/134 and 72/112, and notes that, in response to those resolutions, 142 submissions and 16 questionnaire
responses were received from 61 Member States between 6 December 2007 and 25 June 2019;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to keep up to date the online compilation of the full submissions and
questionnaire responses as well as the online summary table of national provisions, based on information received
from Member States since 2007, regarding the establishment of jurisdiction over their nationals whenever they serve
as United Nations officials or experts on mission, in relation to crimes as known in their existing national criminal
laws, particularly those of a serious nature, and also requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report containing a
general overview of national provisions, based on the information received, for the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly, provided that sufficient information has been received from Member States;
30. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General setting out updates to all relevant existing policies and
procedures of the United Nations system regarding the allegations referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above,24 and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on any updates to those policies and procedures and to develop
recommendations to help to ensure that such policies and procedures relating to the reporting, investigation, referral
and follow-up of credible allegations revealing that a crime may have been committed by a United Nations official or
expert on mission are coherent, systematic and coordinated throughout the United Nations system;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, in particular with respect to paragraphs 10, 12, 13, 15, 18, 20 and 30 above,
as well as any practical problems in its implementation, on the basis of information received from Governments and
the Secretariat;
32. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve reporting methods and expand the scope of
reporting by providing information on the allegations referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above, as well as information
received pursuant to paragraph 20 since 1 July 2007, limited to the United Nations entity involved, the year of referral,
the dates and methods of follow-up requests from the Secretary-General, information about the type of crime and a
summary of allegations, the status of investigations, prosecutorial and disciplinary actions taken, including with
respect to individuals concerned who have left the duty mission or the service of the United Nations, any requests for
waivers of immunity, as applicable, and information on jurisdictional, evidentiary or other obstacles to prosecution,
while protecting the privacy of the victims as well as respecting the privacy and rights of those subject to the
allegations;
33. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission”.
_______________
24

1118

A/74/142.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/182
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/423, para. 12)25

74/182. Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its fifty-second session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of
the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of international trade law, in
reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade, especially those affecting developing countries,
would contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a basis of equality, equity,
common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby,
to peace, stability and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission,26
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of international trade law without
adequate coordination with the Commission might lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in
keeping with the aim of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization of
international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of international trade law, to coordinate legal activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts,
including among organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency, consistency and
coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat,
to maintain close cooperation with other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;26

2. Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the Model Legislative Provisions on
Public-Private Partnerships with an accompanying legislative guide,27 the Model Law on Enterprise Group
Insolvency and its guide to enactment,28 the Practice Guide to the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law Model Law on Secured Transactions29 and a text on the obligations of directors of enterprise group companies
in the period approaching insolvency,30 to be added to part four of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;31
3. Also commends the Commission for the finalization of the Notes on the Main Issues of Cloud Computing
Contracts prepared by the secretariat and for approving them for publication, including in the form of a mobile devicefriendly online tool;32
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Lithuania, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine and United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
26
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17).
27
Ibid., chap. III, sect. C, and annex I.
28
Ibid., chap. VI, sect. A, and annex II.
29
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. C.
30
Ibid., chap. VI, sect. B.
31
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.13.V.10.
32
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), chap. VIII, sect. C.
25

1119

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4. Welcomes the signing ceremony, held in Singapore on 7 August 2019, for the United Nations
Convention on International Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation (Singapore Convention on
Mediation), adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 73/198 of 20 December 2018, and invites
Governments and regional economic integration organizations that have not yet done so to consider becoming a
party to the Convention;
5. Notes with satisfaction the contributions from the Fund for International Development of the Organization
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and from the European Commission, which allow the operation of the
repository of published information under the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration,33 and
that the Commission reiterated its strong and unanimous opinion that the secretariat of the Commission should
continue to operate the transparency repository, which constitutes a central feature both of the Rules on Transparency
and of the United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration (Mauritius
Convention on Transparency);34
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to operate, through the secretariat of the Commission, the
repository of published information in accordance with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, as a pilot project until
the end of 2020, to be funded entirely by voluntary contributions, and to keep the General Assembly informed of
developments regarding the funding and budgetary situation of the transparency repository based on its pilot
operation;
7. Takes note with interest of the progress made by the Commission in its work in the areas of micro-, small
and medium-sized enterprises, dispute settlement, investor-State dispute settlement reform, electronic commerce,
insolvency law and the judicial sale of ships,35 and encourages the Commission to continue to move forward
efficiently to achieve tangible work outcomes in those areas;
8. Notes with interest the authorization for the Secretariat to hold a colloquium on civil asset tracing and
recovery and a colloquium on applicable law in insolvency proceedings, with the goal of advancing the exploratory
work on those topics, as well as other decisions taken by the Commission on future work, notes that the
Commission agreed to request the Secretariat to proceed with its preparatory work on warehouse receipts and to
convene a colloquium with other organizations having relevant expertise, with a view to considering the questions
of scope and nature of work discussed at the fifty-second session and possibly advancing the preparation of initial
draft materials, to conduct exploratory and preparatory work on legal issues which relate to the digital economy
and digital trade, including on dispute resolution in relation to high-technology disputes, and to start exploratory
work on railway consignment notes, as well as to start preparing draft materials on access to credit for micro-,
small and medium-sized enterprises,36 and further notes that the Commission will further consider the draft United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law mediation rules37 and the draft United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law notes on mediation38 at its next session, in 2020, following further comments and
consideration from States and other interested relevant organizations, and any appropriate revisions to the draft
texts;
9. Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body within the United Nations
system in the field of international trade law, aimed at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities
of international and regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, including on legal issues
relating to the digital economy, and at promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field,
and in this regard appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate their activities with those
of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
modernization and harmonization of international trade law;

_______________
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), annex I.
Resolution 69/116, annex.
35
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), chap. XV, sect. A.
36
Ibid., sect. C.
37
A/CN.9/986.
38
A/CN.9/987.
33
34

1120

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

10. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the work of the Commission
concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the field of international trade law reform and development,
and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through its secretariat, its technical
cooperation and assistance programme, in that respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with
State and non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and facilitate the effective
implementation of legal standards resulting from its work, and notes in that regard the round table on technical
assistance held during the fifty-second session of the Commission, which brought together governmental and
intergovernmental organizations active in international development assistance to explore synergies and discuss
ways to further cooperate with the secretariat of the Commission in implementing sound reforms of international
trade law;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities and for providing assistance with legislative drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the
attention of the Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions enabled the technical cooperation and
assistance activities to take place, and appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system,
organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law trust fund for symposiums and, where appropriate, for the financing of special projects and
otherwise to assist the secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and other bodies responsible for
development assistance, such as the World Bank and regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their
bilateral aid programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the Commission and to
cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities with those of the Commission in the light of the
relevance and importance of the work and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at
the national and international levels and for the implementation of the international development agenda, including
the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;39
(e) Recalls its resolutions stressing the need to strengthen support to Member States, upon their request, in the
domestic implementation of their respective international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and
capacity-building, and welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure greater coordination and coherence
among United Nations entities and with donors and recipients;
11. Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and methods of work of the Commission,
including transparent and inclusive deliberations, taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in
annex III to the report on the work of its forty-third session,40 requests the Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings of the
Commission and of its working groups, a reminder of those rules of procedure and methods of work with a view to
ensuring the high quality of the work of the Commission and encouraging the assessment of its instruments, and
recalls in this regard its previous resolutions related to this matter;
12. Notes that the Commission, during its fifty-second session, welcomed improvements in the organization
of that session made by the Secretariat pursuant to a joint comprehensive proposal concerning the methods of work
of the Commission submitted by several Member States at the fifty-first session of the Commission41 and confirmed
its understanding that two-week sessions would generally be sufficient and that the duration of each annual session
was to be determined on a case-by-case basis depending on the expected workload;42
13. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Regional Centre
for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of Korea, towards providing capacity-building and technical assistance
_______________
Resolution 70/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
41
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/73/17), chap. XVIII, sect. A.
42
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), paras. 316 and 331.
39
40

1121

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

services to States in the Asia-Pacific region, including to international and regional organizations, expresses its
appreciation to the Republic of Korea and China, whose contributions enabled continuing operation of the Regional
Centre, notes that the continuation of the regional presence relies entirely on extrabudgetary resources, including but
not limited to voluntary contributions from States, welcomes expressions of interest from other States in hosting
regional centres of the Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed of
developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in particular their funding and budgetary situation;
14. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and
individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust fund established to provide travel assistance to developing
countries that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, in
order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and to increase expert representation from developing
countries at sessions of the Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in
those countries to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment for business, trade and investment;
15. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in the sessions of the Commission and
its working groups, to continue, in the competent Main Committee during the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly, its consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries, at their request and in
consultation with the Secretary-General, and notes the contributions from the European Union and the Swiss Agency
for Development and Cooperation to the trust fund, which would facilitate the participation of representatives of
developing States in the deliberations of Working Group III;
16. Takes note of a proposal for the enlargement of the membership of the Commission submitted by Israel
and Japan at the fifty-second session of the Commission,43 and that the Commission encouraged its member States to
consult with each other and other interested States on the proposal during the intersessional period and requested the
Secretariat to facilitate those intersessional consultations;44
17. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and effective use of modern private
law standards in international trade are essential for advancing good governance, sustained economic development
and the eradication of poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial relations should be
an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to promote the rule of law at the national and international
levels, including through the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law Unit in
the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
18. Notes the role of the Commission in promoting the rule of law, respective discussions in the Commission
at its fifty-second session,45 and the comments transmitted by the Commission, pursuant to paragraph 20 of General
Assembly resolution 73/207 of 20 December 2018, highlighting the relevance of its current work and of the texts
finalized and adopted at the fifty-second session of the Commission to the promotion of the rule of law and the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals;46
19. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of
24 September 2012, Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal frameworks for
generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development, economic growth and employment, generating
investment and facilitating entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the declaration, Member States
expressed their conviction that the rule of law and development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
20. Also notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 89 of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, adopted by the General Assembly by consensus as
resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015, States endorsed the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed at increasing coordination of and
_______________
Ibid., para. 311.
Ibid., para. 315.
45
Ibid., chap. XX.
46
Ibid., sect. B.
43
44

1122

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

cooperation on legal activities of international and regional organizations active in the field of international trade law
and at promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field;
21. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with resolutions of the General Assembly
on documentation-related matters,47 which, in particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate,
the length of documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the substance of the
documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the mandate and functions of the Commission in the
progressive development and codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect to
the documentation of the Commission;48
22. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission standards and the provision of
summary records of the meetings of the Commission, including committees of the whole established by the
Commission for the duration of its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts;
23. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011 regarding the rotation scheme of
meetings between Vienna and New York;
24. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the work of the Commission for the
global unification and harmonization of international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so
to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and encouraging the use of other
relevant texts;
25. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the collection and dissemination
of case law on Commission texts in the six official languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes
the resource-intensive nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and expand it,
in this regard welcomes the renewed efforts by the Commission and its secretariat towards building partnerships
with interested institutions, and appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system,
organizations, institutions and individuals to assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the
availability and usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles and in securing
the funding required for the coordination and expansion of the system and the establishment, within the secretariat
of the Commission, of a pillar focused on the promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a
uniform manner;
26. Welcomes the continuing work of the Secretariat on digests of case law related to Commission texts,
including their wide dissemination, as well as the continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the
CLOUT system, in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools for the promotion of the
uniform interpretation of international trade law, in particular by building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other
legal practitioners to interpret those standards in the light of their international character and the need to promote
uniformity in their application and the observance of good faith in international trade, and notes the satisfaction of the
Commission with the performance of the New York Convention website49 and the successful coordination between
that website and the CLOUT system;
27. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, user-friendly and cost-effective United
Nations websites and the need for their multilingual development, maintenance and enrichment,50 commends the fact
that the website of the Commission has been migrated to a mobile device-friendly platform and that it continues to be
published simultaneously in the six official languages of the United Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of
the Commission to maintain and improve its website, and to enhance the visibility of its work by utilizing social media
features in accordance with the applicable guidelines.51
_______________
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
See resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
49
www.newyorkconvention1958.org.
50
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B, sect. X; 58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76;
59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV, paras. 66–80; and 61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
51
See resolution 63/120, para. 20.
47
48

1123

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/183
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/423, para. 12)52

74/183. Model Legislative Provisions on Public-Private Partnerships of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of
the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Recalling also its resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003, by which it adopted the United Nations Convention
against Corruption,53
Recalling further its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, by which it adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015, by which it endorsed the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the
Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
Convinced that public-private partnerships can play an important role in improving the provision and sound
management of infrastructure and public services and in supporting government efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals,
Concerned that the inadequacy of the legal framework and a lack of transparency may discourage investment
in infrastructure and public services and lead to a greater risk of corruption and mismanagement of public funds,
Emphasizing the importance of providing efficient and transparent procedures for the awarding of contracts for
public-private partnerships and of facilitating project implementation through rules that enhance transparency, fairness
and long-term sustainability and remove undesirable restrictions on private sector participation in the development
and operation of infrastructure and public services,
Recalling the valuable guidance that the Commission has provided to Member States towards the establishment
of a favourable legislative framework in that respect, through its Legislative Guide on Privately Financed
Infrastructure Projects54 and the accompanying Model Legislative Provisions on Privately Financed Infrastructure
Projects,55 and the recommendation by the General Assembly, in its resolution 58/76 of 9 December 2003, that States
give due consideration to those texts when revising or adopting legislation related to private participation in the
development and operation of public infrastructure,
Convinced that the advice provided by the Commission will be of further assistance to States, in particular
developing countries, in promoting good governance and establishing appropriate legislative frameworks for publicprivate partnership projects,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law for the
completion and adoption56 of the Model Legislative Provisions on Public-Private Partnerships57 and the Legislative
Guide on Public-Private Partnerships;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to publish the Model Legislative Provisions and the Legislative
Guide, including electronically, in the six official languages of the United Nations and to disseminate them
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Austria on behalf of the Bureau.
See also United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.
54
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.01.V.4.
55
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/58/17), annex I.
56
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), chap. III.
57
Ibid., annex I.
52
53

1124

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

broadly to Governments and relevant international intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
private sector entities and academic institutions;
3. Recommends that all States give due consideration to the Model Legislative Provisions and the Legislative
Guide when revising or adopting legislation relevant to public-private partnerships, and invites States that have used
the Model Legislative Provisions to advise the Commission accordingly.
RESOLUTION 74/184
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/423, para. 12)58

74/184. Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of
the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Recognizing that effective insolvency regimes are increasingly seen as a means of encouraging economic
development and investment, as well as of fostering entrepreneurial activity and preserving employment,
Noting the significance of enterprise groups, whether formed domestically or internationally, to international
trade and commerce in an increasingly globalized world economy,
Recognizing that, where the business of an enterprise group fails, it is important not only to know how the group
will be treated in insolvency proceedings, but also to ensure that such treatment facilitates, rather than hinders, the fast
and efficient conduct of the insolvency proceedings,
Aware that very few States, if any, have a comprehensive regime for the treatment of enterprise groups in
insolvency, including effective mechanisms for coordination and cooperation in cases of insolvency involving
enterprise groups, the development of a group insolvency solution and the cross-border recognition and
implementation of that solution in multiple States,
Recalling its resolution 52/158 of 15 December 1997, in which it expressed its appreciation to the Commission
for the adoption of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law,59 which deals with cross-border coordination, cooperation and recognition in relation to insolvency
proceedings concerning a single debtor, and its resolution 65/24 of 6 December 2010, in which it expressed its
appreciation to the Commission for the adoption of part three of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law,60 which deals with the treatment of enterprise groups in
insolvency,61
Recognizing the need for a generally acceptable model law that would focus on insolvency proceedings relating
to multiple debtors that are members of the same enterprise group, thereby extending the provisions of the Model
Law on Cross-Border Insolvency and part three of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law,
Convinced that the Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency,62 adopted by the Commission at its fifty-second
session, fulfils that need and is expected to contribute to the establishment of fair and internationally harmonized
legislation on enterprise group insolvency that respects national procedural and judicial systems,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Austria on behalf of the Bureau.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/52/17), annex I.
60
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.12.V.16.
61
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17), chap. V.
62
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), chap. VI, sect. A, and annex II.
58
59

1125

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Convinced also that the Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency provides for the fair and efficient
administration of enterprise group insolvencies, the protection and maximization of the overall combined value of the
assets and operations of enterprise group members affected by insolvency and of the enterprise group as a whole, the
facilitation of the rescue of financially troubled enterprise groups and the adequate protection of creditors and other
interested persons, including debtors,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law for finalizing
and adopting the Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency62 and its guide to enactment;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the text of the Model Law, together with its guide to enactment,
to Governments and interested bodies;
3. Recommends that all States give favourable consideration to the Model Law when revising or adopting
legislation relevant to insolvency, bearing in mind the need for internationally harmonized legislation governing and
facilitating instances of enterprise groups in insolvency, and invites States that have used the Model Law to advise the
Commission accordingly;
4. Also recommends that all States, when revising or adopting legislation on enterprise group insolvency,
also make use of part three of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law,60 on the treatment of enterprise groups in insolvency,61 as well as part four of the Legislative
Guide,63 addressing the obligations of directors of an enterprise in the period approaching the insolvency of that
enterprise,64 whose additional section,65 adopted at the fifty-second session of the Commission, addresses the
obligations of directors of enterprise group companies;
5. Further recommends that all States continue to consider the implementation of the Model Law on CrossBorder Insolvency59 and of the Model Law on Recognition and Enforcement of Insolvency-related Judgments,66 both
of the Commission;
6. Requests the Secretariat to ensure close cooperation and coordination with international organizations
active in the field of insolvency law reform to ensure the consistency and alignment of that work with all texts of the
Commission in the area of insolvency law, including the Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency, the Model Law
on Recognition and Enforcement of Insolvency-related Judgments and part four of the Legislative Guide on
Insolvency Law, as amended by the Commission at its fifty-second session.
RESOLUTION 74/185
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/424, para. 8)67

74/185. United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2099 (XX) of 20 December 1965, in which the General Assembly established the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law to contribute towards a better knowledge of international law as a means of strengthening international peace
and security and promoting friendly relations and cooperation among States,

_______________
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.13.V.10.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. V, sect. B.
65
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), chap. VI, sect. B.
66
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/73/17), annex III.
67
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Ghana on behalf of the Bureau.
63
64

1126

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Reaffirming that the Programme of Assistance is a core activity of the United Nations and that it has provided
the foundation for the efforts of the United Nations to promote a better knowledge of international law for more than
half a century,
Recognizing the major contribution of the Programme of Assistance to the teaching and dissemination of
international law for the benefit of lawyers in all countries, legal systems and regions of the world for more than half
a century and the importance of ensuring the successful continuation of the Programme for the benefit of present and
future generations of lawyers,
Emphasizing the important contribution of the Programme of Assistance, in particular the United Nations
Regional Courses in International Law and the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, to the
furtherance of United Nations rule of law programmes and activities,
Reaffirming that the increasing demand for international law training and dissemination activities creates new
challenges for the Programme of Assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the Programme of Assistance effectively reaching its beneficiaries, including
with regard to languages, while bearing in mind limitations on available resources,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Programme
of Assistance68 and the views of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in the report,
Noting with satisfaction that resources have been provided under the programme budget for the organization of
the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law on an annual basis and the further development of the
United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law,
Welcoming the organization, for the fourth time in the history of the Programme of Assistance, of all three of the
United Nations Regional Courses in International Law, for Africa, for Asia-Pacific and for Latin America and the
Caribbean, in the same calendar year,
Noting with satisfaction that the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea
was awarded in 2019,
Considering that international law should occupy an appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at all
universities,
Convinced that States, international and regional organizations, universities and institutions should be
encouraged to give further support to the Programme of Assistance and to increase their activities to promote the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those activities which are of
special benefit to persons from developing countries,
Reaffirming that in the conduct of the Programme of Assistance it would be desirable to use as far as possible
the resources and facilities made available by Member States, international and regional organizations, universities,
institutions and others,
Reaffirming also the hope that, in appointing highly qualified lecturers for the seminars to be held within the
framework of the fellowship programmes in international law, account would be taken of the need to secure the
representation of major legal systems and balance among various geographical regions,
1. Reiterates its approval of the guidelines and recommendations contained in section III of the reports of
the Secretary-General,69 in particular those designed to strengthen and revitalize the United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law in response to the
increasing demand for international law training and dissemination activities;

_______________
68
69

A/74/496.
A/70/423, A/71/432, A/72/517, A/72/517/Corr.1, A/73/415 and A/74/496.

1127

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out the activities specified in his report68 in 2020, including the
following activities to be financed from provisions in the regular budget:
(a)

The International Law Fellowship Programme, with a minimum of 20 fellowships;

(b) The United Nations Regional Courses in International Law for Africa, for Asia-Pacific and for Latin
America and the Caribbean, with a minimum of 20 fellowships for each course;
(c) The United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, including its continuation and further
development;
(d) The dissemination of legal publications and lectures of the Audiovisual Library to developing countries to
the extent that there are sufficient resources;
3. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to further expand the activities referred to in paragraph 2 above, to
be financed from voluntary contributions received pursuant to paragraphs 16, 25 and 26 below;
4. Commends the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat for the cost-saving
measures undertaken with regard to the International Law Fellowship Programme and the United Nations Regional
Courses in International Law to increase the number of fellowships for the training programmes financed from
provisions in the regular budget, taking into account the number of applications for these programmes;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to award additional fellowships for the training programmes from
available resources under the programme budget for the Programme of Assistance and from voluntary contributions
received pursuant to paragraph 26 below;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to consider admitting, for participation in the training programmes,
self-funded candidates present in the host country or from countries willing to bear the entire cost of their participation;
7. Authorizes the Secretary-General to award a minimum of one scholarship in 2020 under the Hamilton
Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea, subject to the availability of funds from voluntary
contributions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include resources under the proposed programme budget
for 2021 for the International Law Fellowship Programme, the United Nations Regional Courses in International Law
for Africa, for Asia-Pacific and for Latin America and the Caribbean and for the continuation and further development
of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law;
9. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the activities conducted under the Programme of
Assistance and, in particular, for the efforts to strengthen, expand and enhance the international law training and
dissemination activities within the framework of the Programme in 2019;
10. Also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for supporting the establishment of an alumni
network of participants of the training programmes organized under the Programme of Assistance;
11. Commends the Secretary-General for the continuation and further development of the United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law as a major contribution to the teaching and dissemination of international
law around the world, and notes with appreciation the efforts of the Codification Division to enhance the accessibility
of the Audiovisual Library by making all lectures in the Lecture Series available as podcasts;
12. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations legal publications prepared by the Office of Legal
Affairs, and once again requests the Secretary-General to issue the publications referred to in his previous report70 in
various formats, including hard copy publications, which are essential for developing countries;
13. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts undertaken by the Codification Division to bring up to date the
United Nations legal publications, which greatly enhanced the timely issuance thereof and made possible the
preparation of legal training materials, and encourages the Division to continue to explore ways of sustaining such
efforts into the next budget cycle, subject to the availability of resources;
_______________
70

1128

A/70/423, para. 45.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

14. Notes with satisfaction the issuance of volume XXXII of the Reports of International Arbitral Awards;
15. Expresses its appreciation for the issuance of the English-language edition of the International Law
Handbook: Collection of Instruments as a valuable resource for international law education on a broad range of core
subjects of international law in its training programmes and for academic institutions in developing countries to
promote international law education in those countries;
16. Also expresses its appreciation for the issuance of the Recueil de droit international: Collection
d’instruments, the French language equivalent of the International Law Handbook, and requests Member States to
provide the voluntary contributions necessary to ensure the completion of such a handbook in the other official
languages of the United Nations, as well as its dissemination in developing countries;
17. Requests the Codification Division to continue to maintain and expand its websites listed in the annex to
the report of the Secretary-General as an invaluable tool for the dissemination of international law materials as well
as for advanced legal research;
18. Requests that interns and research assistants be enlisted for the preparation of materials for the United
Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law;
19. Welcomes the efforts of the Codification Division to revitalize and conduct the United Nations Regional
Courses in International Law as an important training activity;
20. Expresses its appreciation to Ethiopia, Chile and Thailand for hosting the United Nations Regional
Courses in International Law for Africa, for Latin America and the Caribbean and for Asia-Pacific in 2019;
21. Expresses its appreciation to the African Union for the valuable contribution it continues to make to the
United Nations Regional Course in International Law for Africa;
22. Once again encourages the Codification Division to cooperate with the African Institute of International
Law, dedicated to offering higher learning and research in international law needed for the development of Africa, in
the implementation of the relevant activities under the Programme of Assistance;
23. Expresses its appreciation to the Hague Academy of International Law for the valuable contribution it
continues to make to the Programme of Assistance, which has enabled candidates under the International Law
Fellowship Programme to attend and participate in the Fellowship Programme in conjunction with courses at the
Academy;
24. Notes with appreciation the contributions of the Hague Academy to the teaching, study, dissemination and
wider appreciation of international law, and calls upon Member States and interested organizations to give favourable
consideration to the appeal of the Academy for a continuation of support and a possible increase in their financial
contributions, to enable the Academy to carry out its activities, particularly those relating to the summer and winter
courses, regional courses and programmes of the Centre for Studies and Research in International Law and
International Relations;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme of Assistance and periodically to
invite Member States, universities, philanthropic foundations and other interested national and international
institutions and organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the
Programme or otherwise to assist in its implementation and possible expansion;
26. Reiterates its request to Member States and interested organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions for the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law and for the United Nations
Regional Courses in International Law organized by the Codification Division as an important complement to the
International Law Fellowship Programme;
27. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have made voluntary contributions to support the
Programme of Assistance;
28. Decides to appoint 25 Member States, 6 from African States, 5 from Asia-Pacific States, 3 from Eastern
European States, 5 from Latin American and Caribbean States and 6 from Western European and other States, as
1129

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

members of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law for a period of four years, beginning on 1 January 2020;71
29. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session on the
implementation of the Programme of Assistance in 2020 and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee
on the Programme of Assistance, to submit recommendations regarding the Programme in subsequent years;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law”.
RESOLUTION 74/186
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/425, para. 11)72

74/186. Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-first session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-first session,73
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development and codification of international law as
a means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,74
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
that might be submitted to the International Law Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth
Committee and the Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development and codification
of international law,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which, given their new or
renewed interest for the international community, may be suitable for the progressive development and codification
of international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Recalling also the role of Member States in submitting proposals for new topics for the consideration of the
International Law Commission, and noting in this regard the recommendation of the Commission that such proposals
be accompanied by a statement of reasons,
Reaffirming the importance for the successful work of the International Law Commission of the information
provided by Member States concerning their views and practice,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the special rapporteurs of the International Law Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with appreciation the voluntary
contributions made to the United Nations trust fund for the International Law Seminar,
_______________
The following States have been appointed members of the Advisory Committee on the Programme of Assistance: Argentina, Canada,
Chile, Ethiopia, France, Ghana, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Israel, Italy, Kenya, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland,
Portugal, Russian Federation, Singapore, Slovakia, Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America
and Uruguay.
72
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Colombia on behalf of the
Bureau.
73
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/74/10).
74
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
71

1130

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Acknowledging the importance of facilitating the timely publication of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission and of eliminating the backlog,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each
of the main topics dealt with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,
Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on the report of the International
Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth Committee as a body of governmental representatives and
the Commission as a body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between the two
bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and question time in the Sixth Committee,
as envisaged in General Assembly resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the
work of the Assembly,
1.

Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-first session;73

2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the work accomplished at its seventyfirst session, and notes in particular:
(a) The completion of the second reading of the draft articles on prevention and punishment of crimes against
humanity;75
(b) The completion of the first reading of the draft conclusions on peremptory norms of general international
law (jus cogens);76
(c) The completion of the first reading of the draft principles on protection of the environment in relation to
armed conflicts;77
3. Recommends that the International Law Commission continue its work on the topics in its current
programme of work, taking into account the comments and observations of Governments, whether submitted in
writing or expressed orally in debates in the Sixth Committee;
4. Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of having
their views by 31 December 2019 on the various aspects of the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular
on all the specific issues identified in chapter III of its report, regarding:
(a)

Immunity of State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction;

(b)

Succession of States in respect of State responsibility;

(c)

General principles of law;

(d)

Sea-level rise in relation to international law;

5. Also draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the International Law Commission of
having their comments and observations by 15 December 2019 on the draft guidelines on the protection of the
atmosphere and on the draft Guide to Provisional Application of Treaties, adopted on first reading by the Commission
at its seventieth session,78 including comments and observations on the draft model clauses on provisional application
of treaties, contained in annex A to the report of the Commission on the work of its seventy-first session;79
_______________
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/74/10), chap. IV, sect. E.
Ibid., chap. V, sect. C.
77
Ibid., chap. VI, sect. C.
78
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/73/10), paras. 76 and 88.
79
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/74/10), annex A.
75
76

1131

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

6. Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to include the topic “Sea-level rise in
relation to international law” in its programme of work,80 and encourages the Commission to continue the examination
of the topics that are in its long-term programme of work;81
7. Encourages the International Law Commission to take particular account of the capacity and views of
Member States, as well as of the workload of the Commission, when including topics in its current programme of work;
8. Takes note of paragraphs 289 to 291 of the report of the International Law Commission and notes, in
particular, the inclusion of the topics “Reparation to individuals for gross violations of international human rights law
and serious violations of international humanitarian law” and “Prevention and repression of piracy and armed robbery
at sea” in the long-term programme of work of the Commission,82 and in this regard calls upon the Commission to
take into consideration the comments, concerns and observations expressed by Governments during the debate in the
Sixth Committee;
9. Also takes note of paragraph 302 of the report of the International Law Commission, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify concrete options for support for the work of special rapporteurs,
additional to those provided under General Assembly resolution 56/272 of 27 March 2002;
10. Reiterates its appreciation of the efforts of the International Law Commission to improve its methods of
work,83 and encourages the Commission to continue this practice;
11. Invites the International Law Commission to continue to take measures to enhance its efficiency and
productivity and to consider making proposals to Member States to that end;
12. Recalls the importance of an in-depth analysis of State practice and the consideration of the diversity of
legal systems of Member States to the work of the International Law Commission;
13. Takes note of paragraph 306 of the report of the International Law Commission, recalls the paramount
importance of multilingualism as set forth in General Assembly resolutions 69/324 of 11 September 2015 and 71/328
of 11 September 2017 on multilingualism, underlines the importance of having the documents of the Commission
published in due time in the six official languages of the United Nations while ensuring their accuracy in all official
languages, and to this end requests special rapporteurs to submit their reports within the time limits specified by the
Secretariat, and the Secretariat to give due consideration to the quality of the translation of the documents of the
Commission in the six official languages;
14. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to take cost-saving measures at its future
sessions, without prejudice to the efficiency and effectiveness of its work;
15. Recalls that the seat of the International Law Commission is at the United Nations Office at Geneva;
16. Takes note of paragraph 313 of the report of the International Law Commission, and decides that the next
session of the Commission shall be held at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 27 April to 5 June and from
6 July to 7 August 2020;
17. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the International Law Commission, in
particular the special rapporteurs, and the Sixth Committee, and in this context encourages, inter alia, the continued
practice of informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members of the Sixth Committee and the
members of the Commission throughout the year;
_______________
Ibid., para. 285.
The following topics are currently in the long-term programme of work of the International Law Commission: “Ownership and protection
of wrecks beyond the limits of national maritime jurisdiction”, “Jurisdictional immunity of international organizations”, “Protection of
personal data in transborder flow of information”, “Extraterritorial jurisdiction”, “The fair and equitable treatment standard in international
investment law”, “Settlement of international disputes to which international organizations are parties”, “Evidence before international courts
and tribunals”, “Universal criminal jurisdiction”, “Reparation to individuals for gross violations of international human rights law and serious
violations of international humanitarian law” and “Prevention and repression of piracy and armed robbery at sea”.
82
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/74/10), para. 290.
83
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/66/10), paras. 370–388.
80
81

1132

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

18. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the International Law Commission, to continue
to adhere as far as possible to the structured work programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider
presenting concise and focused statements;
19. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of legal adviser during the first week
in which the report of the International Law Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International Law
Week) to enable high-level discussions on issues of international law;
20. Underlines in this regard the necessity to allow sufficient time for the consideration of the report of the
International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee;
21. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special attention to indicating in its annual
report, for each topic, any specific issues on which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth
Committee or in written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the Commission in
its further work;
22. Takes note of paragraphs 314 to 319 of the report of the International Law Commission with regard to
cooperation and interaction with other bodies, and encourages the Commission to continue the implementation of
articles 16 (e), 25 and 26 of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission and other
bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of such cooperation;
23. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts concerned with international law
may assist Governments in considering whether to make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the
International Law Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
24. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the Codification Division of the
Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing assistance to the International Law Commission, including in
the preparation of memorandums and studies on topics on the agenda of the Commission, and takes note of the request
of the Commission to the Secretariat to prepare a memorandum surveying the case law of inter-State arbitral tribunals
and international criminal courts and tribunals of a universal character, as well as treaties, which would be particularly
relevant for its future work on the topic “General principles of law” contained in paragraph 286 of the report of the
Commission;
25. Also reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the documentation and summary records of the
International Law Commission;84
26. Stresses the need to expedite the preparation of the summary records of the International Law
Commission, and welcomes the continuation of the measures taken to streamline the processing of summary records
during the sixty-fifth session of the Commission,85 which have led to a more rational use of resources, and expresses
its satisfaction that the summary records of the Commission, constituting travaux préparatoires in the progressive
development and codification of international law, will not be subject to arbitrary length restrictions;
27. Welcomes the institutionalization of the practice of the Secretariat to include on the website of the
International Law Commission the provisional summary records in English and French relating to the work of the
Commission;
28. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat in seeking to ensure the timely and efficient processing of the
documents of the International Law Commission and the institutionalization of the experimental measures taken
during the sixty-eighth session of the Commission to streamline the editing of those documents;
29. Takes note of paragraph 303 of the report of the International Law Commission, underlines the importance
of the publications of the Codification Division to the work of the Commission, welcomes in particular the issuance
of the ninth edition of The Work of the International Law Commission in Chinese, Russian and Spanish, and reiterates
_______________
See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the annual reports of the International Law
Commission to the General Assembly; see also Yearbook of the International Law Commission 1982, vol. II (Part Two), paras. 267–269 and
271, as well as all subsequent annual reports of the International Law Commission.
85
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10), para. 183.
84

1133

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

its request that the Secretary-General continue to publish The Work of the International Law Commission in all six
official languages at the beginning of each quinquennium, the Reports of International Arbitral Awards in English or
French and the Summaries of the Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders of the International Court of Justice in
all six official languages every five years;
30. Also takes note of paragraph 308 of the report of the International Law Commission, stresses the unique
value of the Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure its timely
publication in all official languages;
31. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that have made voluntary contributions to the trust fund on the
backlog relating to the Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and encourages further contributions to the
trust fund;
32. Takes note of paragraph 309 of the report of the International Law Commission, expresses its satisfaction
with the remarkable progress achieved in the past few years in reducing the backlog of the Yearbook of the
International Law Commission in all six languages, welcomes the efforts made by the Division of Conference
Management of the United Nations Office at Geneva, especially its Editing Section, in effectively implementing
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly calling for the reduction of the backlog, encourages that Division to
provide continuous necessary support to the Editing Section in advancing the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission, and requests that updates on progress made in this respect be provided to the Commission on a regular
basis;
33. Welcomes the continuous efforts of the Codification Division to maintain and improve the website relating
to the work of the International Law Commission;
34. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to be held in connection with the
sessions of the International Law Commission and that an increasing number of participants representing the principal
legal systems of the world, including in particular those from developing countries, will be given the opportunity to
attend the Seminar, as well as delegates to the Sixth Committee, and appeals to States to continue to make urgently
needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations trust fund for the International Law Seminar;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar with adequate services,
including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to continue to consider ways to improve the structure and
content of the Seminar;
36. Underlines the importance of the records and topical summary of the debate in the Sixth Committee for
the deliberations of the International Law Commission, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to forward
to the Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the Commission at the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly, together with such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction
with their oral statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following established
practice;
37. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after the conclusion of the session of the
International Law Commission, chapter II of its report containing a summary of the work of that session, chapter III
containing the specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the Commission
and the draft articles adopted on either first or second reading by the Commission;
38. Also requests the Secretariat to make the complete report of the International Law Commission available
as soon as possible after the conclusion of the session of the Commission for the consideration of Member States with
due anticipation and no later than the prescribed time limit for reports in the General Assembly;
39. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to consider ways in which specific issues on
which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the Commission could be framed so as to help
Governments to have a better appreciation of the issues on which responses are required;
40. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law Commission at the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly commence on 26 October 2020.

1134

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/187
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/425, para. 11)86

74/187. Crimes against humanity
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its seventyfirst session,87 which contains the draft articles on prevention and punishment of crimes against humanity,
Noting that the Commission decided to recommend the draft articles on prevention and punishment of crimes
against humanity to the General Assembly and recommended the elaboration of a convention by the Assembly or by
an international conference of plenipotentiaries on the basis of the draft articles,88
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the need to prevent and punish crimes against humanity, which are among the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community as a whole,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for its continuing contribution to the
codification and progressive development of international law;
2. Takes note of the draft articles on prevention and punishment of crimes against humanity, presented by the
Commission;89
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session an item entitled “Crimes against
humanity” and to continue to examine the recommendation of the Commission contained in paragraph 42 of its report
on the work of its seventy-first session.87
RESOLUTION 74/188
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/426, para. 9)90

74/188. Diplomatic protection
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/67 of 6 December 2007, the annex to which contains the text of the articles on
diplomatic protection, commending the articles to the attention of Governments,
Recalling also that the International Law Commission decided to recommend to the General Assembly the
elaboration of a convention on the basis of the articles on diplomatic protection,91
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of diplomatic protection is of major importance in relations between States,
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Singapore on behalf of the
Bureau.
87
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/74/10).
88
Ibid., para. 42.
89
Ibid., chap. IV, sect. E.
90
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of South Africa on behalf of the
Bureau.
91
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/61/10), para. 46.
86

1135

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Taking into account the comments and observations of Governments92 and the discussions held in the Sixth
Committee, at the sixty-second, sixty-fifth, sixty-eighth, seventy-first and seventy-fourth sessions of the General
Assembly, on diplomatic protection,
1. Commends once again the articles on diplomatic protection93 to the attention of Governments, and invites
them to submit in writing to the Secretary-General any further comments, including comments concerning the
recommendation by the International Law Commission to elaborate a convention on the basis of the articles;91
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session the item entitled “Diplomatic
protection”, and invites Governments to focus their statements, in the light of the written comments submitted to the
Secretary-General, as well as the views expressed in the debates held at the sixty-second, sixty-fifth, sixty-eighth,
seventy-first and seventy-fourth sessions of the General Assembly, on the question of a convention on diplomatic
protection, or any other appropriate action, on the basis of the above-mentioned articles, and also on identifying any
difference of opinion on the articles.
RESOLUTION 74/189
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/427, para. 7)94

74/189. Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss
in the case of such harm
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/82 of 12 December 2001, 61/36 of 4 December 2006, the annex to which contains
the text of the principles on the allocation of loss in the case of transboundary harm arising out of hazardous activities,
and 62/68 of 6 December 2007, the annex to which contains the text of the articles on prevention of transboundary
harm from hazardous activities, as well as 65/28 of 6 December 2010, 68/114 of 16 December 2013 and 71/143 of
13 December 2016,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the questions of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss
in the case of such harm are of major importance in relations between States,
Taking into account the views and comments expressed in the Sixth Committee at previous sessions and at the
current session of the General Assembly,95
1. Commends once again the articles on prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities, the
text of which is annexed to General Assembly resolution 62/68, to the attention of Governments, without prejudice to
any future action, as recommended by the International Law Commission regarding the articles;
2. Also commends once again the principles on the allocation of loss in the case of transboundary harm
arising out of hazardous activities, the text of which is annexed to General Assembly resolution 61/36, to the attention
of Governments, without prejudice to any future action, as recommended by the Commission regarding the principles;
3. Invites Governments to submit further comments on any future action, in particular on the form of the
respective articles and principles, bearing in mind the recommendations made by the Commission in that regard,
_______________
See A/62/118, A/62/118/Add.1, A/65/182, A/65/182/Add.1, A/68/115, A/68/115/Add.1, A/71/93, A/71/93/Corr.1 and A/74/143.
Resolution 62/67, annex.
94
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Czechia on behalf of the Bureau.
95
See A/C.6/56/SR.11–13, A/C.6/56/SR.15–19, A/C.6/56/SR.22, A/C.6/56/SR.23, A/C.6/61/SR.9–16, A/C.6/61/SR.18, A/C.6/61/SR.19,
A/C.6/61/SR.21, A/C.6/62/SR.12, A/C.6/62/SR.28, A/C.6/65/SR.17, A/C.6/65/SR.27, A/C.6/68/SR.16, A/C.6/68/SR.28, A/C.6/68/SR.29,
A/C.6/71/SR.18 and A/C.6/74/SR.21. See also the reports of the Secretary-General containing comments and observations received from
Governments (A/65/184, A/65/184/Add.1, A/68/170, A/71/136, A/71/136/Add.1, A/74/131 and A/74/131/Add.1) and the reports of the
Secretary-General containing a compilation of decisions of international courts, tribunals and other bodies (A/68/94, A/71/98 and A/74/132).
92
93

1136

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

including in relation to the elaboration of a convention on the basis of the articles, as well as on any practice in relation
to the application of the articles and principles;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a compilation of decisions of international courts, tribunals and
other bodies referring to the articles and the principles;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session the item entitled
“Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss in the case of
such harm”.
RESOLUTION 74/190
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/428, para. 11)96

74/190. Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, by which it established the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, and its relevant resolutions
adopted at subsequent sessions,
Recalling also its resolution 47/233 of 17 August 1993 on the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
Recalling further its resolution 47/62 of 11 December 1992 on the question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council,
Taking note of the report of the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security Council,97
Recalling the elements relevant to the work of the Special Committee contained in its resolution 47/120 B of
20 September 1993,
Recalling also its resolution 51/241 of 31 July 1997 on the strengthening of the United Nations system and its
resolution 51/242 of 15 September 1997, entitled “Supplement to an Agenda for Peace”, by which it adopted the texts
on coordination and the question of sanctions imposed by the United Nations, which are annexed to that resolution,
Concerned about the special economic problems confronting certain States arising from the carrying-out of
preventive or enforcement measures taken by the Security Council against other States, and taking into account the
obligation of Members of the United Nations under Article 49 of the Charter to join in affording mutual assistance in
carrying out the measures decided upon by the Council,
Recalling the right of third States confronted with special economic problems of that nature to consult the
Security Council with regard to a solution of those problems, in accordance with Article 50 of the Charter,
Recalling also that the International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, and
reaffirming its authority and independence,
Mindful of the adoption of the revised working papers on the working methods of the Special Committee,98
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs and
Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council”,99
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Ethiopia on behalf of the Bureau.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/63/47).
98
Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/61/33), para. 72.
99
A/74/194.
96
97

1137

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Recalling paragraphs 106 to 110, 176 and 177 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,100
Mindful of the decision of the Special Committee in which it expressed its readiness to engage, as appropriate,
in the implementation of any decisions that might be taken at the high-level plenary meeting of the sixtieth session of
the General Assembly in September 2005 that concerned the Charter and any amendments thereto,101
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 50/51 of 11 December 1995, 51/208 of 17 December 1996, 52/162
of 15 December 1997, 53/107 of 8 December 1998, 54/107 of 9 December 1999, 55/157 of 12 December 2000, 56/87
of 12 December 2001, 57/25 of 19 November 2002, 58/80 of 9 December 2003 and 59/45 of 2 December 2004,
Recalling also its resolution 64/115 of 16 December 2009 and the document entitled “Introduction and
implementation of sanctions imposed by the United Nations” annexed thereto,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the work of its session held in 2019,102
Noting with appreciation the work done by the Special Committee to encourage States to focus on the need to
prevent and to settle peacefully their disputes which are likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;102
2.

Decides that the Special Committee shall hold its next session from 18 to 26 February 2020;

3. Requests the Special Committee, at its session in 2020, in accordance with paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 50/52 of 11 December 1995:
(a) To continue its consideration of all proposals concerning the question of the maintenance of international
peace and security in all its aspects in order to strengthen the role of the United Nations and, in this context, to consider
other proposals relating to the maintenance of international peace and security already submitted or which may be
submitted to the Special Committee at its session in 2020, including strengthening the relationship and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations or arrangements in the peaceful settlement of disputes;
(b) To consider, in accordance with paragraph 2 of the annex to resolution 71/146 of 13 December 2016, in
an appropriate, substantive manner and framework, the question of the implementation of the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations relating to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions (Article 50 of the
Charter) based on all of the related reports of the Secretary-General103 and the proposals submitted on the question,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit his next report on this issue to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth
session;
(c)

To keep on its agenda the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States;

(d) To consider, as appropriate, any proposal referred to it by the General Assembly in the implementation of
the decisions of the high-level plenary meeting of the sixtieth session of the Assembly in September 2005 that concern
the Charter and any amendments thereto;
(e) To continue to consider, on a priority basis, ways and means of improving its working methods and
enhancing its efficiency and utilization of resources with a view to identifying widely acceptable measures for future
implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with paragraph 3 of the annex to resolution 71/146, to brief
the Special Committee at its next session on the document entitled “Introduction and implementation of sanctions
imposed by the United Nations” contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution 64/115;
_______________
Resolution 60/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/60/33), para. 77.
102
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/74/33).
103
A/48/573-S/26705, A/49/356, A/50/60-S/1995/1, A/50/361, A/50/423, A/51/317, A/52/308, A/53/312, A/54/383, A/54/383/Add.1,
A/55/295, A/55/295/Add.1, A/56/303, A/57/165, A/57/165/Add.1, A/58/346, A/59/334, A/60/320, A/61/304, A/62/206, A/62/206/Corr.1,
A/63/224, A/64/225, A/65/217, A/66/213, A/67/190, A/68/226, A/69/119, A/70/119, A/71/166, A/72/136 and A/74/152.
100
101

1138

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

5. Also requests the Secretary-General to brief the Special Committee at its next session on the information
referred to in paragraph 13 of his report on the implementation of the provisions of the Charter related to assistance to
third States affected by the application of sanctions;104
6. Recalls its decision, in its resolution 72/118 of 7 December 2017, to undertake an annual thematic debate
in the Special Committee, under the agenda item on the peaceful settlement of disputes, to discuss the means for the
settlement of disputes, in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter, including in particular those contained in
Article 33 thereof, and consistent with the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes,105
and in that regard:
(a) Invites Member States to focus their comments during the thematic debate, to be held at the next session
of the Special Committee, at the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, on the subtopic “Exchange of
information on State practices regarding the use of conciliation”, while ensuring that the other means of dispute
settlement will be discussed at the subsequent sessions of the Special Committee;
(b) Also invites Member States to comment on the subtopics of the annual debate in their general statements
with a view to having the texts of those statements posted on the website of the Special Committee;106
(c) Calls upon the Special Committee to include a summary of the subtopics of the annual debate in its annual
report for further consideration;
7. Also recalls its endorsement of the decisions and recommendations adopted by the Special Committee at
its 2016 session, in particular as set forth in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to resolution 71/146;
8. Invites the Special Committee, at its session in 2020, to continue to identify new subjects for consideration
in its future work with a view to contributing to the revitalization of the work of the United Nations;
9. Notes the readiness of the Special Committee to provide, within its mandate, such assistance as may be
sought at the request of other subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly in relation to any issues before them;
10. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session;
11. Recognizes the important role of the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, in adjudicating disputes among States and the value of its work, as well as the importance of having
recourse to the Court in the peaceful settlement of disputes, notes that, consistent with Article 96 of the Charter, the
Court’s advisory jurisdiction may be requested by the General Assembly, the Security Council or other authorized
organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, and requests the Secretary-General to distribute, in due
course, the advisory opinions requested by the principal organs of the United Nations as official documents of the
United Nations;
12. Commends the Secretary-General for the progress made in the preparation of studies for the Repertory of
Practice of United Nations Organs, including the use of the internship programme of the United Nations and
cooperation with academic institutions for this purpose, as well as the progress made towards updating the Repertoire
of the Practice of the Security Council;
13. Encourages Member States to identify academic institutions that have the capacity to contribute to the
preparation of studies for the Repertory and to provide the contact details of such institutions, and in this regard
welcomes the initiative of the Secretariat also to invite academic institutions, to which members of the International
Law Commission are affiliated, to consider contributing to the preparation of studies;
14. Notes with appreciation the contributions made by Member States to the trust fund for the elimination of
the backlog in the Repertory and to the trust fund for the updating of the Repertoire, as well as other contributions,
including the sponsoring of associate experts to assist in the updating of the Repertoire and the financial support
provided for the launching of a revamped website for the Repertoire;
_______________
A/74/152.
Resolution 37/10, annex.
106
http://legal.un.org/committees/charter.
104
105

1139

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

15. Reiterates its call for voluntary contributions to the trust fund for the elimination of the backlog in the
Repertory so as to further support the Secretariat in carrying out the effective elimination of that backlog; voluntary
contributions to the trust fund for the updating of the Repertoire; and the sponsoring, on a voluntary basis and with no
cost to the United Nations, of associate experts to assist in the updating of the two publications;
16. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue his efforts towards updating the two publications and
making them available electronically in all their respective language versions, and encourages the continued updating
of the website for the Repertory;107
17. Notes with concern that the backlog in the preparation of volume III of the Repertory, although slightly
reduced, has not been eliminated, and calls upon the Secretary-General to address that issue effectively and on a
priority basis, while commending the Secretary-General for progress made in reducing the backlog;
18. Reiterates the responsibility of the Secretary-General for the quality of the Repertory and the Repertoire,
and with regard to the Repertoire calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to follow the modalities outlined in
paragraphs 102 to 106 of his report dated 18 September 1952;108
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
both the Repertory and the Repertoire;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”.
RESOLUTION 74/191
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/429, para. 8)109

74/191. The rule of law at the national and international levels
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 73/207 of 20 December 2018,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, which are indispensable foundations of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, and reiterating its
determination to foster strict respect for them and to establish a just and lasting peace all over the world,
Reaffirming that human rights, the rule of law and democracy are interlinked and mutually reinforcing and that
they belong to the universal and indivisible core values and principles of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the need for universal adherence to and implementation of the rule of law at both the national
and international levels and its solemn commitment to an international order based on the rule of law and international
law, which, together with the principles of justice, is essential for peaceful coexistence and cooperation among States,
Bearing in mind that the activities of the United Nations carried out in support of efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate the rule of law are undertaken in accordance with the Charter, and stressing the need to
strengthen support to Member States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective
international obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity-building,
Convinced that the advancement of the rule of law at the national and international levels is essential for the
realization of sustained economic growth, sustainable development, the eradication of poverty and hunger and the
_______________
http://legal.un.org/repertory.
A/2170.
109
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Liechtenstein on behalf of the
Bureau.
107
108

1140

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and acknowledging that collective security depends on
effective cooperation, in accordance with the Charter and international law, against transnational threats,
Reaffirming the duty of all States to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force in any
manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations and to settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered, in accordance
with Chapter VI of the Charter, and calling upon States that have not yet done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice in accordance with its Statute,
Convinced that the promotion of and respect for the rule of law at the national and international levels, as well
as justice and good governance, should guide the activities of the United Nations and its Member States,
Recalling paragraph 134 (e) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome,110
1. Recalls the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international
levels, held during the high-level segment of its sixty-seventh session, and the declaration adopted at that meeting,111
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 41 of the declaration,112 and requests
the Sixth Committee to continue its consideration of ways and means of further developing the linkages between the
rule of law and the three pillars of the United Nations;
2. Acknowledges the efforts to strengthen the rule of law through voluntary pledges, encourages all States to
consider making pledges, individually or jointly, based on their national priorities, and also encourages those States
that have made pledges to continue to exchange information, knowledge and best practices in this regard;
3. Takes note of the annual report of the Secretary-General on strengthening and coordinating United Nations
rule of law activities;113
4. Encourages the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to accord high priority to rule of law
activities;
5. Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in encouraging the progressive development of international
law and its codification, and further reaffirms that States shall abide by all of their obligations under international law;
6. Also reaffirms the imperative of upholding and promoting the rule of law at the international level in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Further reaffirms its commitment to working tirelessly for the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development,114 and recalls that the goals and targets are integrated and indivisible and balance the
three dimensions of sustainable development;
8. Recognizes the role of multilateral and bilateral treaties and treaty processes in advancing the rule of law,
and encourages States to further consider the promotion of treaties in areas where international cooperation could
benefit from treaties;
9. Welcomes the dialogue initiated by the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group and the Rule of
Law Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General with Member States on the topic “Promoting the rule of
law at the international level”, and calls for the continuation of this dialogue with a view to fostering the rule of law
at the international level;
10. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law to the furtherance of United Nations rule of law
programmes and activities, emphasizes that further technical assistance and capacity-building initiatives, focused on
increasing and improving the participation of Member States in the multilateral treaty process, should be examined,
and invites States to support these activities;
_______________
Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 67/1.
112
A/68/213/Add.1.
113
A/74/139.
114
Resolution 70/1.
110
111

1141

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

11. Stresses the importance of adherence to the rule of law at the national level and the need to strengthen
support to Member States, upon their request, in the domestic implementation of their respective international
obligations through enhanced technical assistance and capacity-building in order to develop, reinforce and maintain
domestic institutions active in the promotion of rule of law at the national and international levels, subject to national
ownership, strategies and priorities;
12. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure greater coordination and coherence among the
United Nations entities and with donors and recipients, and reiterates its call for greater evaluation of the effectiveness
of such activities, including possible measures to improve the effectiveness of those capacity-building activities;
13. Calls, in this context, for dialogue to be enhanced among all stakeholders, with a view to placing national
perspectives at the centre of rule of law assistance in order to strengthen national ownership, while recognizing that
rule of law activities must be anchored in a national context and that States have different national experiences in the
development of their systems of the rule of law, taking into account their legal, political, socioeconomic, cultural,
religious and other local specificities, while also recognizing that there are common features founded on international
norms and standards;
14. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to systematically address, as appropriate,
aspects of the rule of law in relevant activities, including the participation of women in rule of law-related activities,
recognizing the importance of the rule of law to virtually all areas of United Nations engagement;
15. Expresses full support for the overall coordination and coherence role of the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group within the United Nations system, within existing mandates, supported by the Rule of Law Unit
and under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in a timely manner, his next annual report on United Nations
rule of law activities, in accordance with paragraph 5 of its resolution 63/128 of 11 December 2008, addressing, in a
balanced manner, the national and international dimensions of the rule of law;
17. Recognizes the importance of restoring confidence in the rule of law as a key element of transitional
justice;
18. Recalls the commitment of Member States to take all necessary steps to provide fair, transparent, effective,
non-discriminatory and accountable services that promote access to justice for all, including legal aid, encourages
further dialogue and the sharing of national practices and expertise in strengthening the rule of law through access to
justice, including with regard to the provision of birth registration for all, appropriate registration and documentation
of refugees, migrants, asylum seekers and stateless persons, and legal aid, where appropriate, in both criminal and
civil proceedings, and in this regard recognizes the role of knowledge and technology, including in judicial systems,
and stresses the need to intensify the assistance extended to Governments upon their request;
19. Stresses the importance of promoting the sharing of national practices and of inclusive dialogue, welcomes
the proposals made by the Secretary-General, inviting Member States to voluntarily exchange national best practices
on the rule of law in informal meetings and on an electronic depository of best practices on the United Nations rule
of law website, and invites Member States to do so;
20. Invites the International Court of Justice, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and
the International Law Commission to continue to comment, in their respective reports to the General Assembly, on
their current roles in promoting the rule of law;
21. Invites the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group and the Rule of Law Unit to continue their
dialogue with all Member States by interacting with them in a regular, transparent and inclusive manner, in particular
in informal briefings;
22. Stresses the need for the Rule of Law Unit to carry out its tasks in an effective and sustainable manner and
the need to provide it with reasonable means required to that effect;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “The rule of law
at the national and international levels”, and invites Member States to focus their comments during the upcoming
Sixth Committee debate on the subtopic “Measures to prevent and combat corruption”.
1142

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/192
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/430, para. 9)115

74/192. The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, to international
law and to an international order based on the rule of law, which is essential for peaceful coexistence and cooperation
among States,
Recalling its resolutions 64/117 of 16 December 2009, 65/33 of 6 December 2010, 66/103 of 9 December 2011,
67/98 of 14 December 2012, 68/117 of 16 December 2013, 69/124 of 10 December 2014, 70/119 of 14 December
2015, 71/149 of 13 December 2016, 72/120 of 7 December 2017 and 73/208 of 20 December 2018,
Taking into account the comments and observations of Governments and observers and the discussions held in
the Sixth Committee at the sixty-fourth to seventy-fourth sessions of the General Assembly on the scope and
application of universal jurisdiction,116
Noting the constructive dialogue in the Sixth Committee, including in the context of its working group,
recognizing the diversity of views expressed by States, including concerns expressed in relation to the abuse or misuse
of the principle of universal jurisdiction, and acknowledging, in order to make progress, the need for continuing
discussions on the scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction in the Sixth Committee,
Reiterating its commitment to fighting impunity, and noting the views expressed by States that the legitimacy
and credibility of the use of universal jurisdiction are best ensured by its responsible and judicious application
consistent with international law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General prepared on the basis of comments
and observations of Governments and relevant observers;117
2. Decides that the Sixth Committee shall continue its consideration of the scope and application of universal
jurisdiction, without prejudice to the consideration of this topic and related issues in other forums of the United
Nations, and for this purpose decides to establish, at its seventy-fifth session, a working group of the Sixth Committee
to continue to undertake a thorough discussion of the scope and application of universal jurisdiction;
3. Invites Member States and relevant observers to the General Assembly, as appropriate, to submit, before
24 April 2020, information and observations on the scope and application of universal jurisdiction, including, where
appropriate, information on the relevant applicable international treaties and on their national legal rules and judicial
practice, and requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit to the Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report
based on such information and observations;
4. Decides that the working group shall be open to all Member States and that relevant observers to the
General Assembly will be invited to participate in the work of the working group;
5. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “The scope
and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction”.
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of the Gambia on behalf of the
Bureau.
116
See A/C.6/64/SR.12, A/C.6/64/SR.13, A/C.6/64/SR.25, A/C.6/64/SR.1–28/Corrigendum, A/C.6/65/SR.10, A/C.6/65/SR.11, A/C.6/65/SR.12,
A/C.6/65/SR.27, A/C.6/65/SR.28, A/C.6/66/SR.12, A/C.6/66/SR.13, A/C.6/66/SR.17, A/C.6/66/SR.29, A/C.6/67/SR.12, A/C.6/67/SR.13,
A/C.6/67/SR.24, A/C.6/67/SR.25, A/C.6/68/SR.12, A/C.6/68/SR.13, A/C.6/68/SR.14, A/C.6/68/SR.23, A/C.6/69/SR.11, A/C.6/69/SR.12,
A/C.6/69/SR.28, A/C.6/70/SR.12, A/C.6/70/SR.13, A/C.6/70/SR.27, A/C.6/71/SR.13, A/C.6/71/SR.14, A/C.6/71/SR.15, A/C.6/71/SR.31,
A/C.6/72/SR.13, A/C.6/72/SR.14, A/C.6/72/SR.28, A/C.6/73/SR.10, A/C.6/73/SR.11, A/C.6/73/SR.12, A/C.6/73/SR.33, A/C.6/74/SR.14,
A/C.6/74/SR.15, A/C.6/74/SR.16 and A/C.6/74/SR.17.
117
A/74/144; see also A/65/181, A/66/93, A/66/93/Add.1, A/67/116, A/68/113, A/69/174, A/70/125, A/71/111, A/72/112, A/73/123 and
A/73/123/Add.1.
115

1143

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/193
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/431, para. 7)118

74/193. The law of transboundary aquifers
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 63/124 of 11 December 2008, 66/104 of 9 December 2011, 68/118 of 16 December
2013 and 71/150 of 13 December 2016,
Noting the major importance of the subject of the law of transboundary aquifers in the relations of States and
the need for reasonable and proper management of transboundary aquifers, a vitally important natural resource,
through international cooperation for present and future generations,
Noting also that the provisions of the draft articles on the law of transboundary aquifers have been taken into
account in relevant instruments such as the Guarani Aquifer Agreement signed by Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and
Uruguay on 2 August 2010, and the Model Provisions on Transboundary Groundwaters adopted by the sixth Meeting
of the Parties to the Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes
on 29 November 2012,
Recognizing that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development119 includes a goal on ensuring availability and
sustainable management of water and sanitation for all,
Taking note of the High-level Panel on Water outcome document,120
Commending the efforts made by the International Hydrological Programme of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization in order for the Member States to draw more attention to and to deepen
understanding of the draft articles on the law of transboundary aquifers,121 in particular through organizing a series of
training courses on the application of the draft articles as well as compiling an inventory of and evaluating the world’s
transboundary aquifer systems,
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive development of international law,
as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting the comments of Governments and the discussions held in the Sixth Committee at the sixty-third, sixtysixth, sixty-eighth, seventy-first and seventy-fourth sessions of the General Assembly on this topic,122
1. Commends to the attention of Governments the draft articles on the law of transboundary aquifers annexed
to its resolution 68/118 as guidance for bilateral or regional agreements and arrangements for the proper management
of transboundary aquifers;
2. Encourages the International Hydrological Programme of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization to continue its contribution by providing further scientific and technical assistance upon the
consent of the recipient State and within its mandate;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-seventh session the item entitled “The law of
transboundary aquifers”.

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Israel on behalf of the Bureau.
Resolution 70/1.
120
High-level Panel on Water, “Making every drop count: an agenda for water action” (14 March 2018).
121
Resolution 68/118, annex.
122
See A/C.6/63/SR.16, A/C.6/63/SR.17, A/C.6/63/SR.18, A/C.6/63/SR.19, A/C.6/63/SR.26, A/C.6/66/SR.16, A/C.6/66/SR.29, A/C.6/68/SR.16,
A/C.6/68/SR.29, A/C.6/71/SR.18, A/C.6/71/SR.19, A/C.6/71/SR.33 and A/C.6/74/SR.21. See also A/66/116, A/66/116/Add.1 and A/68/172.
118
119

1144

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/194
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/432, para. 9)123

74/194. Measures to eliminate international terrorism
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming, in all its aspects, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted on 8 September
2006,124 which enhances the overall framework for the efforts of the international community to effectively counter
the scourge of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and recalling the first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth
biennial reviews of the Strategy, on 4 and 5 September 2008, 8 September 2010, 28 and 29 June 2012, 12 and 13 June
2014, 30 June and 1 July 2016, and 26 and 27 June 2018, respectively, and the debates that were held on those
occasions,125
Recalling its resolutions 62/272 of 5 September 2008, 64/297 of 8 September 2010, 66/282 of 29 June 2012,
68/276 of 13 June 2014, 70/291 of 1 July 2016 and 72/284 of 26 June 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 66/10 of 18 November 2011,
Recalling further its resolution 73/305 of 28 June 2019 on the enhancement of international cooperation to assist
victims of terrorism, and looking forward to the first Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism, to be held in 2020,
Recalling its resolution 71/291 of 15 June 2017, by which it decided to establish the Office of CounterTerrorism,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations,126
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration,127
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,128 and reaffirming, in particular, the section on terrorism,
Recalling also the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994, and the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration
on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to Assembly resolution 51/210 of
17 December 1996,
Recalling further all General Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate international terrorism and Security
Council resolutions on threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts,
Convinced of the importance of the consideration of measures to eliminate international terrorism by the General
Assembly as the universal organ having competence to do so,
Deeply disturbed by the persistence of terrorist acts, which have been carried out worldwide,
Reaffirming its strong condemnation of the heinous acts of terrorism that have caused enormous loss of human
life, destruction and damage, including those which prompted the adoption of General Assembly resolution 56/1 of
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Bureau.
Resolution 60/288.
125
See A/62/PV.117, A/62/PV.118, A/62/PV.119, A/62/PV.120, A/64/PV.116, A/64/PV.117, A/66/PV.118, A/66/PV.119, A/66/PV.120,
A/68/PV.94, A/68/PV.95, A/68/PV.96, A/68/PV.97, A/70/PV.108, A/70/PV.109, A/70/PV.110, A/72/PV.101, A/72/PV.102 and A/72/PV.103.
126
Resolution 50/6.
127
Resolution 55/2.
128
Resolution 60/1.
123
124

1145

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

12 September 2001, as well as Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) of 12 September 2001, 1373 (2001) of
28 September 2001 and 1377 (2001) of 12 November 2001, and those that have occurred since,
Reaffirming also its strong condemnation of the atrocious and deliberate attacks that have occurred against
United Nations offices in various parts of the world,
Affirming that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with all their obligations
under international law and must adopt such measures in accordance with international law, in particular international
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Stressing the need to strengthen further international cooperation among States and among international
organizations and agencies, regional and subregional organizations and arrangements and the United Nations in
order to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, in accordance with the principles of the Charter, international law and the relevant international
conventions,
Noting the role of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism in monitoring the implementation of that resolution, including the taking of the necessary financial,
legal and technical measures by States and the ratification or acceptance of the relevant international conventions and
protocols,
Mindful of the need to enhance the role of the United Nations and the relevant specialized agencies in combating
international terrorism and of the proposals of the Secretary-General to enhance the role of the Organization in this
respect,
Noting the United Nations High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States,
held in New York on 28 and 29 June 2018, the participants of which included representatives of Member States,
regional organizations, civil society organizations and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact entities, also noting the intention of the Secretary-General to convene another such conference in 2020 and
the organization of regional high-level conferences in the lead-up to that conference, and encouraging the SecretaryGeneral to consult Member States in this regard,
Mindful of the essential need to strengthen international, regional and subregional cooperation aimed at
enhancing the national capacity of States to prevent and effectively suppress international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations,
Reiterating its call upon States to review urgently the scope of the existing international legal provisions on the
prevention, repression and elimination of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, with the aim of ensuring that
there is a comprehensive legal framework covering all aspects of the matter,
Emphasizing that tolerance and dialogue among civilizations and the enhancement of interfaith and intercultural
understanding are among the most important elements in promoting cooperation and success in combating terrorism,
and welcoming the various initiatives to this end,
Aware of the need to address underlying conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism through a comprehensive
approach,
Reaffirming that no terrorist act can be justified in any circumstances,
Reiterating that terrorism is a global phenomenon, which is not and should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Recalling Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005, and bearing in mind that States must
ensure that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies with their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law,
Noting recent developments and initiatives at the international, regional and subregional levels to prevent and
suppress international terrorism,
1146

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Noting also regional and subregional efforts to prevent, combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed, including through the elaboration of and adherence to
regional conventions,
Recalling its decision in resolutions 54/110 of 9 December 1999, 55/158 of 12 December 2000, 56/88 of
12 December 2001, 57/27 of 19 November 2002, 58/81 of 9 December 2003, 59/46 of 2 December 2004, 60/43
of 8 December 2005, 61/40 of 4 December 2006, 62/71 of 6 December 2007, 63/129 of 11 December 2008, 64/118
of 16 December 2009, 65/34 of 6 December 2010, 66/105 of 9 December 2011 and 67/99 of 14 December 2012
that the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 should
address, and keep on its agenda, the question of convening a high-level conference under the auspices of the United
Nations to formulate a joint organized response of the international community to terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations,
Recalling also that, in the Final Document of the Eighteenth Summit of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, adopted in Baku on 26 October 2019,129 the Heads of State or Government reiterated the
collective position of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on combating international terrorism and reaffirmed
its previous initiative calling for an international summit conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
formulate a joint organized response of the international community to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
as well as other relevant initiatives,
Noting the importance of continuing to strive towards achieving a world free of terrorism,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 57/219 of 18 December 2002, 58/187 of 22 December 2003, 59/191 of
20 December 2004, 60/158 of 16 December 2005, 61/171 of 19 December 2006, 62/159 of 18 December 2007,
63/185 of 18 December 2008, 64/168 of 18 December 2009, 65/221 of 21 December 2010, 66/171 of 19 December
2011, 68/178 of 18 December 2013, 70/148 of 17 December 2015 and 72/180 of 19 December 2017,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General130 and the oral report of the Chair of the Working Group
of the Sixth Committee on its work during the seventy-fourth session,131
1. Strongly condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations as
criminal and unjustifiable, wherever and by whomsoever committed;
2. Calls upon all Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate international, regional and
subregional organizations to implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,124 as well as the
resolutions relating to the first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth biennial reviews of the Strategy,132 in all its aspects
at the international, regional, subregional and national levels without delay, including by mobilizing resources and
expertise;
3. Recalls the pivotal role of the General Assembly in following up the implementation and the updating of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, looks forward to the seventh biennial review, in 2020, and in
this regard recalls its invitation to the Secretary-General to contribute to the future deliberations of the Assembly, and
requests the Secretary-General when doing so to provide information on relevant activities within the Secretariat to
ensure overall coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system;
4. Reiterates that criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror in the general public, a
group of persons or particular persons for political purposes are in any circumstances unjustifiable, whatever the
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or other nature that may be invoked to
justify them;
5. Reiterates its call upon all States to adopt further measures in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant provisions of international law, including international standards of human rights, to prevent
_______________
A/74/548, annex.
A/74/151.
131
See A/C.6/74/SR.34.
132
Resolutions 62/272, 64/297, 66/282, 68/276, 70/291 and 72/284.
129
130

1147

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

terrorism and to strengthen international cooperation in combating terrorism and, to that end, to consider, in particular,
the implementation of the measures set out in paragraphs 3 (a) to (f) of General Assembly resolution 51/210;
6. Also reiterates its call upon all States, with the aim of enhancing the efficient implementation of relevant
legal instruments, to intensify, as and where appropriate, the exchange of information on facts related to terrorism and,
in so doing, to avoid the dissemination of inaccurate or unverified information;
7. Reiterates its call upon States to refrain from financing, encouraging, providing training for or otherwise
supporting terrorist activities;
8. Expresses concern at the increase in incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking with demands for ransom
and/or political concessions by terrorist groups, and expresses the need to address this issue;
9. Expresses grave concern over the acute and growing threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, namely,
individuals who travel to a State other than their States of residence or nationality for the purpose of the perpetration,
planning or preparation of, or participation in, terrorist acts or providing or receiving terrorist training, including in
connection with armed conflict, emphasizes the need for States to address this issue, including through the
implementation of their international obligations, and underlines the importance of United Nations capacity-building
and facilitation of capacity-building in accordance with existing mandates to assist States, including those in the most
affected regions, upon their request;
10. Emphasizes the need for States to cooperate resolutely against international terrorism by taking speedy and
effective measures to eliminate this scourge, and in this regard calls upon all States, in accordance with their obligations
under applicable international law and the Charter, to deny safe haven and bring to justice or, where appropriate, extradite,
on the basis of the principle of extradite or prosecute, the perpetrators of terrorist acts or any person who supports,
facilitates or participates or attempts to participate in the financing, planning or preparation of terrorist acts;
11. Urges States to ensure that their nationals or other persons and entities within their territory that wilfully
provide or collect funds for the benefit of persons or entities who commit, or attempt to commit, facilitate or participate
in the commission of terrorist acts are punished by penalties consistent with the grave nature of such acts;
12. Reminds States of their obligations under relevant international conventions and protocols, and Security
Council resolutions, including Council resolution 1373 (2001), to ensure that perpetrators of terrorist acts are brought
to justice, and recalls the General Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate international terrorism;
13. Reaffirms that international cooperation as well as actions by States to combat terrorism should be
conducted in conformity with the principles of the Charter, international law and relevant international conventions;
14. Recalls the adoption of the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,133
the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material,134 the Protocol of 2005 to the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation135 and the Protocol of
2005 to the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the
Continental Shelf,136 and urges all States to consider, as a matter of priority, becoming parties to these instruments;
15. Urges all States that have not yet done so to consider, as a matter of priority and in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and Council resolution 1566 (2004) of 8 October 2004, becoming parties to
the relevant conventions and protocols as referred to in paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 51/210, as well
as the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings,137 the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism,138 the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
_______________
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2445, No. 44004.
Adopted on 8 July 2005 by the Conference to Consider and Adopt Proposed Amendments to the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material (International Atomic Energy Agency, document GOV/INF/2005/10 GC(49)/INF/6, attachment).
135
Adopted on 14 October 2005 by the Diplomatic Conference on the Revision of the SUA Treaties (International Maritime Organization,
document LEG/CONF.15/21).
136
Adopted on 14 October 2005 by the Diplomatic Conference on the Revision of the SUA Treaties (International Maritime Organization,
document LEG/CONF.15/22).
137
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2149, No. 37517.
138
Ibid., vol. 2178, No. 38349.
133
134

1148

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Terrorism and the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and calls upon all
States to enact, as appropriate, the national legislation necessary to implement the provisions of those conventions and
protocols, to ensure that the jurisdiction of their courts enables them to bring to trial the perpetrators of terrorist acts
and to cooperate with and provide support and assistance to other States and relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations to that end;
16. Urges States to cooperate with the Secretary-General and with one another, as well as with interested
intergovernmental organizations, with a view to ensuring, where appropriate within existing mandates, that technical
and other expert advice is provided to those States requiring and requesting assistance in becoming parties to and
implementing the conventions and protocols referred to in paragraph 15 above;
17. Notes with appreciation and satisfaction that, consistent with the call contained in paragraphs 14 and 15
of General Assembly resolution 73/211 of 20 December 2018, a number of States became parties to the relevant
conventions and protocols referred to therein, thereby realizing the objective of wider acceptance and implementation
of those conventions;
18. Reaffirms the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 49/60, and the Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to
Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in the annex to Assembly resolution 51/210, and calls upon all States to
implement them;
19. Calls upon all States to cooperate to prevent and suppress terrorist acts;
20. Urges all States and the Secretary-General, in their efforts to prevent international terrorism, to make the
best use of the existing institutions of the United Nations;
21. Notes that the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is performing its duties within the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and that the Centre is supporting the implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, and encourages all Member States to collaborate with the Centre and to contribute to the
implementation of its activities within the Office;
22. Requests the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna to
continue its efforts to enhance, through its mandate, the capabilities of the United Nations in the prevention of
terrorism, and recognizes, in the context of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), its role in assisting States in becoming parties to and implementing the relevant
international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism, including the most recent among them, and in
strengthening international cooperation mechanisms in criminal matters related to terrorism, including through
national capacity-building upon request;
23. Notes the issuance by the Secretariat of the fourth edition of the compendium of international instruments
related to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism in English and Russian and its continuing efforts
to issue the publication in all the official languages of the United Nations;
24. Invites regional intergovernmental organizations to submit to the Secretary-General information on the
measures they have adopted at the regional level to eliminate international terrorism, as well as on intergovernmental
meetings held by those organizations;
25. Decides to recommend that the Sixth Committee, at the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly,
establish a working group with a view to finalizing the process on the draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism as well as discussions on the item included in its agenda by Assembly resolution 54/110 concerning the
question of convening a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations;
26. Recognizes the valuable dialogue and efforts of Member States towards resolving any outstanding issues,
and encourages all Member States to redouble their efforts during the intersessional period;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Measures to
eliminate international terrorism”.

1149

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

RESOLUTION 74/195
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/434, para. 9)139

74/195. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,140
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations,141 the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations,142 the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations143 and the responsibilities of
the host country,
Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of
15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and advise the host country on, issues arising in connection with
the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Recognizing also that the Headquarters Agreement provides that it shall be construed in the light of its primary
purpose to enable the United Nations at its headquarters in the United States, fully and efficiently, to discharge its
responsibilities and fulfil its purposes,
Emphasizing that the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations does not distinguish
between permanent and visiting representatives,
1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
contained in paragraph 165 of its report;140
2. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations and the
missions accredited to the United Nations and the observance of their privileges and immunities, which cannot be
subject to any restrictions arising from the bilateral relations of the host country, are in the interest of the United
Nations and all Member States, takes seriously the increasing number of concerns raised by permanent missions
regarding the normal performance of their functions, notes that the Committee expresses its readiness to effectively
address them and expects that all issues raised at its meetings will be duly settled expeditiously, in a spirit of
cooperation and in accordance with international law, requests the host country to continue to solve, through
negotiations, problems that might arise and to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the
functioning of missions, and urges the host country to continue to take appropriate action, such as the training of
police, security, customs and border control officers, with a view to maintaining respect for diplomatic privileges and
immunities and, if violations occur, to ensure that such cases are properly investigated and remedied, in accordance
with applicable law;
3. Recalls the privileges and immunities applicable to the premises of the permanent missions to the United
Nations enjoyed under international law, in particular the instruments listed in paragraph 165 (a) of the report of the
Committee, and the obligations of the host country to observe such privileges and immunities, takes note of
the alleged ongoing violations thereof by the host country and of the repeated concerns expressed thereon, urges the
host country to remove without delay any restrictions applied to the premises of a Permanent Mission inconsistent
with those privileges and immunities, and in that regard to ensure respect for such privileges and immunities, takes
_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire and
Cyprus.
140
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/74/26).
141
Resolution 22 A (I).
142
See resolution 169 (II).
143
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310.
139

1150

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

seriously the lack of resolution of these matters and the concerns expressed about such lack of resolution, remains
seized of these matters, and anticipates that they shall be duly addressed in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance
with international law;
4. Also recalls that, prior to the institution by the host country of any proceedings that require any person
referred to in article IV, section 11, of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,142 including representatives of a Member State, to leave the host
country, article IV, section 13 (b) (1) of the Headquarters Agreement, inter alia, requires the host country to consult
with the Member State, the Secretary-General or other principal executive officer, as appropriate, and considers that,
given the seriousness of any such measure being exercised by the host country, the consultation should be meaningful;
5. Notes the problems experienced by some permanent missions to the United Nations in connection with
the implementation of the Parking Programme for Diplomatic Vehicles,144 and notes that the Committee shall remain
seized of the matter, with a view to continuing to maintain the proper implementation of the Parking Programme in a
manner that is fair, non-discriminatory, effective and therefore consistent with international law;
6. Urges the host country to remove all remaining travel restrictions imposed by it on staff of certain missions
and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities, and in this regard takes seriously the more stringent travel
restrictions imposed on the permanent and visiting representatives of two Missions and the statements of affected
delegations that travel restrictions impede their ability to carry out their functions, restrict their access to services and
their choice of residence, and negatively impact their families, and notes the long-standing positions of affected States,
of the Secretary-General as set out in the statement of the Legal Counsel, in document A/AC.154/415, according to
which, inter alia, “there is no room for the application of measures based on reciprocity in the treatment accorded to
permanent missions accredited to the United Nations in New York”, and of the host country;
7. Recalls article IV of the Headquarters Agreement, notes the concerns expressed by some delegations
concerning the denial and delay of entry visas to representatives of Member States, and further notes that the
Committee remains seized of an increasing number of entry visa-related issues raised at its meetings and stresses that
these issues should be duly resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law, including the
Headquarters Agreement;
8. Expresses serious concern regarding the non-issuance of entry visas to certain representatives of certain
Member States and takes note of the statement of the Legal Counsel at the emergency, 295th, meeting of the
Committee, set out in document A/AC.154/415, where he confirmed that the legal position regarding the host
country’s obligations with respect to the issuance of visas to persons covered by the Headquarters Agreement remains
unchanged from that which was provided by the then Legal Counsel to the Committee in 1988, set out in document
A/C.6/43/7, according to which, inter alia, “the Headquarters Agreement makes it clear that there is an unrestricted
right of persons mentioned in section 11 to enter the United States for the purpose of proceeding to the Headquarters
district”;
9. Expects the prompt issuance by the host country of entry visas to all representatives of Member States and
members of the Secretariat pursuant to article IV, section 11, of the Headquarters Agreement, in a timely manner, to
enable persons assigned as members of permanent missions or recruited to serve in the Secretariat to take up their
assignments as promptly as possible and to enable representatives of Member States to travel to New York on United
Nations business, and notes that the Committee anticipates that the host country will continue to enhance efforts,
including visa issuance, to facilitate the participation of representatives of Member States in other United Nations
meetings, as appropriate;
10. Notes that a number of delegations have requested shortening the time frame applied by the host country
for issuance of entry visas to representatives of Member States since the time frame poses difficulties for the fullfledged participation of Member States in United Nations meetings, and invites the host country to inform the
Committee, as appropriate, of efforts to address such difficulties, and also notes that the Committee calls upon the
host country to review its differing processes of granting visas to the personnel of certain missions, with particular
attention to single-entry visas;
_______________
144

A/AC.154/355, annex.

1151

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

11. Notes with concern the difficulties experienced by some permanent missions to the United Nations in
obtaining suitable banking services, and welcomes the continued efforts of the host country to facilitate the opening
of bank accounts for those permanent missions;
12. Stresses the need for the permanent missions and the United Nations to benefit from appropriate banking
services, and anticipates that the host country will continue to assist the permanent missions accredited to the United
Nations and their staff in obtaining such services;
13. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made, and expects that the issues raised at the meetings of the
Committee will be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law, including the
Headquarters Agreement;
14. Affirms the importance of the Committee being in a position to fulfil its mandate and meet on short notice
to deal with urgent and important matters concerning the relations between the United Nations and the host country,
and in that connection requests the Secretariat and the Committee on Conferences to accord priority to requests from
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country for conference-servicing facilities for meetings of that Committee
that must be held while the General Assembly and its Main Committees are meeting, without prejudice to the
requirements of those bodies and on an “as available” basis;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United
Nations with the host country and to more actively engage in the work of the Committee with a view to ensuring the
representation of the interests concerned, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI), and in this
regard takes note of the statement of the Legal Counsel at the emergency, 295th, meeting of the Committee, as set out
in document A/AC.154/415, and considers that if the issues raised in the report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country140 are not resolved in a reasonable and finite period of time, serious consideration will be given to
taking steps under section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement, and further recalls that the Secretary-General may bring
to the attention of the Committee issues of mutual concern relating to the implementation of the Headquarters
Agreement and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;141
16. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution
2819 (XXVI) and, in this framework, to continue to consider additional appropriate measures to enhance the work of
the Committee and its effectiveness and to make recommendations in its report to the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session the item entitled “Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
RESOLUTION 74/196
Adopted at the 51st plenary meeting, on 18 December 2019, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/74/440, para. 8)145

74/196. Observer status for the Group of Seven Plus in the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the Group of Seven Plus,
1. Decides to invite the Group of Seven Plus to participate in the sessions and the work of the General
Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2.

Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution.

_______________
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Angola, Brazil, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Cuba, Finland, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mozambique, Norway,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Sweden, Timor-Leste,
Togo and Yemen.
145

1152

Annex I
Allocation of agenda itemsa
a

Plenary meetings

A.

1.

Opening of the session by the President of the General Assembly.

2.

Minute of silent prayer or meditation.

3.

Credentials of representatives to the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly:
(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

4.

Election of the President of the General Assembly.

6.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly.

7.

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and allocation of items: reports of the General Committee.

8.

General debate.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
9.

Report of the Economic and Social Council.

10. Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations
on HIV/AIDS.
11.

Sport for development and peace: building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic
ideal.

12. Improving global road safety.
13. 2001–2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa.
14. Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields.
15. Culture of peace.
19. Sustainable development:
(a)

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development;

(b)

Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;

(f)

Convention on Biological Diversity.

21. Groups of countries in special situations:
(b)
B.

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries.

Maintenance of international peace and security
27. Report of the Security Council.

_______________
a

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.

1153

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

28. Report of the Peacebuilding Commission.
29. Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new
or restored democracies.
30. The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
31. Prevention of armed conflict:
(a)

Prevention of armed conflict;

(b)

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution.

32. Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security
and development.
33. Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic.
34. The situation in the Middle East.
35. Question of Palestine.
36. The situation in Afghanistan.
37. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
38. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte.
39. Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba.
40. The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development.
41. Question of Cyprus.
42. Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
43. Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
44. The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti.
45. Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and international peace and security.
46. Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and aggression against Kuwait.
62. Peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
63. The situation in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine.
C.

Development of Africa
64. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support:

D.

(a)

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support;

(b)

Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

Promotion of human rights
65. Report of the Human Rights Council.
66. Promotion and protection of the rights of children.

1154

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

68. Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
E.

Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts
71. Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance:

F.

(a)

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations;

(b)

Assistance to the Palestinian people;

(c)

Special economic assistance to individual countries or regions;

(d)

Strengthening of international cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate
and minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.

Promotion of justice and international law
72. Report of the International Court of Justice.
73. Report of the International Criminal Court.
74. Oceans and the law of the sea:
(a)

Oceans and the law of the sea;

(b)

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments.

86. Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the
separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965.
87. Request for an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice on the consequences of legal
obligations of States under different sources of international law with respect to immunities of Heads
of State and Government and other senior officials.
G.

Disarmament
88. Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
98. General and complete disarmament.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
110. Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization.
111. Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund.
112. Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations.
113. Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs:
(a)

Election of non-permanent members of the Security Council;

(b)

Election of members of the Economic and Social Council.

114. Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections:
(a)

Election of members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination;

(b)

Election of members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission;
1155

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

(c)

Election of members of the Human Rights Council.

115. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(f)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences;

(g)

Appointment of members of the Joint Inspection Unit;

(h)

Appointment of the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services;

(i)

Appointment of members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns.

116. Admission of new Members to the United Nations.
117. Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit.
118. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
119. Commemoration of the abolition of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
120. Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations.
121. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
122. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other
matters related to the Security Council.
123. Strengthening of the United Nations system.
124. United Nations reform: measures and proposals.
125. Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
126. Global health and foreign policy.
127. International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
128. Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him.
129. Sexual exploitation and abuse: implementing a zero-tolerance policy.
130. The responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
131. Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second World War.
136. Programme planning.

First Committee
5.
G.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Disarmament
89. Reduction of military budgets:
(a)

Reduction of military budgets;

(b)

Objective information on military matters, including transparency of military expenditures.

90. Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace.
91. African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty.
92. Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco).
1156

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

93. Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international
security.
94. Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East.
95. Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
96. Prevention of an arms race in outer space:
(a)

Prevention of an arms race in outer space;

(b)

No first placement of weapons in outer space;

(c)

Further practical measures for the prevention of an arms race in outer space.

97. Role of science and technology in the context of international security and disarmament.
98. General and complete disarmament:
(a)

Treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices;

(b)

Nuclear disarmament;

(c)

Notification of nuclear tests;

(d)

Relationship between disarmament and development;

(e)

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes;

(f)

Regional disarmament;

(g)

Transparency in armaments;

(h)

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels;

(i)

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;

(j)

Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas;

(k)

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and implementation of agreements
on disarmament and arms control;

(l)

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legality of the
threat or use of nuclear weapons;

(m) Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction;
(n)

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction;

(o)

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting
them;

(p)

Reducing nuclear danger;

(q)

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects;

(r)

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament
commitments;

(s)

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation;

(t)

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction;

(u)

Confidence-building measures in the regional and subregional context;

1157

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

(v)

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional ammunition stockpiles in surplus;

(w) Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer space activities;
(x)

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;

(y)

The Arms Trade Treaty;

(z)

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty);

(aa) United action with renewed determination towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons;
(bb) Taking forward multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations;
(cc) Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament;
(dd) Joint panel discussion of the First and Fourth Committees on possible challenges to space
security and sustainability;
(ee) Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons;
(ff) Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world;
(gg) Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions;
(hh) Nuclear disarmament verification;
(ii)

Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

99. Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the
General Assembly:
(a)

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons;

(b)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa;

(c)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean;

(d)

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific;

(e)

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa;

(f)

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament.

100. Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General
Assembly at its tenth special session:
(a)

Report of the Conference on Disarmament;

(b)

Report of the Disarmament Commission.

101. The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East.
102. Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
103. Strengthening of security and cooperation in the Mediterranean region.
104. Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
105. Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction.

1158

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
121. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
136. Programme planning.

Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
5.
B.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Maintenance of international peace and security
47. Assistance in mine action.
48. Effects of atomic radiation.
49. International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space:
(a)

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space;

(b)

Joint panel discussion of the First and Fourth Committees on possible challenges to space
security and sustainability.

50. United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
51. Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories.
52. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.
53. Comprehensive review of special political missions.
54. Questions relating to information.
55. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations.
56. Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
57. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United
Nations.
58. Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
59. Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples.
I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
121. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
136. Programme planning.

Second Committee
5.
A.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
16. Information and communications technologies for sustainable development.
1159

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

17. Macroeconomic policy questions:
(a)

International trade and development;

(b)

International financial system and development;

(c)

External debt sustainability and development;

(d)

Commodities;

(e)

Financial inclusion for sustainable development;

(f)

Promotion of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and strengthen good
practices on assets return to foster sustainable development.

18. Follow-up to and implementation of the outcomes of the International Conferences on Financing for
Development.
19. Sustainable development:
(a)

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21
and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development;

(b)

Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;

(c)

Disaster risk reduction;

(d)

Protection of global climate for present and future generations of humankind;

(e)

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa;

(f)

Convention on Biological Diversity;

(g)

Report of the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United Nations Environment
Programme;

(h)

Education for sustainable development;

(i)

Harmony with Nature;

(j)

Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all;

(k)

Combating sand and dust storms;

(l)

Sustainable mountain development.

20. Globalization and interdependence:
(a)

Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and
interdependence;

(b)

Science, technology and innovation for sustainable development;

(c)

Culture and sustainable development;

(d)

Development cooperation with middle-income countries.

21. Groups of countries in special situations:

1160

(a)

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries;

(b)

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries.

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

22. Eradication of poverty and other development issues:
(a)

Implementation of the Third United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027);

(b)

Women in development;

(c)

Human resources development;

(d)

Eradicating rural poverty to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

23. Operational activities for development:
(a)

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system;

(b)

South-South cooperation for development.

24. Agriculture development, food security and nutrition.
B.

Maintenance of international peace and security
60. Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
121. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
136. Programme planning.

Third Committee
5.
A.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences
25. Social development:
(a)

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and of the twentyfourth special session of the General Assembly;

(b)

Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth,
ageing, persons with disabilities and the family.

26. Advancement of women:

B.

(a)

Advancement of women;

(b)

Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women and of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly.

Maintenance of international peace and security
61. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions.

D.

Promotion of human rights
65. Report of the Human Rights Council.
66. Promotion and protection of the rights of children:
(a)

Promotion and protection of the rights of children;
1161

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

(b)

Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children.

67. Rights of indigenous peoples:
(a)

Rights of indigenous peoples;

(b)

Follow-up to the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples.

68. Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance:
(a)

Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;

(b)

Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action.

69. Right of peoples to self-determination.
70. Promotion and protection of human rights:

H.

(a)

Implementation of human rights instruments;

(b)

Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms;

(c)

Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives;

(d)

Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action.

Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations
106. Crime prevention and criminal justice.
107. Countering the use of information and communications technologies for criminal purposes.
108. International drug control.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
121. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
136. Programme planning.

Fifth Committee
5.
I.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
115. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a)

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;

(b)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions;

(c)

Confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee;

(d)

Appointment of a member of the Board of Auditors;

(e)

Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee;

(j)

Appointment of members and alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee.

121. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
1162

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

132. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors:
(a)

United Nations;

(b)

United Nations peacekeeping operations;

(c)

International Trade Centre;

(d)

United Nations University;

(e)

Capital master plan;

(f)

United Nations Development Programme;

(g)

United Nations Capital Development Fund;

(h)

United Nations Children’s Fund;

(i)

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East;

(j)

United Nations Institute for Training and Research;

(k)

Voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;

(l)

Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme;

(m) United Nations Population Fund;
(n)

United Nations Human Settlements Programme;

(o)

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;

(p)

United Nations Office for Project Services;

(q)

United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women);

(r)

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals;

(s)

United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund.

133. Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.
134. Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019.
135. Proposed programme budget for 2020.
136. Programme planning.
137. Improving the financial situation of the United Nations.
138. Pattern of conferences.
139. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations.
140. Human resources management.
141. Joint Inspection Unit.
142. United Nations common system.
143. Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency.
144. Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
145. Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 48/218 B, 54/244, 59/272, 64/263
and 69/253.
146. Administration of justice at the United Nations.
147. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
148. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
1163

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

149. Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.
150. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic.
151. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
152. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
153. Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
154. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor.
155. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
156. Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.
157. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
158. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
159. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
160. Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East:
(a)

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force;

(b)

United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

161. Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
162. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.
163. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
164. Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009).

Sixth Committee
5.
F.

Election of the officers of the Main Committees.

Promotion of justice and international law
75. Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.
76. Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission.
77. Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second
session.
78. United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation
of International Law.
79. Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its seventy-first session.
80. Diplomatic protection.
81. Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous activities and allocation of loss in
the case of such harm.
82. Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization.
83. The rule of law at the national and international levels.
84. The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction.
85. The law of transboundary aquifers.

1164

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

H.

Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations
109. Measures to eliminate international terrorism.

I.

Organizational, administrative and other matters
121. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
136. Programme planning.
146. Administration of justice at the United Nations.
165. Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country.
166. Observer status for the Cooperation Council of Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly.
167. Observer status for the Eurasian Economic Union in the General Assembly.
168. Observer status for the Community of Democracies in the General Assembly.
169. Observer status for the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands Secretariat in the General Assembly.
170. Observer status for the Global Environment Facility in the General Assembly.
171. Observer status for the Group of Seven Plus in the General Assembly.
172. Observer status for the International Organization of Employers in the General Assembly.
173. Observer status for the International Trade Union Confederation in the General Assembly.
174. Observer status for the Boao Forum for Asia in the General Assembly.

1165

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/1.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations: requests under Article 19 of the Charter

139

14th

10 October 2019

1042

74/2.

Political declaration of the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage

126

14th

10 October 2019

3

74/3.

Political declaration of the high-level meeting to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island developing
States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

19 (b)

14th

10 October 2019

12

74/4.

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on
sustainable development convened under the auspices
of the General Assembly

19 (a)

15th

15 October 2019

17

74/5.

Proclamation of 28 September as the International Day
for Universal Access to Information

14

15th

15 October 2019

22

74/6.

Report of the International Criminal Court

73

26th

4 November 2019

23

74/7.

Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba

39

28th

7 November 2019

26

74/8.

Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency

88

30th

11 November 2019

28

74/9.

The situation in Afghanistan

36

36th

27 November 2019

29

74/10.

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People

35

38th

3 December 2019

41

74/11.

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine

35

38th

3 December 2019

44

74/12.

Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat

35

38th

3 December 2019

48

74/13.

Special information programme on the question of Palestine of
the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat

35

38th

3 December 2019

49

74/14.

The Syrian Golan

34

38th

3 December 2019

51

74/15.

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on
the Implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

21 (b)

39th

5 December 2019

53

74/16.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal

11

41st

9 December 2019

59

74/17.

Problem of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as
parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov

31 (a)

41st

9 December 2019

62

74/18.

Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995 Agreement for
the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks
and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments

74 (b)

43rd

10 December 2019

65

74/19.

Oceans and the law of the sea

74 (a)

43rd

10 December 2019

98

1167

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/20.

Global health and foreign policy: an inclusive approach
to strengthening health systems

126

44th

11 December 2019

143

74/21.

Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace

15

45th

12 December 2019

152

74/22.

World Chess Day

11 and 15

45th

12 December 2019

157

74/23.

Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace

15

45th

12 December 2019

158

74/24.

Objective information on military matters, including
transparency of military expenditures

89 (b)

46th

12 December 2019

209

74/25.

Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a Zone of Peace

90

46th

12 December 2019

212

74/26.

African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty

91

46th

12 December 2019

213

74/27.

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

92

46th

12 December 2019

214

74/28.

Advancing responsible State behaviour in cyberspace
in the context of international security

93

46th

12 December 2019

216

74/29.

Developments in the field of information and
telecommunications in the context of international security

93

46th

12 December 2019

218

74/30.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region
of the Middle East

94

46th

12 December 2019

220

74/31.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements to assure
non‑nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons

95

46th

12 December 2019

222

74/32.

Prevention of an arms race in outer space

96 (a)

46th

12 December 2019

224

74/33.

No first placement of weapons in outer space

96 (b)

46th

12 December 2019

227

74/34.

Further practical measures for the prevention of an arms race
in outer space

96 (c)

46th

12 December 2019

229

74/35.

Role of science and technology in the context of international
security and disarmament

97

46th

12 December 2019

230

74/36.

Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the
1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons

98 (x)

46th

12 December 2019

232

74/37.

Regional disarmament

98 (f)

46th

12 December 2019

234

74/38.

Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels

98 (h)

46th

12 December 2019

235

74/39.

Confidence-building measures in the regional and
subregional context

98 (u)

46th

12 December 2019

237

74/40.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction

98 (m)

46th

12 December 2019

238

74/41.

Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons

98 (ii)

46th

12 December 2019

242

74/42.

Humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons

98 (ee)

46th

12 December 2019

243

1168

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/43.

Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction

98 (t)

46th

12 December 2019

245

74/44.

Reducing nuclear danger

98 (p)

46th

12 December 2019

247

74/45.

Nuclear disarmament

98 (b)

46th

12 December 2019

249

74/46.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments

98 (r)

46th

12 December 2019

254

74/47.

Ethical imperatives for a nuclear-weapon-free world

98 (ff)

46th

12 December 2019

259

74/48.

Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas

98 (j)

46th

12 December 2019

262

74/49.

The Arms Trade Treaty

98 (y)

46th

12 December 2019

264

74/50.

Nuclear disarmament verification

98 (hh)

46th

12 December 2019

267

74/51.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons and collecting them

98 (o)

46th

12 December 2019

269

74/52.

Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control

98 (k)

46th

12 December 2019

271

74/53.

Transparency in armaments

98 (g)

46th

12 December 2019

272

74/54.

Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on nuclear disarmament

98 (cc)

46th

12 December 2019

274

74/55.

Promotion of multilateralism in the area of disarmament
and non‑proliferation

98 (s)

46th

12 December 2019

277

74/56.

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament

98 (i)

46th

12 December 2019

279

74/57.

Relationship between disarmament and development

98 (d)

46th

12 December 2019

281

74/58.

Prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes

98 (e)

46th

12 December 2019

282

74/59.

Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons

98 (l)

46th

12 December 2019

284

74/60.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

98 (q)

46th

12 December 2019

287

74/61.

Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines
and on Their Destruction

98 (n)

46th

12 December 2019

291

74/62.

Implementation of the Convention on Cluster Munitions

98 (gg)

46th

12 December 2019

293

74/63.

Joint courses of action and future-oriented dialogue towards
a world without nuclear weapons

98 (aa)

46th

12 December 2019

296

74/64.

Youth, disarmament and non-proliferation

98

46th

12 December 2019

299

74/65.

Problems arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus

98 (v)

46th

12 December 2019

300

74/66.

Strengthening and developing the system of arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements

98

46th

12 December 2019

303

74/67.

Transparency and confidence-building measures in outer
space activities

98 (w)

46th

12 December 2019

305

74/68.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons

99 (a)

46th

12 December 2019

308
1169

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/69.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Asia and the Pacific

99 (d)

46th

12 December 2019

310

74/70.

United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament

99 (f)

46th

12 December 2019

311

74/71.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Africa

99 (b)

46th

12 December 2019

312

74/72.

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean

99 (c)

46th

12 December 2019

314

74/73.

Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa

99 (e)

46th

12 December 2019

317

74/74.

Report of the Conference on Disarmament

100 (a)

46th

12 December 2019

322

74/75.

The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East

101

46th

12 December 2019

323

74/76.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

102

46th

12 December 2019

326

74/77.

Strengthening of security and cooperation
in the Mediterranean region

103

46th

12 December 2019

329

74/78.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

104

46th

12 December 2019

331

74/79.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction

105

46th

12 December 2019

333

74/80.

Assistance in mine action

47

47th

13 December 2019

339

74/81.

Effects of atomic radiation

48

47th

13 December 2019

343

74/82.

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space

49 (a)

47th

13 December 2019

346

74/83.

Assistance to Palestine refugees

50

47th

13 December 2019

352

74/84.

Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and
subsequent hostilities

50

47th

13 December 2019

354

74/85.

Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

50

47th

13 December 2019

355

74/86.

Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues

50

47th

13 December 2019

363

74/87.

Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories

51

47th

13 December 2019

364

74/88.

Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan

51

47th

13 December 2019

367

74/89.

Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian
people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem

51

47th

13 December 2019

371

74/90.

The occupied Syrian Golan

51

47th

13 December 2019

377

74/91.

Comprehensive review of special political missions

53

47th

13 December 2019

379

1170

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

74/92.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Questions relating to information
A.

Information in the service of humanity

54

47th

13 December 2019

381

B.

United Nations global communications policies
and activities

54

47th

13 December 2019

382

74/93.

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations

55

47th

13 December 2019

396

74/94.

Economic and other activities which affect the interests
of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories

56

47th

13 December 2019

398

74/95.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by
the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations

57

47th

13 December 2019

400

74/96.

Offers by Member States of study and training facilities
for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories

58

47th

13 December 2019

404

74/97.

Question of Western Sahara

59

47th

13 December 2019

405

74/98.

Question of American Samoa

59

47th

13 December 2019

407

74/99.

Question of Anguilla

59

47th

13 December 2019

410

74/100.

Question of Bermuda

59

47th

13 December 2019

414

74/101.

Question of the British Virgin Islands

59

47th

13 December 2019

417

74/102.

Question of the Cayman Islands

59

47th

13 December 2019

420

74/103.

Question of French Polynesia

59

47th

13 December 2019

423

74/104.

Question of Guam

59

47th

13 December 2019

426

74/105.

Question of Montserrat

59

47th

13 December 2019

430

74/106.

Question of New Caledonia

59

47th

13 December 2019

434

74/107.

Question of Pitcairn

59

47th

13 December 2019

439

74/108.

Question of Saint Helena

59

47th

13 December 2019

442

74/109.

Question of Tokelau

59

47th

13 December 2019

445

74/110.

Question of the Turks and Caicos Islands

59

47th

13 December 2019

448

74/111.

Question of the United States Virgin Islands

59

47th

13 December 2019

451

74/112.

Dissemination of information on decolonization

59

47th

13 December 2019

455

74/113.

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

59

47th

13 December 2019

457

74/114.

Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster

71 (d)

49th

16 December 2019

163

74/115.

International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field
of natural disasters, from relief to development

71 (a)

49th

16 December 2019

165

74/116.

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of United Nations personnel

71 (a)

49th

16 December 2019

177

74/117.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

71 (b)

49th

16 December 2019

186

1171

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/118.

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations

71 (a)

49th

16 December 2019

190

74/119.

Cooperatives in social development

25 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

690

74/120.

Promoting social integration through social inclusion

25 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

692

74/121.

Policies and programmes involving youth

25 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

697

74/122.

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for
Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special session
of the General Assembly

25 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

704

74/123.

Persons with albinism

25

50th

18 December 2019

716

74/124.

Follow-up to the twentieth anniversary of the International Year
of the Family and beyond

25 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

719

74/125.

Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing

25 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

722

74/126.

Improvement of the situation of women and girls in rural areas

26 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

729

74/127.

Violence against women migrant workers

26 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

737

74/128.

Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and
full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly

26 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

747

74/129.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

61

50th

18 December 2019

754

74/130.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

61

50th

18 December 2019

755

74/131.

Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa

61

50th

18 December 2019

762

74/132.

Report of the Human Rights Council

65

50th

18 December 2019

769

74/133.

Rights of the child

66 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

770

74/134.

The girl child

66 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

782

74/135.

Rights of indigenous peoples

67 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

790

74/136.

Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other
practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

68 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

797

74/137.

A global call for concrete action for the elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action

68 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

806

74/138.

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination

69

50th

18 December 2019

811

74/139.

The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination

69

50th

18 December 2019

815

74/140.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination

69

50th

18 December 2019

816

74/141.

The human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation

70

50th

18 December 2019

818

74/142.

International Equal Pay Day

70

50th

18 December 2019

823

1172

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/143.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment

70 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

825

74/144.

Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto: accessibility

70 (a)

50th

18 December 2019

832

74/145.

Freedom of religion or belief

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

839

74/146.

Implementing the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and
Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms through providing a safe and enabling environment
for human rights defenders and ensuring their protection

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

843

74/147.

Terrorism and human rights

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

848

74/148.

Protection of migrants

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

854

74/149.

The right to food

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

862

74/150.

Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

871

74/151.

Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human rights
through the promotion of international cooperation and the
importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

876

74/152.

The right to development

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

878

74/153.

Enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

886

74/154.

Human rights and unilateral coercive measures

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

889

74/155.

Promotion of equitable geographical distribution
in the membership of the human rights treaty bodies

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

894

74/156.

National human rights institutions

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

896

74/157.

The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

901

74/158.

Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing
periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

906

74/159.

Human rights and cultural diversity

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

911

74/160.

Protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

915

74/161.

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

925

74/162.

Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
in Central Africa

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

927

74/163.

United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation
Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

929

74/164.

Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping, stigmatization,
discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against
persons, based on religion or belief

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

931

1173

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/165.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons
Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic
Minorities

70 (b)

50th

18 December 2019

935

74/166.

Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea

70 (c)

50th

18 December 2019

939

74/167.

Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran

70 (c)

50th

18 December 2019

948

74/168.

Situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine

70 (c)

50th

18 December 2019

952

74/169.

Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic

70 (c)

50th

18 December 2019

958

74/170.

Integrating sport into youth crime prevention and criminal
justice strategies

106

50th

18 December 2019

969

74/171.

Follow-up to the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations for the
Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice

106

50th

18 December 2019

973

74/172.

Education for Justice and the rule of law in the context
of sustainable development

106

50th

18 December 2019

976

74/173.

Promoting technical assistance and capacity-building to
strengthen national measures and international cooperation
to combat cybercrime, including information-sharing

106

50th

18 December 2019

978

74/174.

Countering child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse online

106

50th

18 December 2019

980

74/175.

Technical assistance provided by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime related to counter-terrorism

106

50th

18 December 2019

984

74/176.

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking
in persons

106

50th

18 December 2019

990

74/177.

Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and criminal
justice programme, in particular its technical cooperation
capacity

106

50th

18 December 2019

997

74/178.

International cooperation to address and counter the world
drug problem

108

50th

18 December 2019 1013

74/179.

Credentials of representatives to the seventy-fourth session
of the General Assembly

3 (b)

51st

18 December 2019

74/180.

Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts

75

51st

18 December 2019 1112

74/181.

Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission

76

51st

18 December 2019 1113

74/182.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fifty-second session

77

51st

18 December 2019 1119

74/183.

Model Legislative Provisions on Public-Private Partnerships
of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

77

51st

18 December 2019 1124

74/184.

Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law

77

51st

18 December 2019 1125

1174

202

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

74/185.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law

78

51st

18 December 2019 1126

74/186.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its seventy-first session

79

51st

18 December 2019 1130

74/187.

Crimes against humanity

79

51st

18 December 2019 1135

74/188.

Diplomatic protection

80

51st

18 December 2019 1135

74/189.

Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm from
hazardous activities and allocation of loss in the case
of such harm

81

51st

18 December 2019 1136

74/190.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization

82

51st

18 December 2019 1137

74/191.

The rule of law at the national and international levels

83

51st

18 December 2019 1140

74/192.

The scope and application of the principle
of universal jurisdiction

84

51st

18 December 2019 1143

74/193.

The law of transboundary aquifers

85

51st

18 December 2019 1144

74/194.

Measures to eliminate international terrorism

109

51st

18 December 2019 1145

74/195.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country

165

51st

18 December 2019 1150

74/196.

Observer status for the Group of Seven Plus
in the General Assembly

171

51st

18 December 2019 1152

74/197.

Information and communications technologies
for sustainable development

16

52nd

19 December 2019

463

74/198.

International Year of Creative Economy for Sustainable
Development, 2021

17

52nd

19 December 2019

471

74/199.

Promoting investments for sustainable development

17

52nd

19 December 2019

474

74/200.

Unilateral economic measures as a means of political
and economic coercion against developing countries

17 (a)

52nd

19 December 2019

479

74/201.

International trade and development

17 (a)

52nd

19 December 2019

480

74/202.

International financial system and development

17 (b)

52nd

19 December 2019

483

74/203.

External debt sustainability and development

17 (c)

52nd

19 December 2019

490

74/204.

Commodities

17 (d)

52nd

19 December 2019

496

74/205.

Financial inclusion for sustainable development

17 (e)

52nd

19 December 2019

502

74/206.

Promotion of international cooperation to combat illicit financial
flows and strengthen good practices on assets return to foster
sustainable development

17 (f)

52nd

19 December 2019

505

74/207.

Follow-up to and implementation of the outcomes of the
International Conferences on Financing for Development

18

52nd

19 December 2019

510

74/208.

Oil slick on Lebanese shores

19

52nd

19 December 2019

513

74/209.

International Day of Awareness of Food Loss and Waste

19

52nd

19 December 2019

516

74/210.

Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone
management for achieving sustainable development

19

52nd

19 December 2019

518

Date of adoption

Page

1175

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/211.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development
in Central America

19

52nd

19 December 2019

521

74/212.

International Day of Clean Air for blue skies

19

52nd

19 December 2019

526

74/213.

Cooperative measures to assess and increase awareness
of environmental effects related to waste originating
from chemical munitions dumped at sea

19

52nd

19 December 2019

527

74/214.

Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in Central Asia

19

52nd

19 December 2019

530

74/215.

Agricultural technology for sustainable development

19

52nd

19 December 2019

533

74/216.

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development

19 (a)

52nd

19 December 2019

539

74/217.

Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States

19 (b)

52nd

19 December 2019

543

74/218.

Disaster risk reduction

19 (c)

52nd

19 December 2019

546

74/219.

Protection of global climate for present and future generations
of humankind

19 (d)

52nd

19 December 2019

554

74/220.

Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa

19 (e)

52nd

19 December 2019

560

74/221.

Implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity
and its contribution to sustainable development

19 (f)

52nd

19 December 2019

564

74/222.

Report of the United Nations Environment Assembly
of the United Nations Environment Programme

19 (g)

52nd

19 December 2019

573

74/223.

Education for sustainable development in the framework
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

19 (h)

52nd

19 December 2019

577

74/224.

Harmony with Nature

19 (i)

52nd

19 December 2019

581

74/225.

Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for all

19 (j)

52nd

19 December 2019

585

74/226.

Combating sand and dust storms

19 (k)

52nd

19 December 2019

591

74/227.

Sustainable mountain development

19 (l)

52nd

19 December 2019

595

74/228.

Role of the United Nations in promoting development
in the context of globalization and interdependence

20 (a)

52nd

19 December 2019

601

74/229.

Science, technology and innovation for sustainable development

20 (b)

52nd

19 December 2019

605

74/230.

Culture and sustainable development

20 (c)

52nd

19 December 2019

611

74/231.

Development cooperation with middle-income countries

20 (d)

52nd

19 December 2019

618

74/232.

Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries

21 (a)

52nd

19 December 2019

623

1176

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

74/233.

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference
on Landlocked Developing Countries

21 (b)

52nd

19 December 2019

631

74/234.

Implementation of the Third United Nations Decade
for the Eradication of Poverty (2018–2027)

22 (a)

52nd

19 December 2019

635

74/235.

Women in development

22 (b)

52nd

19 December 2019

643

74/236.

Human resources development

22 (c)

52nd

19 December 2019

655

74/237.

Eradicating rural poverty to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development

22 (d)

52nd

19 December 2019

661

74/238.

Operational activities for development
of the United Nations system

23 (a)

52nd

19 December 2019

665

74/239.

South-South cooperation

23 (b)

52nd

19 December 2019

667

74/240.

Natural plant fibres and sustainable development

24

52nd

19 December 2019

668

74/241.

International Tea Day

24

52nd

19 December 2019

671

74/242.

Agriculture development, food security and nutrition

24

52nd

19 December 2019

673

74/243.

Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the Arab
population in the occupied Syrian Golan over their
natural resources

60

52nd

19 December 2019

683

74/244.

International Year of Fruits and Vegetables, 2021

14

52nd

19 December 2019

202

74/245.

International Day of Banks

17 (b)

52nd

19 December 2019

204

74/246.

Situation of human rights of Rohingya Muslims and other
minorities in Myanmar

70 (c)

52nd
27 December 2019 1030
(resumed)

74/247.

Countering the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes

107

52nd
27 December 2019 1037
(resumed)

74/248.

Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in
the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members
of the party accompanying him

128

52nd
27 December 2019
(resumed)

74/249.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors

132

52nd
27 December 2019 1042
(resumed)

74/250.

Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019

205

A.

Final budget appropriations for the biennium 2018–2019

134

52nd
27 December 2019 1044
(resumed)

B.

Final income estimates for the biennium 2018–2019

134

52nd
27 December 2019 1047
(resumed)

74/251.

Programme planning

136

52nd
27 December 2019 1047
(resumed)

74/252.

Pattern of conferences

138

52nd
27 December 2019 1051
(resumed)

74/253.

Enhancing accessibility for persons with disabilities to
conferences and meetings of the United Nations system

141

52nd
27 December 2019 1061
(resumed)

1177

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

140

52nd
27 December 2019 1061
(resumed)

Resolution A

142

52nd
27 December 2019
(resumed)

1062

Resolution B

142

52nd
27 December 2019
(resumed)

1063

74/254.

Seconded active-duty military and police personnel

74/255.

United Nations common system

74/256.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services

133 and 144

52nd
27 December 2019 1065
(resumed)

74/257.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
48/218 B, 54/244, 59/272, 64/263 and 69/253

145

52nd
27 December 2019 1067
(resumed)

74/258.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

146

52nd
27 December 2019 1068
(resumed)

74/259.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals

147

52nd
27 December 2019 1072
(resumed)

74/260.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti

156

52nd
27 December 2019 1074
(resumed)

74/261.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur

163

52nd
27 December 2019 1075
(resumed)

74/262.

Questions relating to the proposed programme budget for 2020

135

52nd
27 December 2019 1076
(resumed)

74/263.

Special subjects relating to the proposed programme budget
for 2020

135

52nd
27 December 2019 1084
(resumed)

74/264.

Programme budget for 2020
A.

Budget appropriations for 2020

135

52nd
27 December 2019
(resumed)

1105

B.

Income estimates for 2020

135

52nd
27 December 2019
(resumed)

1107

C.

Financing of appropriations for the year 2020

135

52nd
27 December 2019
(resumed)

1108

74/265.

Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for 2020

135

52nd
27 December 2019 1108
(resumed)

74/266.

Working Capital Fund for 2020

135

52nd
27 December 2019 1109
(resumed)

1178
