VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

19. States should consider incorporating into the national law norms
proscribing abuses of power and providing remedies to victims of such
abuses. In particular, such remedies should include restitution and/or compensation, and necessary material, medical, psychological and social assistance and support.
20. States should consider negotiating multilateral international treaties relating to victims, as defined in paragraph 18.
21. States should periodically review existing legislation and practices
to ensure their responsiveness to changing circumstances, should enact and
enforce, if necessary, legislation proscribing acts that constitute serious
abuses of political or economic power, as well as promoting policies and
mechanisms for the prevention of such acts, and should develop and make
readily available appropriate rights and remedies for victims of such acts.

40/35. Development of standards for the prevention
of juvenile delinquency
The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 4 adopted by the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, held at Caracas from 25 August to
5 September 1980, 63 in which the Congress called for the
elaboration of a set of standard minimum rules for the
administration of juvenile justice and for the care of
juveniles,
Noting that the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules) 76 recommended by the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, held at Milan, Italy, from 26 August to 6 September 1985, are limited to the administration of juvenile
justice and the assurance of legal guarantees in respect of
young persons in conflict with the law,
Mindful of the need to develop national, regional and
international strategies for the prevention of delinquency
among the young,
Recognizing that the prevention of juvenile delinquency
includes measures for the protection of juveniles who are
abandoned, neglected, abused and in marginal circumstances and, in general, those who are at social risk,
Recognizing further the existence of a large number of
young persons who are not in conflict with the law but who
are at social risk,
Acknowledging that one of the basic aims of the prevention of juvenile delinquency is the provision of requisite
assistance and a range of opportunities to meet the varying
needs of the young, especially those who are most likely to
commit crime or to be exposed to crime, and to serve as a
supportive framework to safeguard their proper development,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the work undertaken
by the United Nations regional institutes for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders and the
regional commissions in the field of crime prevention;
2. Also takes note with appreciation of the working
paper prepared by the Secretariat on youth, crime and justice; 77
3. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Interregional Preparatory Meeting for the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Beijing
from 14 to 18 May 1984; 78
4. Requests the Secretary-General and Member States
to take the necessary steps to establish joint programmes
in the field of juvenile justice and the prevention of juvenile delinquency with the United Nations Social Defence
76 Resolution 40/33, annex.

77 NCONF.12117.
78NCONF.121/IPM/l, sect. II.

215

Research Institute, the United Nations regional institutes
for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders,
the Arab Security Studies and Training Centre at Riyadh
and other national and regional institutes, and with the
assistance of regional commissions and national correspondents, which would include the following activities:
(a) To study the situation of juveniles at social risk and
to examine the relevant policies and practices of prevention within the context of socio-economic development;
(b} To intensify efforts in training, research and advisory services for the prevention of juvenile delinquency;
5. Invites Member States to adopt distinct measures
and systems appropriate to the interest of juveniles at
social risk;
6. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control,
with the assistance of the United Nations institutes for the
prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, the
regional commissions and the specialized agencies, to
develop standards for the prevention of juvenile delinquency which would assist Member States in formulating
and implementing specialized programmes and policies,
emphasizing assistance and care and the active involvement of the community, and to report to the Eighth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders on the progress achieved in the
development of the proposed standards, for review and
final action;
7. Requests that the prevention of delinquency among
the young should be considered regularly by the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control and that it should be
considered by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
under a separate agenda item;
8. Urges all relevant bodies within the United Nations
system to collaborate with the Secretary-General in taking
appropriate measures to ensure the implementation of the
present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
29 November /985

40/36. Domestic violence
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
14 of 24 May 1984 on violence in the family,
Recalling also resolution 9 adopted by the Sixth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, in which the Congress called for
the fair treatment of women by the criminal justice system, 63
Bearing in mind the recommendations made on the subject of domestic violence by the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, 79
Having regard to the Declaration on the Rights of the
Child, 62 in particular principle 9 concerning the protection
of the child against exploitation, neglect and cruelty, and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 7 5
Mindful of the important role of the family in ensuring
the proper development of the young and their integration
79 See Report oft he World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Natwns Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, Nairohi, 15-26 July /98.' (United Nations publication. Sales No
E.85.IV. I0). chap. I. sect. A.

216

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

into the mainstream of society, and in preventing delinquency,
Mindful further of the social aspects of domestic violence and of the great importance of emphasizing and
developing appropriate methods of conflict resolution
between the parties involved,
Recognizing that abuse and battery in the family are
critical problems that have serious physical and psychological effects on individual family members, especially the
young, and jeopardize the health and survival of the family unit,
Recognizing further the adverse effects of exposure to
domestic violence, especially at an early stage of human
development, and the incalculable harm thereof,
Convinced that the problem of domestic violence is a
multifaceted one which should be examined from the perspective of crime prevention and criminal justice in the
context of socio-economic circumstances,
Convinced also of the necessity to improve the situation
of the victims of domestic violence,
Concerned that the abuse of alcohol, narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances may be an exacerbating factor in
domestic violence and that the effects thereof should be
further examined,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation of women as victims of
crime; 80
2. Invites Member States concerned to take specific
action urgently in order to prevent domestic violence and
to render the appropriate assistance to the victims thereof;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify research
on domestic violence from a criminological perspective to
formulate distinct action-oriented strategies that could
serve as a basis for policy formulation and to report
thereon to the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control to examine the problem of domestic violence;
5. Urges all relevant United Nations bodies, agencies
and institutes to collaborate with the Secretary-General in
ensuring a concerted and sustained effort to combat this
problem;
6. Invites the Eighth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders to
consider the problem of domestic violence under a separate agenda item dealing with domestic violence;
7. Invites Member States to adopt specific measures
with a view to making the criminal and civil justice system
more sensitive in its response to domestic violence, including the following:
(a) To introduce, if not already in existence, civil and
criminal legislation in order to deal with particular problems of domestic violence, and to enact and enforce such
laws in order to protect battered family members and punish the offender and to offer alternative ways of treatment
for offenders, according to the type of violence;
(b) To respect, in all instances of the criminal proceeding, starting with the police investigation, the special and
sometimes delicate position of the victim, in particular in
the manner in which the victim is treated;
(c) To initiate preventive measures, such as providing
support and counselling to families, in order to improve
their ability to create a non-violent environment, emphasizing principles of education, equality of rights and equal80 NC'ONF 121/lh

ity of responsibilities between women and men, their pannership and the peaceful resolution of conflicts;
(d) To inform the public, as necessary, through all
available channels, about serious acts of violence perpetrated against children, in order to create public awareness
of this problem;
(e) To deliver appropriate, specialized assistance to
victims of domestic violence, as an integral part of social
policy;
(I) To provide, as a temporary solution, shelters and
other facilities and services for the safety of victims of
domestic violence:
(g) To provide specialized training and units for those
who deal in some capacity with victims of domestic violence;
(h) To initiate or intensify research and collect data on
the background, extent and types of domestic violence;
(1) To make legal remedies to domestic violence more
accessible and, in view of the criminogenic effects of the
phenomenon, in particular on young victims, to give due
consideration to the interests of society by maintaining a
balance between intervention and the protection of pnvacy;
(J) To ensure that social welfare and health administration systems are engaged more intensely in providing
assistance to victims of familial violence and abuses, and
to make all efforts to co-ordinate social welfare and criminal justice measures.
96th plenar)' meeting
29 November 1985

40/37. Expression of appreciation to the Government and people of Italy on the occasion of
the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the significance and the results of
the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Milan,
Italy, from 26 August to 6 September 1985.q
Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government and
people of Italy for acting as host to the Seventh United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/38.

International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/56 of 3 December 1982, 381
104 of 16 December 1983 and 39/122 of 14 December
1984, as well as Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/45 of 31 May 1985,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Inter
national Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women on its activities, 81
Taking note with interest of the Institute's mode of operation, through the use of networks, in carrying out its functions at the international, regional and national levels,
81 A/401707, anon
