General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

58

· services needed by the Committee on Disarmament and
any subsidiary bodies which it may establish, in accordance with the arrangements contained in its rules of
procedure.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
M
PROGRAMME OF RESEARCH AND STUDIES
ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 33/71 K of 14 December
1978, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
report to it at its thirty-fourth session on possible ways
of establishing, operating and financing an international
institute for disarmament research, under the auspices
of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the information relevant to the
matter contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the programme of research and studies on
disarmament; 64
2. Welcomes the recommendations concerning the
United Nations institute for disarmament research submitted by the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies
and set forth in the report of the Secretary-General; 05
3. Notes that, under those recommendations, the
United Nations institute for disarmament research would
be set up within the framework of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research as an interim arrangement, for the period until the second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
in 1982;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to hold consultations with the United Nations Institute on Training and
Research regard.ing the establishment of the United Nations institute for disarmament research;
5. Expresses the hope that appropriate steps will be
taken as soon as possible with a view to implementing
the recommendations set forth in the report of the Secretary-General;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34 / 84.

Conclusion of an international convention on
the strengthening of guarantees of the security
of non-nuclear-weapon States

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to take effective measures for
the strengthening of the security of States and prompted
by the desire shared by all nations to eliminate war and
prevent a nuclear holocaust,
Taking into account the principle of the non-use of
force or threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and reaffirmed in a number of United
NatioQs declarations and resolutions,
Noting with satisfaction the desire of States in various
regions to prevent nuclear weapons from being introduced into their territories, including through the estab8' A/34/589.
&& Ibid.,

para. 7.

lishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the
region concerned, and being anxious to contribute to
this objective,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is
achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the
international community to develop, as appropriate,
effective measures to ensure the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution
to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Mindful of the statements and observations made by
various States on the strengthening of the security of
non-nuclear-weapon States,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 00 in which it urged the
nuclear-weapon States to pursue efforts to conclude, as
appropriate, effective arrangements to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolution 33/72 of 14 December 1978,
Welcoming the in-depth consideration of the item entitled "Effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons" by the Committee on Disarmament and the establishment of an ad hoe working group
open to all States members of the Committee to conduct
negotiations on the subject, 67
Noting with satisfaction that, under that item, drafts
of an international convention were submitted to the
Committee on Disarmament,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Disarmament, including the report of the ad hoe Working Group, 08
Noting with satisfaction that the idea of a convention
has gained broad international support,
Desirous of promoting an early and successful completion of the negotiations on the elaboration of the
convention,
1. Welcomes the conclusion of the Committee on
Disarmament that it is urgent to reach agreement on
effective international arrangements to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the
idea of such an international convention;
3. Commends the decision of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue the negotiations on this subject
at the beginning of its session in 1980;
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to continue the negotiations on this subject on a priority basis
during its session in 1980 with a view to their early conclusion with the elaboration of a convention to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Conclusion of an
international convention on the strengthening of the
60

Resolution S-10/2.

61 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.1), paras. 44-51.
6& Ibid., appendix II.

m. Raoludom adopted on tbe npom of the Ftnt Committee
security of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons".
97th plenary meeting
JJ December 1979
34/85.

Conclusion of an international convention to
assure the non-nuclear-weapon States aplnst
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the world with regard to ensuring
lasting security for their peoples,
Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest
threat to mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of the arms race,
in particular the nuclear arms race, and the threat to
mankind due to the possibility of the use of nuclear
weapons,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove the danger of nuclear war,
Taking into account the principle of the non-use of
force or threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations;
Deeply concerned about any possibility of the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States need to
be safeguarded against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is
achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the
international community to develop, as appropriate,
effective measures to ensure the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution to
the prevention of the spread of nucJear weapons,
Recalling its resolution 3261 G (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Further recalling its resolution 31 / 189 C of 21 December 1976,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 69
in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to pursue
efforts to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session,
Recalling its resolution 33/72 of 14 December 1978,
Welcoming the in-depth consideration of the item entitled "Effective international arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons" by the Committee on Disarmament and the establishment of an ad hoe working group
under the aegis of the Committee to conduct negotiations
on the subject, 70
89 Resolution S-10/2.
70

Of/icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/34/27 and Corr.I), paras. 44-Sl.

59

Noting the drafts of an international convention submitted under that item in the Committee on Disarmament,
Taking n'?te of.the report of the Committee on Dis~rmament, mcludmg the report of the ad hoe Workmg Group, 71
Noting the decision of the Sixth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, calling on the
Committee on Disarmament to elaborate the international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons during its next session, in 1980, 72
Also noting similar recommendations made in the
relevant resolution of the Tenth Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers, held at Fez from 8 to 12 May 1979,73
Further noting the general support expressed during
its thirty-fourth session for the elaboration of an international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
1. A !firms the conclusion of the Committee on Disarmament that there is wide recognition of the urgent
need to. reach agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nucJear-weapon States against
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the
idea of an international convention to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons;
3. Endorses the decision of the Committee on Disarmament to continue negotiations on this subject at the
beginning of its session in 1980;
4. Recommends that the Committee on Disarmament should conclude effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons during its session in 1980, taking into account the widespread support
for the conclusion of an international convention and
giving consideration to any other proposals designed to
secure the same objective;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Conclusion of an
international convention to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

34 / 86.

Strengthening of the security of no■-nuclear­
weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to promote international peace
and security,
Recognizing the legitimate security concerns of all
States,
Convinced of the importance of effective efforts to
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure nonnucJear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
71
72

73

Ibid., appendix n.
See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 219.
A/34/389 and Corr.I, annex II, sect. A, reaolution lS/10-P.
