S/PV.6961

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6961st meeting

Tuesday, 7 May 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Togo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Estreme
Ms. King
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

13-32509 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1332509*

S/PV.6961

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

In the context of the OSCE chairmanship, Ukraine
has set ambitious goals, with a number of priorities
across the three dimensions of security.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
His Excellency Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Kozhara.
Mr. Kozhara: I am very pleased and honoured to
address the Security Council today as Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE).
With its comprehensive approach to security and
in view of its geographical scope, which stretches from
Vancouver to Vladivostok, the OSCE enjoys a unique
position among all other regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Our organization is a strong partner of the United
Nations in promoting international peace and security
in its area. It is a great responsibility for me personally
and for Ukraine to guide the OSCE towards the
implementation of a shared vision of a Euro-Atlantic
and Eurasian security community, as set forth in the
2010 Astana Commemorative Declaration.
The year 2015 marks four decades since the signing
of the Helsinki Final Act. We strongly believe that that
anniversary should serve as a catalyst for re-energizing
the organization. The OSCE needs to retain the political
momentum provided by the Astana Summit. The
“Helsinki+40” process, initiated last year in Dublin,
seems to be a promising framework in that respect.
The Ukrainian chairmanship will facilitate the
Helsinki+40 dialogue, which is focused on overcoming
divergences and clarifying the role and goals of the
OSCE in the modern security architecture.

2

With regard to the politico-military dimension,
we aim to update and modernize the OSCE’s
politico-military instruments. We remain strongly
engaged with the United Nations Group of Friends of
Mediation and attach great importance to the updating
of confidence- and security-building measures. During
our chairmanship, the organization will continue
to be actively engaged with the United Nations,
and we will facilitate the development of an OSCE
mediation-support capacity.
The Ukrainian chairmanship contributes fully
to the continued efforts of the United Nations in
the promotion of global security and peace. The
achievement of progress in finding a sustainable, longterm solution to the protracted conflicts in the OSCE
area is at the top of its agenda.
Ukraine is strongly determined to contribute to
the Transdniestrian settlement process. We call for
the constructive engagement of all participants in
the “5+2” talks so as to move forward in solving the
existing social and economic problems and achieving a
comprehensive political settlement.
We are convinced that direct dialogue between
the political leadership of Chisinau and Tiraspol is
crucial. We have been doing our utmost to promote and
to facilitate it, encouraging both leaderships to engage
constructively in the negotiation process.
Ukraine fully supports the work under way within
the framework of the Geneva international discussions
aimed at resolving security and humanitarian issues in
the area of conflict in Georgia. We highly appreciate
the input of the United Nations to that process and
welcome the existing level of coordination among the
three co-chairing organizations.
The Ukrainian chairmanship lends its full support
to the efforts of the OSCE Minsk Group co-chairs in
assisting the parties to find a peaceful solution to the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. During my visit to the
South Caucuses in June, I intend to support the call
of the co-chairs for more active engagement in the
negotiations.
Developments in South-Eastern Europe are a focus
for our organization throughout the year. The European
Union-led dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina has

13-32509

S/PV.6961

opened new prospects for normalization in that part of
the region.
The OSCE welcomes the Brussels agreement
of 19 April. The leadership in Belgrade and Pristina
should be commended for their courage and vision in
reaching it. I welcome the continuation of that dialogue.
Where possible, the OSCE will provide support in line
with its mandate.
Conventional arms control and confidence- and
security-building measures constitute an important
part of common efforts to strengthen peace and
stability in the OSCE area. As a strong advocate of
non-proliferation, Ukraine, together with Poland,
Belarus and Kazakhstan, introduced the draft of
the updated 1994 OSCE Principles Governing
Non-proliferation. That work is expected to be finalized
before the Kyiv OSCE Ministerial Council meeting, to
be held on 5 and 6 December.
Let me also draw the Council’s attention to two
memorandums of understanding that were signed
between the OSCE and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, namely, on developing a
partnership on peace and disarmament initiatives
and on promoting the regional implementation of the
resolution 1540 (2004).
We deem it necessary to pay particular attention
to the OSCE response to transnational threats. In that
regard, we see particular merit in deepening cooperation
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. A joint
action plan for 2013-2014 was recently signed with the
latter.
Security, political and economic transitions in
Afghanistan, as well as the withdrawal of international
security forces in 2014, will continue to have
security implications for the OSCE area. As OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office, we are proceeding to further
explore areas that require enhanced interaction with
Afghanistan and improved coordination with the
relevant international actors.
Exchanging military information and contacts, in
particular in border areas close to Afghanistan, is of
paramount importance. The OSCE Border Management
Staff College in Dushanbe plays a major role in that
field. It has trained more than 1,000 border experts,
from 38 OSCE participating States and partners,
including almost 400 Afghan border professionals.

Within the economic and environmental dimension,
the core theme of the Ukrainian chairmanship is
increasing stability and security by improving the
environmental footprint of energy-related activities.
We are also exploring how the OSCE could provide
added value and play a role in the development of new
trade and transport corridors. In both areas, we see
great potential for building on existing cooperation
with the United Nations.
The Ukrainian chairmanship is convinced that
our commitment to the human dimension of security
is, and should remain, at the core of the concept of
comprehensive security. The fight against trafficking in
human beings remains one of the key issues addressed
by the OSCE under the Ukrainian chairmanship. We
continue to pursue a comprehensive, human rightsbased approach to this global crime — in close
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Labour
Organization, UNICEF and the United Nations Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights — within
the OSCE-initiated Alliance against Trafficking in
Persons and on a bilateral basis under the Global
Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking. In that respect,
the chairmanship will organize an international
conference on combating trafficking in human beings,
to be held in June in Kyiv.
Further priorities in that dimension include
strengthening the freedom of media. A human rights
seminar in Warsaw will address the topic of best
practices for crafting legal frameworks to establish and
safeguard free, independent and pluralistic media.
We will also strive to achieve progress in the
areas of the free movement of people, the promotion
of tolerance and non-discrimination, the freedom of
association and assembly, inter-religious dialogue in
promoting freedom of religion or belief, as well as
democratic elections and election observation.
Finally, we attach particular attention to the
promotion of tolerance and non-discrimination through
youth education. In that regard, we plan to host an
OSCE youth summit this summer in Crimea, Ukraine.
Before I conclude, let me once again stress the
value of cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations. A number of our chairmanship’s priorities
coincide with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
Five-Year Action Agenda. That is especially true with

13-325093

S/PV.6961

regard to early warning and early action in preventing
violent conflicts, building a safer and more secure
world, and supporting nations in transition.

combat against trafficking in human beings. We believe
that an integral part of that effort should be to prevent
the trafficking in human organs and tissues.

The United Nations is the OSCE’s principal partner
organization. As security challenges continue to evolve,
the nature of OSCE-United Nations cooperation has to
become more pragmatic, effective and results-oriented.
We look forward to even closer cooperation with the
United Nations and count on the Council’s full support
in the months ahead.

As an active participant in the OSCE, the Russian
Federation hopes that Ukraine will strictly comply with
the chairmanship mandate set forth in the decision of the
OSCE Ministers for Foreign Affairs in Porto in 2002,
and take fully into account the views and interests of
all States participants. It is important to concentrate on
establishing a unifying agenda and on bringing OSCE
countries together on the basis of shared goals and
objectives.

The President (spoke
Mr. Kozhara for his briefing.

in

French):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
Mr. Leonid Kozhara, and we thank him for his detailed
statement.
The Russian Federation has consistently called for
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE
to be scaled up on the basis of the 2006 declaration
in that regard. We feel that the OSCE successfully
complements the work of the United Nations in a
number of areas, as clearly reflected in the fight against
transnational threats, such as terrorism, illegal drugtrafficking and organized crime. The OSCE is making
a significant contribution to implementing the basic
United Nations conventions in those and other areas.
We welcome the cooperation between the OSCE
secretariat and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Vienna. We value the results of the first month
of the Ukrainian chairmanship of the OSCE. To a great
extent, the priorities set out for the organization for the
coming overlap with those of the Russian Federation.
We stand ready to provide the Ukrainian chairmanship
with the necessary assistance.
We, too, believe in the need to strengthen the
conventional arms control regime. Further negotiations
in that area should be conducted without preconditions,
politicization or attempts to prejudge the outcomes.
We welcome the intention of Ukraine to assist
in the settlement of conflicts in existing negotiation
formats and by fully upholding the interests of parties
to the conflict. We support the intention to scale up the

4

With respect to Russia’s priorities for the OSCE,
we note that the most important objective is reforming
the organization so as to address imbalances in its work
and make it a fully-fledged international organization.
Along those lines, the OSCE could draw upon the
experience of the United Nations in institution-building.
First and foremost, a legally binding charter and
procedures for the participation of non-governmental
organizations in OSCE events could be drawn up.
We support Ukraine’s intention to develop the
“Helsinki+40” process, which should bolster the OSCE
through the forthcoming fortieth anniversary of the
Helsinki Final Act in 2015. A document should be
drawn up that would not be run-of-the-mill, but rather
breathe new life into the implementation of agreements
set forth in the Final Act and other fundamental
documents of the OSCE.
We attach great importance to the efforts of the
OSCE to counter terrorism and illegal drug trafficking.
We hope to see cooperation with the United Nations
in the context of the OSCE conference on the matter
in Vienna in 2013. We support the implementation of
OSCE obligations in the area of freedom of movement,
in particular with respect to the liberalization of visa
regimes.
We attach great importance to the observation of
elections. We believe that the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights must carry out its
monitoring functions in similar conditions in all OSCE
countries across the board. We support the conduct
of a comparative analysis of electoral laws and the
drawing up of monitoring standards. We count on the
organization to conduct a seminar on that very matter
this year.
We attach particular importance to the efforts being
made to protect the rights of national, religious and
13-32509

S/PV.6961

linguistic minorities and in combating manifestations
of statelessness in Latvia and Estonia. We are convinced
that the OSCE will make an important contribution to
combating aggressive nationalism, neo-Nazism and
neo-fascism.
We believe that, in the context of the economic
crisis, the OSCE must more actively take up matters
touching upon the social and economic aspects of
human rights.
We hope that all of the aforementioned topics will
take their due place in the OSCE agenda for 2013 and be
reflected in the documents of the meeting of the OSCE
Ministers for Foreign Affairs to take place in Kiev on
5 and 6 December.
We hope that the approach of the Ukrainian
chairmanship set forth by Foreign Minister Kozhara
today will help to overcome the crisis of recent years
in the OSCE and adapt the organization to new global
realities. Russia stands fully ready to constructively
cooperate with the Ukrainian chairmanship and other
OSCE participants in that matter.
Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s briefing. I would like to thank
Foreign Minister Kozhara for his briefing and welcome
him to the Security Council for the first time in his
capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
As the world’s largest regional security organization,
the OSCE has much to offer the Council, particularly its
expertise in arms control, counter-terrorism, conflict
prevention and post-conflict resolution. As members
of the Council are aware, close cooperation between
the Council and regional organizations, including the
OSCE, can be a decisive component of our efforts to
maintain international peace and security. It is clear
that one of Australia’s priorities during its term on
the Council is to further encourage such cooperation,
and the OSCE provides a good illustration of what is
possible.
To point to one example, Australia acknowledges
the OSCE’s strong contribution to the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, where it
leads the important third pillar of democratization and
institution-building. We join the OSCE in commending
the leadership in both Belgrade and Pristina for
the recent positive steps they have taken towards
normalizing their relationship.

Australia enjoys a strong partnership with the
OSCE. As an Asia partner country of the OSCE since
2009, we work through the organization to address
security challenges that span borders. Australia
supports OSCE projects designed to enhance local,
national and regional capacities to combat the effects of
human trafficking and help protect vulnerable groups in
Central Asia, which we are pleased to hear is among the
priorities of the OSCE under Ukraine’s chairmanship.
In March, Australia was pleased to co-chair
the 2013 OSCE Conference of Asian Partners for
Cooperation, which took place in Australia. Under the
theme “Improving the Security of Women and Girls”,
the Conference brought together Government and
civil society to examine the successes and failings of
international efforts in the fight against gender-based
violence and human trafficking, as well as efforts to
increase the economic empowerment of women. That
reinforces the work of the Council on the women and
peace and security agenda and the priority that we
attach to that work.
Australia also endorses the OSCE vision of
comprehensive security that includes the integral role
of human rights and economic and environmental issues
alongside the politico-military dimension. Protecting
and empowering people is essential to shaping longterm and effective responses to multidimensional
threats to security. It builds capacity, understanding
and resilience among individuals and communities.
Australia congratulates the OSCE on its longstanding commitment to non-proliferation. We
commend the OSCE leadership in preventing the
spread of illicit small arms and light weapons among its
members and beyond to regions that face conflict and
instability. That leadership contributed to the adoption
of the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in 2001.
The adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)
by the General Assembly on 2 April was another
significant development in that area, and we
appreciate the contribution of the OSCE membership
to the achievement of a strong outcome. Effective
implementation of the ATT will now be critical to
preventing the illegal and irresponsible trade in arms
and reducing human suffering. We look to the OSCE
once again to play a leading role in ensuring the
signature of the Treaty by its members on 3 June and its

13-325095

S/PV.6961

effective implementation within the OSCE region and
others that need implementation support.
I thank Mr. Kozhara for his observations on
Afghanistan. Along with other members of the
Council and the international community, Australia
is committed to Afghanistan’s long-term stability,
security and prosperity, which will in turn benefit
from the constructive engagement and support of its
neighbours. Australia supports efforts to that end,
including regional confidence-building measures
through the Heart of Asia initiative. We welcome
the OSCE’s continued constructive contribution to
international efforts to support Afghanistan’s security
and stability.
Australia also shares with the OSCE and other
members of the Council an abhorrence of terrorism and
a determination to combat that threat wherever it occurs.
The OSCE’s counter-terrorism work is impressive.
Australia welcomes the organization’s cooperation
with United Nations agencies, has been pleased to
support a number of OSCE counter-terrorism projects,
and wishes to build on that partnership. We appreciate
the determination and international cooperation that
the OSCE brings to the global stand against terrorist
ideologies and tactics.
In conclusion, close engagement between the
Council and regional organizations is an essential
component of securing international peace and security,
and we encourage the Council to continue to look for
opportunities to work closely with the OSCE in that
endeavour.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Sir, I congratulate
you on assuming the office of the President of the
Security Council for the month of May. We also thank
Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana for his effective
presidency of the Council last month. We offer our
thanks and best wishes to both teams.
We thank Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), for his comprehensive briefing and for
sharing with us the vision and programme of work of
his organization.
The OSCE, representing 57 States in Europe,
Central Asia and North America, has been a pillar
of strength for regional peace and security. Its best
practices in early warning, conflict prevention and

6

crisis management are being emulated by other
regional organizations. The three dimensions of the
OSCE’s work — political-military, economic and
environmental, and human — provide the best tools for
a comprehensive response to security situations.
The United Nations, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of its Charter, co-opts regional organizations for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and the pacific settlement of disputes. In the past, the
United Nations and the OSCE have complemented each
other’s efforts aimed at conflict prevention, confidenceand security-building, mediation, crisis management
and post-conflict stabilization.
During the Cold War, the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the OSCE’s predecessor, played
an important role by providing a forum for dialogue and
negotiation between East and West. Following the end
of the Cold War, the OSCE contributed to managing the
transition in Europe and dealing with post-Cold War
challenges. We appreciate the important role the OSCE
is currently playing in facilitating various processes
aimed at settling crises and conflicts in its region.
They include the Transdniestrian settlement process,
the Geneva international discussions on Georgia, and
the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs assisting Azerbaijan
and Armenia in finding a peaceful solution to the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. We also welcome the
European Union-led dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. The OSCE’s role in support of that dialogue
is very important.
The OSCE’s initiatives on disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control are producing
results. We also greatly appreciate its work in
countering transnational threats such as human and
narcotics trafficking, terrorism and cyber-crime.
The United Nations and the OSCE have similar
priorities in the economic and environmental areas,
as well as with respect to sustainable energy for all.
What we need is more synergy and closer coordination
between the two organizations. We believe that the
OSCE’s successes in these fields are relevant to South
Asia and many other regions.
The human dimension is equally important. The
OSCE’s focus on young people and children is geared
towards forward-looking solutions for more developed,
educated and tolerant societies. We particularly
appreciate its activities in Afghanistan in building the
capacity of the Afghan National Police, combating

13-32509

S/PV.6961

drug trafficking and strengthening customs and border
management. Pakistan strongly believes that a peaceful
and stable Afghanistan will help its people rediscover
their destiny, consolidate their polity and rebuild their
economy. As the international security forces prepare
to withdraw by 2014, the OSCE’s continued engagement
with Afghanistan will have a positive impact on the four
transitions under way in the security, reconciliation,
electoral and economic areas. We particularly welcome
the Chair’s intention to explore further areas of
cooperation for capacity-building in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, we wish Ukraine a very successful
chairmanship of the OSCE. We take note of its priorities,
and hope that under its stewardship the organization will
continue its important work in areas ranging from hard
security issues to sustainable economic development
and the promotion and protection of human rights.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I join
previous speakers in welcoming Mr. Leonid Kozhara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, to the Security
Council, and in thanking him for briefing us on his
priorities for 2013 in his capacity as Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE).
Now with 57 States members, the OSCE occupies
a unique place among the regional organizations with
which the United Nations is called upon to cooperate
under Chapter VIII of its Charter. It has an important
role to play in settling conflicts and promoting
human rights in Europe and Central Asia. Mongolia’s
recent accession to OSCE membership illustrates the
organization’s ongoing appeal beyond Europe’s borders.
As an OSCE member, Luxembourg fully supports
the Ukrainian chairmanship’s desire to take advantage
of the momentum resulting from the Astana summit in
2010 to deepen the discussion of the vision of a EuroAtlantic and Eurasian security community that is free,
democratic, united and indivisible. The “Helsinki+40”
process launched at the Ministerial Council meeting
in Dublin in December can help the OSCE realize
its ambitious vision centred on a global approach to
security that can encompass the political-military,
economic and environmental, and human dimensions.
We are particularly interested in the human
dimension, which is an essential element of any modern
security architecture and should be a priority within
the OSCE. It is important that Ukraine continue the
work begun by the Lithuanian and Irish chairmanships

on freedom of expression and freedom of the media,
including digital media. We commend the important
work that has been done in the area of electoral
observation and assistance by the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
The United Nations and the OSCE are founded
on shared values and principles. It is therefore quite
natural for the two organizations to cooperate closely.
We welcome the memorandums of intent signed
between the OSCE and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs aimed at developing a partnership
for peace and disarmament initiatives and combating
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
promoting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) at the regional level. We also welcome the
OSCE’s efforts in partnership with the United Nations,
particularly the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, to combat transnational organized crime, such
as trafficking in drugs and humans.
On the ground, the OSCE cooperates actively with
the United Nations. It has demonstrated its ability to
play an essential role in concert with other regional
organizations in settling conflicts and promoting
peace. It does so in Afghanistan, the Balkans and
Eastern Europe, in the context of the conflict in
Moldova over Transdniestria. It is also the case in the
southern Caucasus, through the Minsk Group and the
Geneva discussion process, as well as in Central Asia.
To cite only the latter example, we commend the OSCE
for working closely with the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia on the
cross-border challenges connected to the management
of water and energy resources and to combating
terrorism.
We note with interest that the Ukrainian
chairmanship of the OSCE has made dealing with
prolonged and unsettled conflicts in the organization’s
zone its top priority. Any progress towards a lasting
solution to such conflicts will be an important
contribution to peace and security in the region.
Luxembourg will chair the OSCE Forum for
Security Cooperation for the last four months of this
year. As our Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs announced at the Ministerial Council
meeting in Dublin in December, Luxembourg intends
to support, within that framework, efforts to improve
coordination with the United Nations in the area of small
arms and light weapons. We will organize two security

13-325097

S/PV.6961

dialogues in September with the aim of promoting the
implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty. Finally,
my country will chair the discussions on the political
and military priorities for 2014 to be submitted for
adoption by the Ministerial Council meeting in Kiev
in December.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine that Luxembourg will
spare no effort in promoting the progress achieved by
the OSCE in all its facets and the cooperation between
the United Nations and the OSCE for international
peace and security.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the presence of Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, and congratulate his
country on its assumption of the chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2013. I also take this opportunity to
welcome the decision taken on 10 December 2012 by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the European Union to
recognize Ukraine’s European aspirations and to work
towards achieving political association and economic
integration based on respect for common values ​​within
the Eastern Partnership. I shall limit myself to making
three observations.
First, on the relationship between the two
organizations, the United Nations and the OSCE have a
common goal — for the former at the global level and
for the latter at the regional level — to strengthen links
and dialogue among States so as to better ensure their
security. We know that dialogue between organizations
usually raises complex political issues. We see that at
work, for example, in the dialogue that the Council has
with the African Union, the League of Arab States and
many other organizations. But that dialogue has become
an essential element in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
provides a framework that, in our view, has withstood
the test of time and events. From Central Asia, Georgia
and Kosovo to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the OSCE
and the United Nations have shown their ability to
work harmoniously on the ground. We believe that that
relationship remains an essential element for security
in Europe. It can also be a source of inspiration in terms
of useful and innovative cooperation in other regions.
My second point concerns the future of the
OSCE, which covers a vast area, from Vancouver to

8

Vladivostok. With the recent accession of Mongolia,
it includes 57 countries that share common values​​
and a belief that the security of the Euro-Atlantic and
Euro-Asian areas goes hand in hand with the promotion
of human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
However, we note in Vienna a worrying tendency
by some members of the organization to reconsider their
commitments in that regard. We expect the Ukrainian
chairmanship of the OSCE to guarantee and promote
the commitments made in the three areas covered by the
OSCE. In that regard, we attach particular importance
to freedom of expression and freedom of the media.
Similarly, the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights must be able to continue to play its role
in monitoring elections, and its autonomy must be
preserved to that end.
France fully supports the dialogue initiated at the
Dublin meeting of the Ministerial Council on the future
of the OSCE within the “Helsinki+40” process and in
the light of the fortieth anniversary of the Helsinki
Final Act in 2015. The process should not limit itself
to reaffirming, as was done at the Astana summit in
2010, the validity of the Helsinki obligations and of all
of the significant achievements of the OSCE. Instead,
we must find ways to fully implement the commitments
made by the participating States and to reaffirm our
commitment to that security arrangement based on
common values.
My third point has to do with the commitment on
the ground. The OSCE today has 15 field missions
in the Caucasus, Central Asia and the Balkans, often
alongside the United Nations. Its role remains, in our
view, essential. Therefore, after having contributed,
along with the United Nations and the European
Union, to the cessation of inter-ethnic violence in
Kyrgyzstan, the OSCE has implemented a community
safety initiative to help ease tensions between Kyrgyz
and Uzbek communities. It actively contributes to
stabilizing the borders of Afghanistan and Central
Asia, in particular by training border guards in Central
Asia, including Afghanistan. It also cooperates with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the fight
against transnational threats, and it has just renewed a
joint action plan for 2013-2014 with that Office. That is
a good example of successful cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations.
In the Caucasus, we remain committed, as part
of our co-chairing of the Minsk Group along with

13-32509

S/PV.6961

the United States and Russia, to helping Armenia and
Azerbaijan find a peaceful settlement to the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. The co-chairs are continuing their
mediation work while calling on the parties to respect
the ceasefire and to refrain from actions and statements
likely to fuel tensions. The co-chairs have repeatedly
expressed their concerns about the start of civilian
flights to Nagorno Karabakh and the continuing
violence at the line of contact.
With regard to the OSCE office in Baku, we trust
that the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office will arrive at a
solution that will enable that field mission to maintain
and fulfil its mandate.
On the subject of Georgia, France lends its full
support to the Geneva discussions and to the OSCE role
in that process, alongside the European Union and the
United Nations. Those discussions must be continued
in order to build confidence among the parties and
improve the situation of local populations. Of course,
we reaffirm our commitment to the principles of
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
recognized by international law.
In Transdniestria, we are encouraged by the
increasing number of meetings in the “5+2” format held
in 2012. We hope that that positive trend will continue
in 2013 and that substantive progress will be possible.
In the Balkans, the facilitation of the OSCE allowed
binational Serbian voters in Kosovo to participate
peacefully in the Serb legislative and presidential
elections of 6 May 2012. It was a difficult task, which
the OSCE carried out with professionalism, thanks in
particular to its substantial presence on the ground.
The OSCE has once again been asked to help organize
the partial municipal elections, under the agreement
reached on 19 April in Brussels between Belgrade and
Pristina and confirmed by both parliaments.
Finally, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country that
will be on the Council’s agenda next week, the OSCE
presence covers a substantial number of activities, such
as governance, the rule of law and respect for human
rights, as well as the management of stockpiles and
surplus ammunition, a subject that the OSCE should at
the forefront of.
I conclude by once again expressing to Ukraine all
our best wishes for its chairmanship and by assuring it
of France’s full support.

Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America) I
would like to welcome to the Security Council the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office, Foreign Minister
Kozhara, and to thank him for today’s briefing on
OSCE activities under the leadership of Ukraine. We
commend the Chairperson-in-Office for his priorities,
including efforts to revitalize existing negotiation
processes, combat transnational threats, including
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
support human rights education.
The Security Council and the OSCE have shared
interests in ending active conflicts and mitigating
future threats to international peace and security.
The United States is committed to working with the
Chairperson-in-Office, the OSCE secretariat and other
participating and partner States to further the OSCE’s
comprehensive approach to security, which closely
complements the work of the United Nations.
The OSCE continues to contribute to peace and
security, notably through its field missions, the work
of its special representatives and its promotion of
military transparency. In Kosovo, where the head of the
OSCE mission concurrently serves as deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the
complementarity of the OSCE and the United Nations
is clearly evident. The United States commends the
OSCE for its active role in helping to develop and
advise Kosovo’s democratic institutions and protect
human rights. We urge the OSCE to support, within its
mandate, the important 19 April agreement between
Serbia and Kosovo.
The OSCE’s effort to promote progress on Europe’s
protracted conflicts in Moldova, Georgia and Nagorno
Karabakh is long-standing. In Moldova, we welcome
the progress of the “5+2” talks towards a comprehensive
settlement of the Transdniestria issue and we hope that
the additional measures can be undertaken to improve
confidence on both sides of the River. As a co-chair
of the Minsk Group, the United States appreciates the
support of the chairmanship as we work to help the sides
reach a solution to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
The United States also supports the OSCE’s work as
a co-chair of the Geneva international discussions and
its ongoing work to address security and humanitarian
issues in the conflict-affected areas of Georgia.

13-325099

S/PV.6961

Secondly, the United States commends the
OSCE’s efforts to share expertise and promote
dialogue beyond Europe through its Mediterranean
and Asian partnership for cooperation programmes.
We were especially grateful for the OSCE’s support
for Afghanistan’s transition through improving
border security, combatting narcotics trafficking and
promoting development. Programmes such as the
joint OSCE-United Nations Development Programme
training for Afghan and other Central Asian officials
at the OSCE Border Management Staff College in
Dushanbe not only develop the skills of border and
customs officers, but also enhance regional cooperation
in crucial areas.
Thirdly, the United States supports and urges the
OSCE to continue its advocacy with participating
States on countering transnational threats, including
cyber threats, drug trafficking, counter-terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The organization’s work in the new field of cyber
security to identify emerging trends and potential
counter measures is critical for addressing not only
virtual but very real threats, including terrorists’ use
of the Internet. We also welcome the OSCE’s efforts
to implement Security Council resolutions to counter
terrorism and proliferation and its work to strengthen
the international legal framework against terrorism
by facilitating international cooperation in criminal
matters and through its joint initiatives with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Finally, the United States looks to the OSCE as
an important player to help protect human rights,
promote tolerance and non-discrimination, implement
support for citizens’ exercise of fundamental
freedoms and advance the goal of gender equality in
its region — commitments to which all participating
States have fundamentally agreed.
We fully support the OSCE’s efforts to increase the
political participation of women, expand the capacities
of legal systems to address domestic violence and
promote mentor networks for women’s empowerment.
We greatly appreciate the significant support and
advice that the OSCE has provided to participating
States through its Forum for Security Cooperation,
as they strive to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on
women, peace and security. We urge all participating
States, partnerships and the broader United Nations
membership to uphold the principle of gender equality.
Within the OSCE, gender focal points have been

10

appointed in all field operations, institutions and
departments of its secretariat. It serves as an illustrative
example of how organizations can effectively implement
gender mainstreaming.
As we approach the fortieth anniversary of the
Helsinki Final Act, we are reminded of the accords
that affirmed an inextricable link between the security
of States and the security of citizens. We reaffirm our
commitment to that objective and support the OSCE’s
tremendous efforts in achieving it.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, to the Council today
and to congratulate Ukraine’s chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I thank him for his briefing outlining the
priorities of the OSCE for 2013.
The security challenges we are facing today clearly
show the importance of the close partnership between
the United Nations and regional bodies in maintaining
international peace and stability. The Republic of
Korea welcomes the OSCE’s increasing contribution
to addressing global threats and challenges, as well as
its greater readiness to enhance cooperation with the
Security Council. The OSCE’s expertise and its own
experience of overcoming the Cold War and division
have enabled it to become a more reliable partner of the
Security Council. We also note the priorities set out by
the Chairperson-in-Office. In the light of that, I would
like to highlight several points today.
First, we welcome the OSCE’s greater focus on
non-proliferation. That is an area where I believe
we can expand our ongoing cooperation. As the
largest regional organization, the OSCE has served
as a torchbearer in leading the global fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Moreover, it is also commendable that the OSCE is
playing an important role in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), incorporating it as a priority in
its work programme for 2012 to 2015. As the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), I believe that such regional efforts are crucial
in implementing, complementing and supporting the
existing endeavours of the 1540 Committee. In line
with that, I plan to exchange views with the members
of the OSCE on that matter at the meeting of the Forum
for Security and Cooperation to be held in Vienna
next week. I am confident that it will serve as a timely

13-32509

S/PV.6961

opportunity to further mutual cooperation towards the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Secondly, we welcome and encourage the efforts
of the OSCE to resolve the protracted conflicts in the
region. While the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, I recognize that the OSCE can
effectively contribute to addressing regional conflicts
while complementing and reinforcing the work of the
Security Council. We commend the OSCE for its active
engagement in the political process of the comprehensive
settlement of such conflicts, particularly in the South
Caucasus and Transdniestria. We encourage the OSCE
to continue its efforts in that regard, with its intimate
understanding of the political, social, cultural and
economic underpinnings of the conflicts.
Thirdly, the Republic of Korea applauds the OSCE
for its firm commitment to counter transnational
threats such as terrorism, organized crime, illicit drug
trafficking and cyber threats. Particularly worthy of note
among such challenges are the threats stemming from
cyberspace. In an attempt to effectively address that
challenge, the Korean Government will host the Seoul
conference on cyberspace in October. We are confident
that it will be a good opportunity to explore constructive
ways to build a safe, reliable and open cyberspace. The
efforts of the OSCE to develop confidence-building
measures in cyberspace can provide valuable insight
for the deliberations at the conference.
Lastly, let me briefly comment on the Helsinki
process of the OSCE and the vision for peace and
cooperation in North-East Asia. The concept of
cooperative, comprehensive and indivisible security
and confidence- and security-building measures of
the Helsinki process still has special significance
for other regions of the world, especially in NorthEast Asia. In North-East Asia, where overarching
multilateral security institutions are markedly absent,
the level of political and security cooperation remains
at a nascent stage, despite the high level of economic
interdependence. Against that backdrop, the Korean
Government seeks to create a North-East Asian peace
and cooperation initiative, namely, the Seoul process.
It would involve countries in the region extending their
cooperation from non-political issues, such as climate
change, to political areas on the basis of trust. As we
take this trust initiative forward, the Helsinki process
of the OSCE can be a useful guide for the promotion of
peace and prosperity in North-East Asia as well.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea would like
to express its appreciation for the OSCE’s valuable
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security and hopes that it will further strengthen
its close cooperation with the Security Council in
addressing global threats and challenges.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to welcome Minister Leonid
Kozhara, whom we thank for his presentation. I
congratulate him on his assumption of the chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), and I wish him every success during
his term.
Guatemala is convinced that regional and
subregional organizations can contribute to further
strengthening the multilateral system, including in
the area of the maintenance of international peace and
security. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE is a concrete example of an alliance that has
helped to promote peace and security in Eastern Europe,
the Caucasus and Central Asia. We are confident that
under the chairmanship of Ukraine, the OSCE will
continue to promote dialogue and cooperation with the
United Nations.
We wish also to highlight specific efforts in areas
that are on the agenda of the Security Council.
First, in Afghanistan, the OSCE has actively
participated in efforts to promote political dialogue,
enhance national capacities and support the democratic
process. In that regard, Guatemala welcomes the close
coordination between the OSCE and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We welcome the
assistance provided by the Government of Afghanistan
in the areas of border security, police training and the
fight against drug trafficking.
Secondly, with respect to the situation in Kosovo,
the OSCE is also playing a constructive role, in close
coordination with the United Nations and the European
Union, in the context of an environment that poses major
challenges. Guatemala acknowledges the work that has
been done, inter alia, to strengthen the rule of law. We
note also the recent agreement signed by Belgrade and
Pristina, and we commend the results of the dialogue
conducted under the auspices of the European Union.
Thirdly, with regard to the OSCE zone, we are
concerned about the threats to security that the
prolonged, unresolved conflicts in that area continue to

13-3250911

S/PV.6961

pose. That is an issue that could be an area for greater
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE.
Fourthly, we note the priorities that Ukraine has
set for its chairmanship of the OSCE in 2013. We are
pleased to hear that, in addition to efforts to resolve
protracted conflicts, there will be a focus on a renewed
commitment to democracy, the rule of law and human
rights, as well as transnational threats.
We wish also to welcome the recent memorandums
of understanding signed between the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the OSCE aimed at promoting
the regional implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Lastly, Guatemala joins others in supporting
Ukraine’s vision and priorities for the OSCE’s work
this year, and it is our hope that there will be continued
fruitful cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to join the other members of the Security
Council in welcoming Minister Leonid Kozhara
and congratulating him on his assumption of the
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I also thank him for
his briefing on the priorities that his country has set
for its chairmanship of that organization and on the
prospects for cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations.
Argentina values the contributions made by regional
and subregional organizations to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We believe that not
only are they essential for strengthening the multilateral
system, but they also give greater legitimacy and
effectiveness to the actions of the international
community in responding to challenges to peace and
promoting dialogue and cooperation.
In that context, we welcome the important work
done by the OSCE in the areas of early warning,
conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict situations. In connection with those issues,
I wish to refer to some of the aspects highlighted by
Minister Kozhara.
Cooperation between the United Nations, the OSCE
and other organizations, on both regional and thematic
issues, has made it possible to have a better-coordinated
focus between the various international stakeholders.
Other examples, as mentioned by other members of the
Council, include the cooperation between the United

12

Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
and the OSCE. We believe that that cooperation has
contributed to the efforts under way to normalize and
stabilize relations in the region.
We also deem it important to highlight the close
cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia. There can be no doubt that that
cooperation has bolstered the contribution made by
the Regional Centre in responding both to domestic
issues that have repercussions on regional stability and
to the trans-boundary impact of the threats posed by
terrorism, organized crime and drug trafficking, as well
as environmental deterioration and problems related to
the management of water resources.
We welcome the inclusion of the issue of
prolonged conflicts among Ukraine’s priorities for its
chairmanship, as they pose a threat to regional stability.
In that vein, we welcome the determination to contribute
to the process of resolving the Transdniestrian question,
as made clear by the visit carried out by Mr. Kozhara
and his special representative to Chisinau at the
beginning of the year, as well as the role played in the
talks that took place in Leopolis last April. We hope
that the next meeting, to be held in Odessa, will enable
political progress to be made towards a lasting solution.
We also welcome the commitment made in the
context of the Geneva talks on the 2008 conflict in
Georgia and the talks on Nagorno Karabakh, led by the
co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group.
When it comes to topics on the agenda of the
Security Council, such as Afghanistan, we agree with
the Minister of Ukraine that there is a need to consider
the implications of the upcoming withdrawal of
international forces in 2014 and the potential responses
that the OSCE and other bodies could possibly provide
with a view to ensuring stability in the region.
We also welcome the importance given by
the Ukrainian chairmanship to efforts aimed at
strengthening arms control mechanisms and securityand confidence-building measures, as well as its
commitment to fighting transnational threats such as
those as I mentioned previously, namely, organized
crime and trafficking in persons, weapons and drugs.
In conclusion, Argentina values in particular
the attention given to the implementation of existing
commitments in the areas of the freedom of the press,

13-32509

S/PV.6961

youth education and human rights. We support the
vision and priorities set out by Ukraine for the work
of the OSCE over the coming year. We trust that both
the Security Council and the United Nations system as
a whole will deepen their cooperation with the OSCE
during the Ukrainian chairmanship.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to join
Security Council colleagues in welcoming Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Leonid Kozhara, to
the Security Council today. May I also thank him for
setting out his priorities as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) in 2013 and his view of the progress so far.
The OSCE remains a crucial forum for dialogue
aimed at creating a security community across a vast
area, from the North Atlantic to the Far East, that
commits its participating States to a wide-ranging
acquis across its three dimensions. It provides a
platform for holding participating States to account for
the commitments they have made, and offers a forum
for discussion of the issues that at times continue to
divide East and West, in particular in the areas of
human rights and democracy.
We support the Ukrainian Chairperson’s programme
of work across the three dimensions, and we continue to
work with him towards making progress on his priority
areas, notably the protracted conflicts in Moldova and
the South Caucuses, and promoting human rights and
democratization. Those are issues that not only matter
to the OSCE, but are important to the United Nations
as well.
We support the work that Ukraine is doing
to advance discussions on arms control in the
politico-military dimension, and we look forward to
engaging constructively both with the Chairperson and
with his successors in the “Helsinki+40” process, which
seeks to reinvigorate and strengthen commitments
across the organization.
The promotion and protection of human rights,
fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of
law remain central to the OSCE’s comprehensive
concept of security. The OSCE has one of the most
extensive sets of commitments, standards and
principles of any international organization, but there
are increasing gaps in the compliance with those
commitments by participating States. We support the
Ukrainian chairmanship’s efforts to encourage better
implementation.

The OSCE’s institutions have an important role
to play in assisting States in complying with their
commitments. We take the opportunity today to thank
them for their outstanding contributions.
Likewise, OSCE field operations within
participating States remain important in assisting
their hosts to meet their commitments. We continue to
support those mandates across the OSCE region.
We attach particular priority to the OSCE’s efforts
to ensure that the freedom of the media is respected
both online and off-line, and that those exercising their
right to the freedom of expression are able to do so
free from violence, harassment and intimidation. We
hope that participating States will agree to strengthen
commitments in this area at the Kyiv meeting of the
Ministerial Council.
We support Ukraine’s efforts to make progress
in the protracted conflicts in Moldova and the South
Caucuses, and we were interested to hear the views of
the Chairperson’s Special Representative Ambassador
Deshchytsia when he visited London recently. As a key
player in the Transdniestria “5+2” process, Ukraine
is well-placed to reinvigorate talks. We continue to
believe that the Geneva talks being co-chaired by the
OSCE with the European Union and the United Nations
provide a necessary dialogue for a resolution of the
conflict in Georgia. On Nagorno Karabakh, we support
the Chairperson’s efforts to engage with the Minsk
Group, and continued dialogue with Azerbaijan and
Armenia.
On the politico-military dimension, the OSCE’s
existing overarching framework of conventional arms
control and confidence- and security-building measures
contains many important elements that we should
carefully preserve and implement comprehensively.
However, it is also clear that the regimes are not
functioning optimally, and need to be modernized so
that they can be made fit for purpose in the context
of the evolving international security landscape. The
current status quo is inherently unstable and unlikely
to be sustainable.
The United Kingdom believes that the OSCE can
play a useful regional role on transnational challenges,
including in areas such as Central Asia. There is an
increasing body of compelling evidence that the OSCE
can add significant value through its work on border
security and resolution 1540 (2004). Addressing issues
of women, peace and security is essential to conflict

13-3250913

S/PV.6961

resolution, which goes to the heart of the OSCE’s raison
d’être.
Colleagues know the deep commitment of the United
Kingdom to addressing sexual violence in conflict.
We welcome the continued focus under the Ukrainian
chairmanship on effective cooperation between the
OSCE and other international organizations, not least
the United Nations. There is more that could be done
in collaboration on wider security matters to ensure
complementary activity and to avoid duplicating efforts,
including on work to combat trafficking, whether in
human beings, narcotics or other illicit goods.
It is important that all OSCE members adhere to
their commitments. The role of Chairperson-in-Office
of the OSCE provides an opportunity to promote and
model the principles of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, democracy, good governance and the rule of
law, on which the OSCE is founded. The United Kingdom
looks forward to continuing to work with Ukraine and
other participating States towards the strengthening
and implementation of these commitments across the
OSCE region.
I have a couple of questions for the Foreign Minister.
The first is on the human dimension. The United
Kingdom sees great value in the commitments that
OSCE participating States have made under the human
dimension in promoting human rights and democracy
across the region. We were very disappointed that
no agreement on strengthening those commitments
was possible at either of the past two meetings of the
Ministerial Council. We would be grateful to hear the
Minister’s views on what he sees as the prospects for
progress in that area under his chairmanship at Kyiv in
December.
Secondly, on cooperation with other international
organizations, we were very pleased to hear the
Minister talk of increased cooperation between the
OSCE and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in the area of transnational threats, and of greater
coordination with other international actors in the
context of the upcoming transition in Afghanistan. I
wonder what other opportunities the Minister sees for
joint work between the OSCE and other international
organizations, including the United Nations, where
such coordination would be complementary and allow
the OSCE to add value and expertise.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I join my colleagues before me in welcoming the

14

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Leonid
Kozhara, and congratulating him on his assumption
of the chairmanship of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I thank him,
furthermore, for the comprehensive briefing in which
he set out the priorities and positions of the Ukrainian
chairmanship.
Morocco attaches great importance to the role
of regional and subregional organizations and their
cooperation with the United Nations in keeping with
the Charter with full respect for their mandates and
respective responsibilities. The OSCE makes an
undeniable and appreciated contribution in resolving
conflicts through its prevention mechanisms, in
particular the Conflict Prevention Centre. We believe
that the understanding and complementarity between
the OSCE and the United Nations are achievements that
must be preserved and enhanced.
We welcome the priorities identified by the
Ukrainian chairmanship, which are part of the OSCE’s
ongoing contribution to the promotion of international
peace and security. As an active member of the
Group of Friends of Mediation, Morocco welcomes
the commitment of the Ukrainian chairmanship to
fostering the development of an OSCE mediation
support mechanism and its intention to pursue efforts
to find lasting settlements to protracted conflicts in the
OSCE area.
We share the priority attached by the Ukrainian
chairmanship to constructive negotiations and dialogue
in resolving disputes, including in the framework of the
“5+2” talks and international discussions in Geneva.
In that respect, my country supports efforts to find a
negotiated, peaceful settlement to the conflict between
Azerbaijan and Armenia. Accordingly, we reiterate our
support for OSCE efforts through the Minsk Group, and
in particular the appeal of the co-Chairs for dialogue.
In that regard, the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan is
an important principle that must be upheld.
Turning now to the other actions planned by the
Ukrainian chairmanship, Morocco remains convinced
that the United Nations could draw on the experience
and capacities of the OSCE in many areas, including
in weapons control, non-proliferation and combating
transnational threats. We will follow with interest the
updating of the Guiding Principles on Non-proliferation,
and underscore the contribution of the OSCE to
responding to transnational threats. We take this

13-32509

S/PV.6961

opportunity to reiterate that the multidimensional and
universal nature of those threats requires collective,
coordinated and sustained international action. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the importance attached
to bolstering cooperation with the United Nations in
those areas.
Morocco is an OSCE Mediterranean Partner
for Cooperation and actively participates in the
Mediterranean Contact Group. My country’s interest
in its Mediterranean partnership with the OSCE
arises from the great importance it attaches to the
partnership’s priority areas in the security, economic
and environmental fields, in particular those
concerning the fight against terrorism and other types
of crime, discrimination, trafficking in human beings,
immigration and development.
Allow me in that regard to reiterate Morocco’s
appeal to review the status of the Mediterranean
Partners for Cooperation with a view to identifying
a more committed and participatory approach. In
that respect, I recall that Morocco put forward a text
reflecting our vision of the format and content of
that partnership. The document contains a number of
proposals aimed at strengthening the partnership and
making it more substantive on the basis of an updated
agenda.
Morocco supports all initiatives to promote
tolerance and interreligious dialogue and to counter
all types of discrimination, and reiterates its appeal for
strengthened cooperation between the OSCE and the
Alliance for Civilizations. That partnership is based
on a number of clear objectives in peace, security and
cooperation.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating all our wishes
for success to the Ukrainian chairmanship of the OSCE
in carrying out the ambitious objectives that it has
taken on.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, let me
thank the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, for his work at the helm of the OSCE and for
his briefing today. We value our regular interactions
with regional and subregional organizations, as Rwanda
strongly believes in strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

We welcome the priorities for action set forth by
Ukraine for its 2013 chairmanship of the OSCE, which
are in line with the “Helsinki+40” process. We approve
its common vision, goals and actions, which we hope
will ensure security, stability and prosperity in the
OSCE area. We commend the comprehensive approach
of the OSCE, which focuses on peace and security
issues, including conflict prevention, but which also
strives to foster economic development while ensuring
the sustainable use of natural resources and promoting
full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
We stress the importance of cooperation between the
OSCE and other stakeholders at all stages of conflicts,
namely, conflict prevention, conflict management
and resolution, and post-conflict peacebuilding. In
that regard, we commend the work of the OSCE in
mediating conflicts and monitoring elections on the
European continent. I highlight OSCE cooperation
with the European Union (EU) in Kosovo in promoting
the rule of law, which is paramount to stability and
progress there.
On election monitoring, Rwanda supports OSCE
efforts aimed at facilitating municipal elections in 2013
in northern Kosovo, in accordance with applicable law
and international standards. We commend the continued
cooperation of the OSCE Mission in Kosovo with other
regional actors, particularly the EU. We believe that
such cooperation on region-wide issues will support
reconciliation efforts in Kosovo and the region.
On another conflict, we welcome the continued
efforts of the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group to
mediate on the Nagorno Karabakh conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan. We reiterate Rwanda’s belief
that only a negotiated settlement complying with
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, respecting
internationally recognized borders and ensuring the
protection of minorities will bring a lasting resolution
to the crisis.
Finally, let me conclude by saying that past and
current experience has shown that strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
actors can play a key role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Therefore, Rwanda
looks forward to continued fruitful cooperation with
the OSCE under Ukraine’s able leadership.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to welcome the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

13-3250915

S/PV.6961

(OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
Mr. Leonid Kozhara, to the Security Council and thank
him for his briefing and for setting out his priorities
across the three dimensions of security.
Azerbaijan commends the Ukrainian chairmanship
for its focus on the resolution of the protracted conflicts
in the OSCE area. It is important to reinvigorate ongoing
conflict settlement efforts and encourage participating
States to comply with their obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act of 1975 and to implement the resolutions adopted
by the main organs of the United Nations. We hope that
the decision on the “Helsinki+40” process adopted last
year in Dublin will contribute to the achievement of
tangible outcomes to that end.
The OSCE provides an ongoing forum for
discussions on settling the conflict between Armenia
and Azerbaijan. We take positive note of the support of
the Chairperson-in-Office for mediation efforts in that
regard, and would like to offer some thoughts on issues
of concern and areas of action that we deem particularly
important.
Twenty years ago, in 1993, the Security Council
adopted four resolutions condemning the use of force
against Azerbaijan and the occupation of its territories;
reaffirming respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country and the inviolability of
international borders; confirming that the Nagorno
Karabakh region was part of Azerbaijan; and demanding
the immediate, full and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from all the occupied territories.
The resolutions also made specific reference to
violations of international humanitarian law, including
the displacement of a large number of civilians in
Azerbaijan, attacks on civilians and bombardments of
my country’s territory. A series of Security Council
presidential statements made between 1992 and 1995
are phrased along the same lines. In other words, the
resolutions, which are clearly the most authoritative
and binding rulings on the problem, acknowledge
that acts of military force were committed against
Azerbaijan, and that such acts constituted a violation of
international law.
Unfortunately, key Security Council demands have
still not been implemented, and the mediation efforts
conducted for more than 20 years within the framework
of the OSCE have yet to yield results. Against that
background, attempts to downplay the relevance of the

16

Security Council resolutions and to misinterpret the
norms and principles of international law, as well as the
Armenian side’s insistence on unrealistic annexationist
claims, represent an open challenge to the conflictsettlement process and a serious threat to international
and regional peace and security. Moreover, consistent
measures are being undertaken in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan with a view to further consolidating the
current status quo of the occupation and preventing
the return of more than 700,000 internally displaced
Azerbaijanis to their homes.
On our initiative in the United Nations in 2005
and 2010, OSCE-led fact-finding and fact-assessment
missions visited the occupied territories. Both missions
documented the facts of illegal activities in those areas
involving, inter alia, implanting settlers, extensive
redrawing of boundaries, changing place names,
and discriminatory treatment regarding cultural
property and sacred sites. However, the missions’
recommendations remained on paper. Moreover, the
latest reports on the transfer of Syrian Armenians into the
Nagorno Karabakh region and other occupied territories
of Azerbaijan, along with other illegal activities,
including efforts to operate flights into and out of those
territories, provide yet more evidence of Armenia’s
deliberate policy of colonization of Azerbaijani lands.
We hope that the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office will
insist on the need for an immediate and unconditional
halt to all actions seriously obstructing the prospects
for a negotiated settlement of the conflict, based on
international law.
The achievement of peace, security and stability
is possible first and foremost only if the consequences
of Armenia’s unlawful use of force are removed, thus
ensuring that the occupation of Azerbaijan’s territories
is ended and that the right of internally displaced
Azerbaijanis to return to their homes, property and
possessions is guaranteed and implemented. That
is what international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions require, and that is what can in no
way be introduced as a bargaining chip in the conflictsettlement process. Above all, Azerbaijan will never
compromise its territorial integrity or the rights and
freedoms of its citizens.
The establishment of the truth about the serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law committed during the conflict, the provision
of adequate and effective reparations to victims and the
need for institutional action to prevent the repetition

13-32509

S/PV.6961

of such violations are all prerequisites for true conflict
resolution. It is obvious that the impunity still enjoyed
by the perpetrators of the crimes, including the political
and military leadership of Armenia and the members
of the puppet separatist regime in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, continues to impede progress
in achieving the long-awaited peace and reconciliation
between the two countries.
Azerbaijan is confident that the consistent
measures being taken at the national level, as well as
the existing international legal framework, will serve
to bring to justice those responsible for the grave
offences committed against the civilian population of
Azerbaijan during the conflict. Generally speaking,
we believe that the conflict-resolution initiatives must
ensure that peace and justice work together effectively.
Peace efforts cannot be conducted in a manner that
contradicts the established norms of international
law. It is therefore imperative that such efforts and
peace agreements never encourage the acceptance of
situations achieved by the unlawful use of force or
other egregious violations of international law, such
as war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
ethnic cleansing.
We commend the OSCE chairmanship for its
commitment to remaining actively engaged with
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations towards
strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution. There is an obvious need for reviewing
and assessing the OSCE mandates and performance
in conflict-cycle-related issues, in particular conflict
resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation. Based on
existing commitments, more concerted efforts should
be put into exploring the OSCE’s role in multinational
peacekeeping operations, with a particular focus on
civilian and police components. The OSCE’s interaction
with various military and security arrangements must
be considered in the context of the indivisibility of the
OSCE area, by addressing, inter alia, the legitimate
concerns of those States participating in the OSCE
that are not members of any military alliances, and by
providing them with political and security guarantees.
One of the OSCE’s major contributions to peace
and security in the political-military dimension is
made chiefly through arms control and confidenceand security-building measures. The implementation
of such measures should be done in a way that ensures
the right of every State to an equal level of security

and that guarantees that no individual State or group of
States enjoys an advantage over others. Efforts in that
particular area should not be taken out of the overall
political and security context. They should take into
account the legitimate security needs and concerns
of participating States, especially those that are not
members of military alliances with conflict-affected
territories; they should also take into account the
consequences of conflict, such as military intervention
and illegal deployment.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine once again for addressing
the Security Council, and to wish our Ukrainian
colleagues a successful chairmanship.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, Mr. Leonid Kozhara, for his briefing on behalf
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). As an important regional organization,
over the years the OSCE has made a positive contribution
to efforts to conduct preventive diplomacy, enhance
security and mutual trust, mediate regional disputes
and combat transnational crime. China appreciates
those efforts, and we encourage the OSCE to continue
to exploit its advantages and to play a constructive
role in maintaining regional peace, security and
stability. China believes that strengthening United
Nations cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations is very important to the maintenance
of international peace and security, as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council bears the primary responsibilty
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Regional and subregional organizations, with their
unique advantages, are in a position to support and
collaborate with the Security Council as a useful
complement to its work. The OSCE is an important
cooperation partner for the United Nations. China
encourages the Security Council to cooperate with the
OSCE in the maintenance of international peace and
security in a manner that is more results-oriented and
effective.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I, too, would like to welcome the presence here
in the Council of the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister for Foreign

13-3250917

S/PV.6961

Affairs of Ukraine, and to thank him for having
presented, inter alia, his country’s priorities for its
chairmanship of the OSCE.
My country shares his expressed desire to
continue to strengthen the cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE in particular and, more
generally, between the United Nations and regional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter.
We believe that concerted responses by the United
Nations and regional organizations and closer and more
sustained partnerships will prevent and permanently
resolve frozen and latent conflicts and those under way
almost everywhere in the world.
In this sense, my country welcomes the major
contribution the OSCE has made to conflict resolution.
In working to create a security community through
continuous dialogue and based on the concept of global
and indivisible security, the OSCE has been able to
ensure stability in its region and improve the lives of
its individuals and communities, despite the several
remaining areas of tension. Indeed, its multifaceted
work in Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular, have provided support for the creation of
institutions designed to avert future conflicts, strengthen
governance in those countries, and encourage the
consolidation of multi-ethnic and multi-faith societies,
even if progress in that area is still needed.
My country believes that, in order to achieve the best
results and avoid duplication of efforts in their areas of
responsibility, the OSCE and the United Nations must
continue to strengthen their cooperation on the basis
of their respective experience, which could benefit
other regional organizations. Indeed, the recognized
expertise of the OSCE in electoral processes, supporting
for democratization process, the implementation of
confidence-building measures, the strengthening of
security and the fight against terrorism — all of which
are issues that Africa faces — could be very useful,
particularly to the African Union. That is why we
welcome the focus of the Ukrainian chairmanship
of the OSCE on strengthening cooperation with the
United Nations, and we hope that such cooperation will
extend to other regional organizations. No State and no
institution, no matter how powerful, can stand alone
against threats to international peace and security.
Togo welcomes Ukraine’s decision to include, in
the list of priorities of its chairmanship, a new effort
to resolve unresolved or prolonged conflicts within the

18

OSCE region, including the conflict in Transdniestria,
which has not been able to reach a viable resolution
for over 20 years. In that regard, we welcome the
announcement of a new round of negotiations on
the issue under the “5+2” format in the coming days
in Odessa. Togo urges the parties to the conflict to
become more involved in those negotiations in a spirit
of consensus so that a mutually acceptable political
solution can finally emerge. My country believes that
a proposal for a resolution to the conflict that takes the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and Constitution of the
Republic of Moldova into account, alongside a special
guaranteed status for Transdniestria, could be a good
basis for negotiations.
Furthermore, we hope that, in chairing the OSCE,
Ukraine will achieve the desired success in reconciling
the positions of the parties to the conflicts in Nagorno
Karabakh, South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and thereby
allow for progress towards their final resolution.
The Nagorno Karabakh conflict, which has already
lasted too long and has had a negative impact on the
relationship between Armenia and Azerbaijan, should
receive special attention so that the suffering of the
people of that region can be brought to an end. We hope
that Mr. Kozhara’s visit to Baku in June will allow
move the process forward.
Let me conclude by wishing every success to
Ukraine in implementing its mandate. In addition to
the priorities it has identified for its tenure, it must
overcome, on the one hand, the lack of interest shown
by some members of the organization that no longer
recognize its usefulness, and, on the other hand, the
current disagreements regarding the activities of the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,
which have been largely responsible for delays in the
adoption of the budget this year.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Kozhara to respond to the
comments and questions of Council members.
Mr. Kozhara: I thank all the Council members
for their kind words regarding Ukraine’s chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and their strong belief in its success.
I am strongly encouraged by the unanimous support
granted by Council members to the priorities and
initiatives of the Ukrainian chairmanship. We welcome
their constructive suggestions and valuable opinions,

13-32509

S/PV.6961

which we will certainly take into account in advancing
our common goals.
As I am a few minutes late for a meeting with the
Secretary-General, I shall ask the Ukraine mission to
pass on our answers in written form. I thank all members
for their kind and warm approach to the chairmanship
of the Ukraine.

The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

13-3250919
