.

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

JAN 2 2 1993

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (UAgendaI2509).

.. ... ... ... .. ... .. ... ... . ... .. ... .. ..

Opening statement by the President.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 lanuary 1984 from the Permanent iZepresentativ& of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the S&xity Council
(S/16244) . . . . ..i..............‘..................
..,...‘.....‘.....

SlPV.2509

;

”

NOTE
)‘[‘. i
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2509th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 4 January 1984, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Javier CHAMORRO
(Nicaragua).

MORA

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2509)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 January 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16244)
The meeting

of the agenda

was called to order at 4.35 p.m.

Opening statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT:
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
Since this is the first meeting of the Council this year,
I should like to extend my congratulations to everyone
here today. I wish you good health and voice the hope
that your fruitful work, characterized by the spirit of cooperation, will be in the interest of international peace
and security for all mankind.
2. I am particularly pleased to welcome the new nonpermanent members of the Council elected for a twoyear term-Egypt,
India, Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic and the Upper Volta. I know that
I am reflecting the sentiments of the other members
of the Council in expressing the conviction that the
participation of the new members in the Council’s work
will be an invaluable contribution
to the search for
solutions to the complex problems with which the
Council will have to deal in the discharge of its important functions.
3. I should like also, on behalf of the Council, to
express my thanks to the retiring non-permanent members for the important and valuable contributions that
they have made to our work. The representatives of
Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire have won our
esteem and friendship and brought their talent to the
Council’s work in various ways. I am sure that our cooperation in the future will continue to be fruitful.

4. Before I conclude, I should like, on behalf of the
Council, to express my grateful thanks to my predecessor, Mr. Max van der Stoel, the representative of the
Netherlands,
who conducted the proceedings of the
Council most effectively during the month of December. Mr. van der Stoel won our enthusiastic admiration
for his diplomatic skill displayed during the course of
our work.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 January 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16244)
5. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
I should like to inform the members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Ethiopia, Mozambique,
South Africa, Togo,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Seifu
(Ethiopia), Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. von
Schirnding
(South Africa),
Mr. Amega
(Togo),
Mr. Rupia (United
Republic
of Tanzania)
and
Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reservedfor them
at the side of the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
The Security Council is meeting today in response to
the request which appears in a letter dated 1 January
from the representative of Angola to the President of
the Security Council.
7. I should also like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to document S/16245, containing the text
of a letter dated 31 December 1983 from the representative of Angola to the Secretary-General.
8. The first speaker is the representative
upon whom I now call.

of Angola,

9. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President,
although I come here on a tragic mission, my mind is
easier knowing that the Council’s deliberations
are
being presided over by a staunch defender of freedom
and national liberation. The role played by your country as a beacon in the struggle against neo-colonialism
and imperialism is a source of consolation to us in our
dark hour.

murdered. the Door neasants whose life’s savings and
meagre propeiy are destroyed by racist troop& the
Angolans who daily are subjected to artillery and aerial
bombings-these
are at the heart of problems of international peace and security in our region.
17. Instead, the Council’s deliberations
on strategic concerns and considerations:
peace and for whom?

10. I should also like to extend, on behalf of my Government and delegation, our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his unceasing efforts, offtcial and
otherwise, to secure the withdrawal of South African
troops from Angola and for his support of Angola’s just
calls.

are focused
what price

18. The anguish of the Angolan people is matched
-no, exceeded-by
the cynicism of the racist regime.
Even as the Council heard the views and appeals of the
Government and people of Angola just two weeks ago
[2504th to 2508th meetings], the racist regime hurriedly
addressed a letter to the Secretary-General
with an
“offer” of “disengagement”
to begin ‘on 31 January
[see S/26219, unnex r]. Before my Government could
even begin to study this “offer” to determine its genuineness, perhaps to seek clarification on certain points,
we received an answer to our unspoken questions, a
confirmation of our unvoiced suspicions:

11. As this is the third time within a few weeks that
I have taken the floor in the Council, I run the risk of
sounding tedious and repetitious. In southern Africa
armed aggression, the butchery of civilians, State terrorism and economic sabotage, murder, kidnapping
and rape have all become so commonplace
that representatives may well ask: What else is new?

19. Even as the Council had placed before it the letter
of the racist authorities, even as Pretoria’s friends and
allies were pointing to the letter with pious satisfaction,
even as the letter attempted, unsuccessfully, to diffuse
the solid international support for the Angolan position
by its spurious “offer” of “disengagement”,
the South
African armed forces were fortifying their military positions inside Angolan territory, where they have been in
illegal occupation since I98 1.

12. The fact that the majority of the acts I have just
mentioned are aimed at one country and people,
Angola, and that they are perpetrated by one entity, the
racist regime of South Africa, simply serves to make the
issue that much more of a repetition.
13. Nevertheless, no matter how blase the audience,
each death is a fresh catastrophe on the battlefields of
Angola; each kidnapping and rape is a major trauma for
the victim and the family; each racist act of sabotage is a
setback in our efforts for national reconstruction; each
act of racist aggression is a human and national disaster.

20. Then began a series of military moves by the
South African armed forces farther north of their positions inside Angolan territory. Their acts of armed
aggression, including
aerial bombing,
strafing and
rocket attacks, artillery bombings, ambush, mine detonations, and so on, were aimed at localities more than
200 kilometres from the Namibian border. This gives
the lie to the racist assertion that South African troops
would engage in operations only against Namibian freedom fighters. The families of thousands of Angolan
victims can refute these lies.

14. Matters of peace-keeping
and security, with
which the Council is charged under the Charter of the
United Nations, are not entities in and of themselves,
devoid of their human aspect. In fact, all the purposes
and principles of the Charter, the r&on d’&tre of the
United Nations and all its organs, all the work ordinary
and extraordinary carried out by the United Nations
-all these have and must have as their central purpose
and goal the human being. Yet this is too often forgotten
under the mounds of paperwork and rhetoric of which
the Organization is often rightly accused.

21. A partial list of South African acts of aggression,
which are continuing to this day, is before the Council
members as an annex’ to a letter addressed to the Secretary-General by President Jose Eduardo DOS Santos
[S/16245].

15. The Council in particular has a tendency indeed to
deal with weighty issues of international significance as
if these, and not the human factor, were the aim of the
exercise; and buried beneath all the words and resolutions, the bickering and the negotiations, the acrimony
and the debates, are real, living human beings, the
victims of disasters which are being discussed in these
halls and chambers.

22. Between March 1976 and August 1981, the racist
armed forces of South Africa carried out 2,988 detected
and counted acts of aggression against Angola, ranging
from airspace violations to wholesale slaughter as at
Cassinga and Bomba. In July 1981, the racist regime
massed 40,000 troops on the Namibian border and began “Operation Protea”, which led to the illegal occupation since 1981 of parts of southern Angola. Since
that date, the racist troops have carried out countless
acts of aggression against the Government and people
of Angola from inside Angolan territory. Hence I am

16. Therefore, in our debate on the present issue, the
Angolan mother who weeps for her sons slain by the
racist fire, the Angolan parents whose children are
raped by South African soldiers and then kidnapped or
2

not even attempting to compile a list of such acts since
mid-1981 to the present. In any case, these figures
cannot even begin to convey the true scale and tragedy
of the human, economic, social and civil consequences
of these relentless military operations against Angola.

some action that will redress the existing military
aggression being carried out by the racist South African
regime. Despite our bitter experience and despite the
recent and ongoing massive military operations, and to
deny Pretoria’s friends any excuse to point a finger at
us, the Government of Angola is willing to test the socalled offer made by the South African regime. After
all, 31 January is not too far away.

23. This latest operation, carried out against old and
new Angolan targets and from inside Angolan territory,
is one of the largest such operations carried out by,the
racist armed forces, using Mirage fighter aircraft, motorized infantry brigades, four 140-mm and 155-mm
artillery guns, 100 fighter aircraft and helicopters,
AML-90 and AML-60 armoured cars and MX tanks.
The sophisticated military arms and arsenals at the
disposal of the South African armed forces are available
through direct and indirect military assistance-in contravention of the Council’s embargo on arms sales to
South Africa-by Pretoria’s Western friends and some
allies, many of which are permanent or rotating members of the Council and some of which are represented
at the Council table. Nevertheless, the valiant People’s
Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola (FAPLA)
have honourably defended their country, downing
South African aircraft and capturing some equipment
and arms.

27. We can understand the Council’s reluctance to act
in situations where the issue has not been brought to
the Council. Neither the Government nor the people
of Angola can understand the Council’s inability or
unwillingness to act when the issue has been before the
Council since 1976; when six resolutions have been
adopted by the Council itself since 1976 [resolutions
387(1976), 428 (1978), 447(1979), 454 (1979), 475 (1980)
and 545 (2983)]; when there is a clear violation of
the Charter; when the Council is the supreme peacekeeping organ of the Organization and the guardian of
the Charter; when the will of the international community has been regularly, consistently and unequivocally
expressed in support of the Angolan position; when
there have been almost 3,000 documented cases of
South African aggression against Angola up to mid1981; when there has been no case of an Angolan soldier ever setting foot across the national borders of
Angola; when the known, recognized and internationally acknowledged aggressor strikes with impunity
across its own borders; when the members of the Council and States Members of the United Nations acknowledge the validity and justness of the Angolan position
and acknowledge and admit the culpability of the racist
South African regime-why then, in the face of this
universality, is the Council impotent to deliver justice
and to safeguard peace and security?

24. Incidentally, the valiant FAPLA units and the
Angolan People’s Defence Organization had succeeded
in routing the bandits and puppets supported by the
South African armed forces when the latter rushed in
their troops and saved their puppets from being wiped
out. This is part of an ongoing attempt by the racist
regime, an attempt started in 1975,to use military might
inside Angolan territory and install a puppet administration in areas under South African military occupation. The White Paper prepared by the Government of
Angola details the attempts made in 1975and 1976.’The
present operation is part of that plan. In fact, a similar
military action by FAPLA in the past almost succeeded
in destroying the bandit group, only to have the racist
armed forces rush in at the last minute to save their
proteges.

28. Will the aggressor be allowed to go unindicted?
Will it be free to continue its racist acts with impunity;
free to violate the Charter; free to expand its hegemony
over southern Africa and destroy the fragile balance
that exists in the region; free to destabiiize sovereign
Governments in the region; free to sabotage the national reconstruction efforts by independent States;
free to carry out State terrorism and acts of armed
aggression; free to butcher, rape and kidnap; free to
threaten and destroy the livelihood of civilians?

25. The Government and the people of Angola are
bearing the brunt of the fury unleashed by the racist
regime against those whose very existence threatens
the racist structure and way of life. For the apartheid
regime to feel safe inside the borders of South Africa, it
feels impelled to exert its hegemony over Africa up to
the equator, as is explicitly stated in its amended Defence Laws. Unfortunately, owing to a fact of geography, the independent and sovereign State of Angola
stands in the way. Ironically enough, Angola has no
border with South Africa. However, since Namibia is
ruled as a fifth province by the Pretoria regime, this
technicality is not allowed to stand in the way of the
racist actions.

29. As a State Member of the United Nations, a Member in good standing, Angola has the right to demand
and the right to expect an answer-an answer that will
be acceptable to the people of Angola, whose concerns
we present to the Council and whose interests we represent at the United Nations.
30. My delegation waits not merely for another resolution on paper, but for the answer to carry home.

26. Every duty carries a corresponding right. Angola,
as a State Member of the United Nations, has always
discharged its obligations under the Charter. For its
part, the Council owes the southern African States

31. A luta continua!

A vitoria

P certa!

32. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa,
3

whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

coming increasingly integrated with the SWAP0 murder gangs for whom they provide facilities and arms and
equipment.

33. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): Sir, on
behalf of the South African delegation I should like to
convey to you our congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council.

41. South Africa has made it clear that it has no quarrel with the military units of the Luanda regime and
that its cross-border activities are aimed at eradicating
SWAP0 nests in Angola. However, we ‘have made it
equally clear that if the armed forces of the Angolan
regime are bent on giving active military support to
SWAP0 or interfere <with South ‘Africa’s operations
against SWAPO, then they must bear full responsibility
for the consequences. South Africa furthermore denies’
emphatically
that its forces commit atrocities against
the civilian population of Angola.
. .
42. If the Luanda regime is so concerned with a threat
to peace and security in the region, it should take the
necessary steps to ensure that its territory is not used
for the launching of aggression against its neighbours.

34. In requesting this meeting of the Council, the representative of Angola, in his letter dated 1 January,
transmitted a message from the President of Angola to
the President of the Security Council in which reference
is made to “the worsening military situation in southern Angola created by the advancement of the South
African military units further north into Angolan territory” and a wish was expressed to avoid “a situation that would lead to disastrous consequences; which
would in turn threaten peace and security in the
region”.
35. When I last addressed the Council, as recently as
16 December 1983 [250&h ineeting], I made it clear that
South Africa has no desire to control a single centimetre
of Angolan territory and that South African security
operations in southern Angola have but a single objective, and that is the protection of the inhabitants of
South West AfricalNamibia
from SWAP0 [South West
Africa People’s Organization]
terrorist attacks which
are launched from Angolan territory.

43. If it is so concerned with the threat to’peace and
security in the region,,as it professes, why does it
attempt to justify the presence in Angola of the Cuban
and other surrogates, who represent ideologies completely foreign to Africa? Their presence is indeed a
threat to peace and security in the region, and is leading
Angola to disastrous consequences because the people
of Angola refuse to succumb -to the tyranny which has
been imposed on them with the direct assistance of the
Cuban forces.

36. The progressive moves by South African military
units to which the President of Angola has referred are
being conducted with precisely that objective in view.

44. South Africa and, I trust, the members of the
Council will not be taken in by this transparent attempt
of the Luanda regime at deception. As long as the
Angolan regime tolerates, encourages and nourishes
SWAPO’s gangs of terrorists on its soil, for so long will
the South African Defence Force seek out their bases
and destroy them. ‘. ‘.
I 3.c’
_’ ’
45. Let me turn now to the letter dated 3 1 December
1983 which the President of Angola addressed to the
Secretary-General
[S/16245]. It will be recalled that.
when I addressed the Council on 16 December, I read to
the ,Council the text of the letter dated 15 December
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information.
of South Africa to the Secretary-General,
in which the
Government of South Africa indicated that it was prepared to begin, on 31 January 1984, a disengagement of.
forces which,from time to time conduct.military
operations against SWAP0 in Angola, on the understanding
that this gesture would be reciprocated by the Angolan
Government,
which would assure that its own forces,
SWAP0 and the Cubans’would not exploit the resulting
situatidn, in ‘particular with regard to actions which
might threaten the &curity of the inhabitants of South
West Africa/Namibia
[see S/16219; annex t].

37. It is hypocrisy for Angola to come to the Council
and to state that it wishes to avoid a situation that would
lead to disastrous consequences. It is the actions of the
Angolan regime in aiding and abetting SWAPO’s terrorist aims and by supporting SWAP0 to launch attacks
from Angola and maintain bases on Angolan territory
which in fact will lead to “disastrous consequences”,
unless the Luanda regime comes to its senses.
38. South Africa has stated on innumerable,occasions
that it will not sit idly by while SWAP0 operates with
impunity from the safety of Angolan territory from
where they plan and execute their acts of murder and
pillage against the civilians ‘of the Territory of South
West Africa/Namibia.
39. It is hypocrisy for Angola to have the effrontery to
complain to the Council about the security operations,
of the South African military forces in the execution of
their task to seek out and to destroy SWAP0 bases in
southern Angola in pre-emptive actions such as the one
which is currently under way. South Africa has declared its intentions openly. I have personally stated
them in the Council and I repeat them: here today.

46. It will be further recalled that Angola’s immediate
response to this positive gesture on the part of South
Africa was one of contemptuous rejection. Apparently
that regime has now had second thoughts and must

40. The Luanda regime makes no secret of its support
for SWAPO’s aims and objectives, and it is also no
secret that the forces of the Angolan regime are be4

have been advised that its outright rejection of South
Africa’s initiative did it more harm than good; hence
this attempt by Angoia to appear to be reasonable. The
Angolan Government is, however, the one which will
have to comply with the conditions for peace, not the
South African Government.

54. There is no denying the threat posed for the past
several years by the warlike acts of the racist regime to
both regional and international peace and security. The
Council is fully aware of this. For a number of years the
international
community
and, especially, the Council
have been passive observers of the many systematic
campaigns of destabilization
carried out by the racist
regime of South Africa against the front-line States.

47. The South African Government’s
offer still
stands. Its language is clear: if Angola desires peace it
can have peace by not allowing SWAP0 to operate
from its territory and by not exploiting any arrangement
for the cessation of hostilities. Finally, as regards the
implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978), South
Africa has stated that it remains prepared to begin the
process of implementation
upon resolution of the problem of Cuban forces in Angola as reflected in paragraph 12 of the Secretary-General’s
report of 28 August
1983 [S/15943]. That remains South Africa’s position.

55. That policy of destabilization
has been and still is,
most obvious in the acts of aggression conslantly perpetrated against Angola. It reached its climax when, in
August 198 1, the troops of the ppartheid regime carried
out a massive invasion of the territory of Angola,
occupying certain parts of the south of that country..
56. Thus, history shows that the situation in Angola,
today is nothing new. It is a situation regarding which
the Council, in its resolution 387 (1976), demanded
South Africa’s respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola; regarding which the Council
adopted its resolution 428 (1978), in which it demanded
the unconditional withdrawal of the racist armed forces
from Angola; and regarding which the Council saw fit to
reiterate its appeals in resolutions 447 (1979), 454 (1979)
and .475 (1980).

48. Mr. DIALLO
(Upper Volta) [interpretufionjiom
French]: Mr. President, as this is my first statement in
the Council on behalf of the Upper Volta, I wish first of
all to convey my country’s deep gratitude to all the
St$es Members of the United Nations, by whose decision we have become a member of the Council. They
may rest assured that the trust they placed in us will not
be betrayed.
,.

57. The incontestable facts are there abundantly to
prove that this situation is a flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola, a State
Member of the United Nations. The incontestable facts
are there as a constant reminder to us all of the threat
posed by this situation to international peace and security.

49. Permit me next to express to you and to my other
colleagues in the Council how much my delegation and
I appreciate the warm welcome extended to the new
members of the Council. We are certain that this welcome bodes well for close and frank co-operation, as a
foundation for our mutual relations and efforts aimed at
maintaining international
peace and security.

58. What is sadly lacking-and
this is the second point
on which my delegation wishes to reflect-is a political
decision made by certain members of the Council, and
not the least prominent among them, to make an honest
contribution,.
without machiavellian
intrigues, to dissipate that threat forever in the light solely of their
heavy responsibility
regarding the maintenance
of
international peace and security. If the Council is today
unable to give the world the expected response to this
distressing problem, it is particularly because of the
support enjoyed by Pretoria from those Powers.

50. I am particularly pleased, Sir, to greet you, the
representative of Nicaragua, a country with which the
Upper Volta maintains excellent relations of friendship
and co-operation. I express my sincere wishes for the
success of your tenure as President of the Council and’
assure you of my delegation’s total readiness to cooperate with you to that end.
5 1. I wish also to pay a well-deserved tribute to your
predecessor, who skilfully guided the Council’s debates during the month of December.

59. The situation in Angola is deteriorating from day
to day. Security Council resolution 545 (1983) has not
been enough to bring the racist regime into line. Not
content with perpetuating its .military occupation of,
some parts of southern Angola, that regime has reached
the heights of effrontery by pushing even deeper into
the interior of Angolan territory, and the criminal even
daresnot merely to walk the streets, but tocome here to
the Council to make further threats against its victim.

52. Turning to the situation in Angola, my delegation’s position in this debate is based on three essentials
points.
53. The first is the contribution which my country, the
Upper Volta, considers it should make to the maintenance of international peace and security, not only as a
full-fledged Member of the United Nations, but also as
a member of the Council. For it is not a question only of
the fate of the little State of Angola-which,
in the
manner of Sisyphus, returns to the Council again and
again to recount its misfortunes: international
peace
and security themselves are at stake.

60. Grven that attitude, we are entitled to wonder
whether it will be enough for the Council simply to
adopt a resolution during these meetings if things are to
change. There is every reason to believe that, no sooner
have our voices fallen silent in this chamber than the
5

acts of aggression will proliferate, the cannon will continue to roar, and sovereignty and territorial integrity
will go on being violated.

69. Mr.
AMEGA
(Togo)
[interpretation
from
French]: Taking part in the Council’s debate involves a
special duty: that of thanking the members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to take part in their
work. As this is the outset of the new year, I extend my
best wishes for the New Year to one and all.

61. It is clear to my delegation that another condemnation of the Pretoria regime’s continued aggression
against and occupation of Angola, and a further demand
that the South African regime immediately and unconditionally withdraw its troops from Angolan territory
will also be inadequate to deal justly with Angola,
which, since its accession to independence, has been
groaning under the burden of war.

70. I should also like to congratulate the representatives of Egypt, India, Peru, the Ukrainian
Soviet
Socialist Republic and the Upper Volta on their admission to the Council. I am convinced that, as they exercise their responsibilities
in the maintenance of peace,
they will share their experience and their faith in this
United Nations forum with others, as did the representatives of those countries whose term has just expired.

62. My delegation believes that there is something
else which can be done, and that is the third point I wish
to touch on.

71. Mr. President, my delegation knows that, in addition to your great human qualities and your qualities as
a diplomat, you have faith in the Council. That is why
we are convinced that under your stewardship the
Council’s work will be positive, as indeed it was last
month.

63. The apartheid regime’s game is obvious. As a
pastmaster of sowing confusion, it is trying to distract
the attention of the international community from the
underlying reasons for its infamy. Clearly, it is trying to
make Angola pay for supporting SWAP0 in its struggle
for the liberation on the Namibian people, a struggle
which the General Assembly and the Security Council
consider to be a legitimate one.

72. I am pleased to congratulate once again Mr. van
der Stoel, the representative of the Netherlands,
en
the dedicated, expert and wise manner in which he
conducted the proceedings of the Council last month.

64. This new dimension in the action of the Council
which we are thinking of at the present stage of the
situation is firmness. It is high time that the Council
stood firm in demanding the strict implementation
of its
resolutions and decisions. That firmness can be convincing only if all the members in this chamber speak
with one voice. We urge them to do this, especially
those among them whose attitudes encourage racist
South Africa to persist in its violation of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

73. I should like to extend a welcome to Mr. I&ma
Arba Diallo, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Upper Volta, who has by his presence here been kind
enough to express the importance his country attaches
to the item under consideration.
74. I am taking part in this debate in the Council on the
situation in Angola as Chairman of the Group of African
States at the United Nations for January and as representative of my country to express faith in the Organization at a time when, for the second time in two
weeks, the Council has to consider the violation of the
fundamental rights of one of the Members of the Organization, Angola. Angola’s complaint, coming as it does
so soon on the heels on the last complaint, proceeds
from the faith that country has had in the Organization
since its accession to independence in 1975, convinced,
as it is, that the United Nations will succeed in forcing
the Pretoria regime to cease its acts of violation. Since
1948, that regime has desperately tried to maintain racist control over 22 million blacks, the genuine inhabitants of the country,’ by resorting to the most abject
means, going beyond the boundaries of morality and
law. In the circumstances, nothing seems to stop the
illegal racist apartheid regime. It uses torture, imprisonment and mass executions of freedom fighters and
defenceless women, children and old persons, and it
persecutes representatives of religious organisations. It
has set up a system of subversion, terrorism and aggression against neighbouring
countries,
in particular
Angola, whose complaint is the subject of the present
debate.

65. It is our hope that a clear decision and an unambiguous resolve, particularly
on the part of the permanent members of the Council, will induce the racist
clique in Pretoria to grasp the fact that the Council
expects of it the immediate
unconditional
and total
cessation of its criminal armed attacks against Angola.
66. The Upper Volta, which has always demonstrated
its attachment to the cause of peoples struggling for
their independence, their territorial integrity and their
national sovereignty, is ready at all times to provide its
assistance wherever necessary in order to establish this
new dimension in our actions.
67. The Upper Volta solemnly reaffirms that we will
always be by t,he side of the fraternal people of Angola
in the sacrifices they will have to make in order to
continue this war that has been imposed upon them.
68. The PRESIDENT
[inferprefationfiom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is. the representative of Togo, who
wishes to make a statement as Chairman of the Group
of African States at the United Nations for the month of
January. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

75. It will be recalled that. on 20 December 1983, the
Council adopted its .resolution 545 (1983), in which it
6

strongly condemned “South Africa’s continued military occupation of parts of southern Angola which constitutes a flagrant violation of international law and of
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Angola”, declared that “the continued illegal military occupation of the territory of Angola is a flagrant
violation of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Angola and endangers international
peace and security, and demanded that “South Africa
should unconditionally
withdraw forthwith all its occupation forces from the territory of Angola and cease all
violations against that State and henceforth scrupulously respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Angola.”

Afrique, Nos. 1199 and 1200, of 28 December 1983 and
4 January 1984, “in the year 2000 there will be 27 million
oppressed people against 5 million whites, and then the
only real question will be: where will all those blacks
go? In short, where can they be put?”
79. Returning to the situation in Angola, the subject of
the Council’s present debate, I should like, on behalf
of my colleagues in the Group of African States, to
invite the Council at the conclusion of this debate to
adopt a draft resolution whose basic elements would be
an immediate cease-fire and the unconditional
withdrawal of South African troops from Angola. In our
opinion, the Council must once again condemn South
Africa’s hostile acts against Angola arid order that they
be stopped. The Council must also once again reject
“linkage”.
On behalf of my colleagues in the Group of
African States, I express the hope that the new year will
inspire the Council so that, in the face of situations like
the one currently before it, its members will join their
efforts in order to strengthen the Council’s effectiveness and credibility. Such efforts must include the exercise of unanimous and increased pressure against the
racist South African regime to force it to abandon its
policy of aggression against and violation of the territorial integrity of its neighbours. The time is more
propitious than ever for bringing about a meeting of
minds.

76. That resolution expresses the feelings of the
Council in December 1983, showing that they have not
changed since 1976, seven years earlier, as is borne out
by resolutions 387 (1976), 428 (I978), 447 (1979), 454
( 1979) and 475 ( 1980). Furthermore, the Council, impatient with the stubbornness of the racist South African
regime, has once again called on all States to implement
fully the arms embargo imposed against South Africa in
Security Council resolution 418 (1977).
77. What has happened since 20 December? Why is
there need for a further meeting of the Council? On
17December, it might have been thought that the Council’s debate would have satisfied everyone, but now the
South African ogre has once again bared its fangs and
its claws and taken a heavy toll on the martyred people
of Angola. Not only have the efforts of the Council been
flouted, but the will of the international community has
been completely disregarded. The unlawful Govemment of South Africa has, as is its wont, ignored resolution 545 (1983) by again bombing the territory of
Angola. Furthermore, that Government has now made
its untrustworthiness
abundantly clear by violating the
commitments
it unilaterally-and
freely entered into in
its letter of 15 December addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, in which it stated that it was “prepared to
begin a disengagement of forces which from time to
time conduct military operations against SWAP0 in
Angola, on 3 1 January 1984” [see S/16219, annex I’j. As
far as disengagement is concerned, we are now witnessing further acts ofreprisal and repression just committed by the South African regime against Angola.
Once again human lives have been lost, property has
been destroyed, initiatives have perished and hopes
have been dashed.

80. The PRESIDENT
[interpretafion from Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of India, who
wishes to make a statement in his capacity as representative of the Chairperson of the Movement of NonAligned Countries.
81. Mr. VERMA (India): I should like, Sir, to begin by
greeting you and offering you our felicitations as you
accede to the presidency of the Council at the outset of
the new year. We hope this year will bring peace, amity
and goodwill and draw us away from confrontation and
from the precipice of conflict. We are confident that
with your wisdom, objectivity and experience you will
impart vigour and a sense of purpose to the Council’s
deliberations in 1984. Although, of course, my country
was not a member of the Council last month, I should
like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the rep- resentative of the Netherlands on the manner in which
he conducted the business of the Council during the
previous month.
82. I should also like to thank you for the very warm
words of welcome which you have addressed to my
delegation, among others, on our assumption of membership of the Council. We congratulate the other new
members. My delegation looks forward to working
closely in co-operation with our colleagues in the exercise of our common responsibilities
and in the promotion of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

78. People in Africa are wondering how far the South
African racists plan to go. It is clear and certain that
even with its vast modern means of destruction and
murder the racist regime of South Africa cannot pride
itself on its, ability to overcome national liberation
movements. History teaches us that nothing can prevail
over an oppressed people, for right is on its side. We in
Africa are therefore convinced that time is working in
favour of the oppressed black people of Azania. It is
high time to move to the negotiating table, for, as the
editorial writer Bechir Ben Yahmed stated in Jeune

83. Finally, to you and to all our colleagues on the
Council, we extend our best wishes for the New Year.
7

84. India has the privilege to return to the Council
after a lapse of six years, and we are grateful to all those
countries.that
have made this possible. We are conscious of the confidence that has been reposed in us,
and it shall be our endeavour to vindicate that trust to
the best of our conviction and ability. India’s commitment to the United Nations and to the Charter is well
known. As the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira
Gandhi, stated in her address to the thirty-eighth
session of the General .Assembly:

State and henceforth scrupulously respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola”.
87. Those pronouncements
of the Council were clear
and unequivocal and reflected the will of the Council and indeed of the entire international
community.
Yet, how did South Africa respond? By launching the
largest offensive into Angolan territory since 1981, by
advancing deeper than 200 kilometres into the territory
of that sovereign State, and by inflicting fresh loss
of human life and further large-scale ‘damage to the
Angolan economy. In other words, South Africa has
remained true to its reputation by arrogantly defying
the verdict of the Council yet again, even before the.ink
was dry on resolution 545 (1983).

“Today, because’of the unique authority entrusted to
rt in controlling
military. crises through its instruments and its influence on social and economic developments through its various specialized agencies, the
United Nations is an integral part of the lives of
nations and individuals?
!
_

88.. The representative
of Angola has apprised the
Council of the details of the latest in the series of Pretoria’s unceasing acts of aggression. Over the past few
days we have seen also reports in the press about the
massive South African offensive, professedly launched
on the old and familiar pretext of so-called hot pursuit of
SWAP0 freedom fighters and sought to be justified on
the alleged ground of an imminent SWAP0 offensive
into occupied Namibia. That pretext of “hot pursuit”,
-or of so-called pre-emptive strikes-that
the representative of South,Africa
has just presented to the
Council stands long discredited and exposed. South
Africa has no business to be in Namibia, in the first
place. Pretoria has repeatedly used Namibian territory
as a, spring-board for launching acts of aggression, destabilization and terrorism against independent African
States in an effort to consolidate its illegitimate
presence in Namibia and to further its exploitation of the
human and material resources of that Territory. Furthermore, while the right of the Namibian people, led
by their sole and authentic representative, SWAPO, to
achieve their independence by every means at their
disposal has been acclaimed by the international community, SWAP0 has distinguished itself by its flexibility and willingness to negotiate.

Thirty years earlier,, Prime Minister
Jawaharlal
Nehru had observed that the United Nations represented “the timeless urge of humanity for peace”. My
delegation’s participation
in the work of the Council
shall be rooted in its firm and abiding commitment
to
the Charter and conviction in its principles.
85. Though this iS the fifth time that India is serving on
the Council, the present occasion acquires for us a
special character. That’is so be&use we.also concurrently have the honour to serve as Chairman of the
Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Thus, though
I represent my Government;
I cannot but be deeply
conscious, of the larger mantle of responsibility
which
we bear. We are happy that there are three other nonaligned countries among the new members of the Council We recall the support which the non-aligned have
always extended to the United Nations and the Charter.
As the Prime Minister of India and Chairperson of the
Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries, stated to the
thirty-eighth session’of the General Assembly:
“Firm faith in the United Nations is central to
the:non-aligned.
All members of the Non-Aligned
Movement are:members, current or potential, of the
United Nations. However, the United Nations is an
institution, the non-aligned group a movement.
.. .
But the aim is the same: to maintain peace by removing the sources of tension and to bring out the
humanity in human beings.“)
,
86. It was scarcely two weeks ago [250&h meeting]
that the Council pronounced itself once again on South
Africa’s continued aggression against and illegal occupation of parts of Angolan territory by adopting resolution 545 (1983). That resolution; infer.alia,
strongly
condemned “South Africa’s continued military occupation of parts of southern Angola,” deemed that this
constituted “a flagrant violation of the sovereignty,
independence and territo’rial integrity of Angola” and
endangered international
peace .and security, and demanded “that South Africa . . . unconditionally
withdraw forthwith all its occupation forces,from the territory of .Angola .and cease all violations against the

89. What the Council is considering today is therefore
yet another instance of unabashed aggression against
an independent African State: Angola. What we are
faced with is a situation in which,Pretoria’s forces have
again struck over 200 kilometres deep inside Angolan
territory and have had to be engaged in combat by
Angolan defence units in the localities of Cuvelai,
Mulondo, Cahama, Cassinga and Caiundo. Angola has
again felt compelled to ,come to the Council with the
plaint that its sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity are being trampled upon by South Africa. Let
us not therefore be taken in by South Africa’s arguments and diversionary manoeuvres but squarely face
the real issue before us.
_.
90. When my. delegation
addressed the Council’
on 16 December
1983 on the item before us
[250&h meeting], we had occasion to refer in extensu to
the. firm and principled support that the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries has always extended to
8

my country, as well as for my delegation, to be a member of the Council for the next two years, after a long
absence. Egypt fully appreciates the great respdnsibilities entailed by this membership. I assure the Council that we will spare no efforts in carrying out those
responsibilities,
drawing on the experience of our predecessors in the Council and the relations’of friendship
and co-operation that we enjoy with all its members.
./
.

Angola, a fellow member of the Movement. There is no
need for me therefore to repeat the pronouncements
made by the Movement in this regard. Suffice it to
reiterate that the Movement has deemed the occupation’
of Angolan territory by forces of the racist regime as an
act of aggression against the Movement itself. We also
apprised the Council in the same statement of the position of the Commonwealth
and, of course; India’s own
steadfast solidarity with the Government and people of
Angola and support for that country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
.

96. Only two weeks have elapsed since the Council concluded discussion of a complaint brought by
Angola against South Africa because of the latter’s
occupation of parts of ,Angolan territory [250&h to
2508th meetings]. In its resolution 545 (1983), the Council condemned South Africa’s continued military occupation of parts of Angola which constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law and of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. The
Council demanded that South Africa should unconditionally
withdraw forthwith from. ‘the territory of
Angola.

91. My delegation has learnt with interest of the proposal separately made by the President of Angola,in his
letter to the Secretary-General
of 31 December 1983
[S/1624.5], expressing Angola’s willingness to observe a
30-day truce, with effect from 31 January 1984; provided certain crucial conditions are met. We believe
that to be a positive and constructive proposal which
deserves careful consideration by all concerned. We
understand that the Secretary-General is in direct touch
with the concerned parties and’ we look forward to
hearing from him on the outcome of his consultations.

97. However, South Africa as usual did not stop at
disregarding the provisions of the aforementioned resolution. Instead, as of 15 December, 1983 it has escalated
its military operations inside Angola and has mobilized
large numbers of its armed forces and air force to attack
positions 200 kilometres and more inside Angolan territory. To this end it has used its air force to attack
positions and towns; many of which are deep inside
Angola. This has led to a further loss of lives and
destruction of property, as is clearly stated in the annex
to the letter addressed to the Secretary-General by the
President of Angola [see S/16245] as the representative
of Angola explained to us in an emotional but factual
way. Needless to say, losses are mounting every day
owing to the continuing aggiession of the racist regime
of Pretoria and the escalation of its actions.-

92. Be that as it may, the Council needs to address
itself more urgently to the issue at hand, namely, the
latest massive act of aggression by Pretoria against
Angola and to South Africa’s’persistent
intransigence.
We believe that the Council must condemn those
actions in the strongest terms and demand respect for
Angola’s sovereignty,
independence
and territorial
integrity. The Council must ensure, by every means
available under the Charter, that South Africa respects
the will of the Council by withdrawing immediately and
unconditionally
from Angola. The situation in southern
Africa, which has been volatile at the best of times
on account of Pretoria’s policies, has acquired even
greater seriousness as a result of the latest South
African aggression against Angola, threatening regional
and international peace and security. It is high time that
the Council acted firmly and effectively to rectify the
situation. My delegation remains ready to extend its
support to all efforts in this direction.

98. The delegation of Egypt, in its statement before
the Council on 20 December in the course of the debate on Angola’s complaint
against South Africa
[2507th meeting], plainly said that Angoia ,does not
represent a security threat to South Africa, as the latter
claims in seeking to justify its continuing aggression.
The contrary is true. The latest acts of aggression by
South Africa provide additional pro&if
the interna:
tional community still needed such proof, that Angola is
the one needing to have its security protected against
the continuing aggression of South Africa since .1976,
aggression in which South Africa exploits its great military superiority, which allows it to attack positions
deep inside Angola, as is happening now.

93. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) [interpretatitin
froin Arubit]: Allow ‘me to begin by congratulating you;Sir, on
your accession to the presidency of the Council for the
month of January, the beginning of a new year, with all
the hope it brings. We are confident that your wellknown diplomatic experience and wisdom will be of
great assistance to the Council in successfully cai-rying
out the tasks entrusted to it.
94. I should like also to congratulate and thank your
predecessor, Mr. Max van der Stoel, the representative
of the Netherlands,
President of the Council for the
month of December, for the diplomatic skills he displayed in conducting the Council’s work.

99. The current situation, which is the result of South.
Africa’s escalating aggression against’ Angola, adds
new dimensions
to the deterioiating
situation in
the region. By its resolution 545 (1983), the Council
attempted to preserve international peace and security;
yet once again this matter biings before
the Council its
,,- a:.:
basic responsibilities.

95. I especially appreciate the kind words with which
you, Mr. President, welcomed my country’s accession
to membership of the Council It is a great honour for
9

100. The delegation of Egypt believes that the Council, in addition to demanding that the racist regime of
Pretoria immediately cease its armed aggression, withdraw its troops from Angola and desist from further air
raids, must, in the light of that regime’s disregard for
Council resolutions, consider implementing the. relevant provisions provided by the Charter of the United
Nations. Faced today with flagrant defiance on the part
of the racist regime of South Africa, the Council must
act appropriately to enforce implementation of its resolutions.

occupied and administered by South Africa in a further
violation in defiance of the authority of the Council and
of the international community.
107. In view of the deterioration of the situation in
southern Angola, which further aggravates the chronic
instability of that part of the continent and endangers
international peace and security, as referred to in the
request for a meeting by the Council contained in document S/l6244 of 1January, the Council has an obligation to take an unequivocal stand.

101. Mr. ARIAS STELLA (Peru) [interpretation
from Spanish]: First of all, I should like to extend to you
my personal congratulations, Sir, and those of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency for this
month. As a Latin American and representative of a
nation that shares traditional bonds of friendship and
co-operation with your own country, I fervently hope
that under your wise leadership our work will be entirely successful. I also thank you for your words of
welcome to those countries which arejoining the Council today.

108. In the opinion of my delegation, the decision to
be adopted should contain three main elements, the
nucleus of the question before us: rejection of South
Africa’s armed aggression, an immediate cessation of
hostilities and the earliest possible withdrawal of foreign invading and occupying forces.
109. In connection with the proposal put forward by
the President of Angola to create the necessary conditions for an early settlement of the question of Namibia, in keeping with the plan agreed to by the United
Nations, and which appears in document S/16245, my
delegation supports the representations being made by
the Secretary-General and expresses the hope that
these efforts will lead to success.

102. Also on behalf of the delegation of Peru, I should
like to express congratulations and thanks to the representative of the Netherlands on the effective manner
in which he carried out his duties last month.

110. The PRESIDENT [interpreration
from Spunis/z]:The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

103. Peru is now beginning its participation as a nonpermanent member of the Council, and I should like
most sincerely and cordially to extend greetings to all
the members of the Council and to the Secretary-General. Here and now I can pledge the full co-operation of
the Government of Peru as we strive in this body to
discharge our duties and responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations.

111. Mr. DOS SANTOS (Mozambique): Mr. President, I wish on behalf of my delegation to thank you and
the members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to participate in the deliberations on the question
of racist South African aggression against the sister
Republic of Angola. I am confident that your long and
rich experience will be brought to bear upon the Council and will successfully guide it during this month.

104. The item before us today is no stranger to the
urgent questions of great concern to the international
community. It has been on the agenda of the Council for
nearly a decade and has been considered and debated
at length. A number of resolutions have been adopted
on it, although their binding provisions have regrettably not been carried out. Barely two weeks ago
[250&h meeting] the Council unanimously adopted its
most recent resolution, namely resolution 545 (1983).

112. You know the full meaning of what foreign
aggression means, of what dictatorship means, of what
it means in human suffering, deprivation and degradation and of the price to be paid to rid oneself of imperialist aggression in order to gain and attain independence
and defend sovereignty and territorial integrity. Nicaragua and Mozambique share this common bitter experience. Angola, just like Nicaragua, is going through a
difficult period for its people.

105. As soon as it became an independent country, a
sizable portion of Angola was invaded and occupied
by military forces from South Africa. That occupation
continues today, in violation of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. In defence
of the principles of the Charter and of the norms of
international law, Peru rejects the use of force by South
Africa against the people and Government of Angola
and the intensification of hostilities in recent days.

113. May I pay a very special tribute to the person
who preceded you in the presidency, the representative
of the Netherlands. Similarly, I wish warmly to greet
and congratulate the new members.
114. Not long ago-about two weeks, to be more
exact-the Angolan people and their Government
sought the assistance of the international community,
through the Council, in their quest to persuade the
racist South Africans to withdraw their forces of

106. The situation today is particularly delicate in
view of the fact that the continuing military operations
against that country are being carried out from the
Territory of Namibia, which also has been unlawfully
10

false promises and assurances to the international
munity.

aggression [2504th to 2508th meetings]. The aggression
was condemned and the apartheid forces of aggression
were enjoined to withdraw unconditionally
and forthwith. That was only two weeks ago.

com-

120. Two weeks ago, the Council was treated to that
well-known, time-tested and time-honoured traditional
dish that constitutes the prime pride of the Boers. That
dish was given the fancy name of disengagement, the
ingredients of which were carefully guarded in a vain
attempt to dupe the peace-loving international
community. It deceived no one, much less the Council,
except of course those few who are ever ready, for
reasons best known to themselves only, to grab the
tiniest straw, just as a drowning person does, or a child
who is ever eager to lay its hands on any candy or
anything resembling it, however remote the resemblance might be. Disengagement does not necessarily
mean cease-fire. It definitely does not mean withdrawal
of troops. At the time the so-called disengagement deceit was offered, the racist forces of aggression were
intensifying their bombings against innocent civilians,
butchering defenceless women and children, expanding
their military operations to new areas, moving deeper
and deeper into Angoian territory and spreading their
heinous crimes.

115. Now the Angoian people and Government are
forced by circumstances to seek help from the Council.
This is only normal and natural, for the Council bears
the primary responsibility for upholding and defending
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Although they are ail well known, it seems to me that
we should remind ourselves of them from time to time.
116. They are: first, to maintain international
peace
and security, and, to that end, to take effective coiiective measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about
by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principies of justice and international
law, adjustment or
settlement of international disputes or situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace; secondly, to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect
for the principle of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples, and to take other appropriate measures to
strengthen universal peace.

121. Today there are no signs of South Africa’s compliance with resolution 545 (1983) and other relevant
Council resolutions, nor of the so-called disengagement. On the contrary, racist South Africa has increased its forces of aggression occupying much of
southern Angola to three mechanized infantry brigades, four 140-mm and 155-mm artillery units, two
paratrooper bataiiions, tanks and other armoured personnel carriers and assault vehicles. About 100 warplanes and helicopters were thrown into the battle. In
recent days, the towns of Cahama, Cuveiai, Muiondo,
Cassinga and Caiundo came under increasing, intensified and barbarous attacks. As a matter of fact, the
latest acts of aggression are the most extensive and
brutal in the last two years. Is this disengagement? I do
not know what disengagement means in Afrikaans, but
in English, according to my limited knowledge, this
cannot be termed disengagement: this is engagement;
this is unprovoked and naked aggression. Of course,
I am not going to engage in semantics. I leave it up to my
good friend the representative of the United Kingdom
to clarify the situation. This is Shakespearean language,
not Bantu language.

117. This peace has eluded the Angoian people for the
last five centuries. Under Portuguese colonial rule
-and variously known as “colony”,
“State*‘, back to
“colony”
again, “overseas province’* and back to
“State” again-they
were suppressed and repressed
until 1975. With the defeat of the Portuguese coioniaiists, the racist South Africans sent their tanks, artillery,
armoured vehicles and personnel carriers into Angola
in 1975.
118. Ignominiously
defeated in their turn, they retreated from Angoian territory in 1976. Because they
could not count on their major ally from 1976 onwards,
the racists relied mainly on bands of Angoian traitors
to harass Angola. But once assured of that support
again, the Boers again sent their murderous forces and
tither mercenaries into southern Angola in 1981 and
they have been there ever since, sowing death and
wanton destruction and bringing untold deprivation,
sorrow and suffering to the Angoian people. Economic
infrastructures such as roads, bridges and dams are
being destroyed, factories are being razed to the
ground and whole towns wiped out. Defenceless civiiians, including the elderly, women and children, are
being mercilessly cut down by the advancing bioodthirsty columns.

122. In my last address to the Council on the same
subject I had this to say when referring to the racist
South Af&ans:
“They are hardened, perpetual offenders. Their behaviour can be likened to that of a hardened, callous
criminal who does not feel comfortable outside the
prison walls. He feels so uncomfortable
that as his
person term approaches its end he becomes very
restless and begins plotting and designing the next
crime. No sooner is he released than he commits
another crime, and he is back in prison.

119. It has become a habit of racist South Africans
and common knowledge of the international
community that, whenever there is significant movement towards peace and a peaceful settlement of the Namibian
independence question in particular, or peace in southem Africa in general, or the question of racist South
African aggression against Angola, the Boers resort to
limitless subterfuge and deception, as well as to giving
11

“Let us face the facts, however hard, unpalatable
and ugly they may be. The racist clique in Pretoria is
composed of hardened, unrepentant criminals who
are no different from other well-known international
organized crime groups, except perhaps that they
have organized something resembling and having the
appearance of Government-when
taken at face value, that is. In reality South Africa is run by a masonic
.house known as the broederbond.”
[2506rh meeting,
pams. 142. and 143.1

129. Mr. RUPIA
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I am grateful to you and to the other
members of the Council for allowing my delegation to
take part in this urgent debate. I wish you all therefore a
prosperous new year. Allow me, Sir, to congratulate
you personally on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month.
130. Allow me also to congratulate Mr. van der Stoel,
representative of the Netherlands for the exemplary
manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Council
for the month of December.

123. Recent events in South Africa, Namibia and
Angola have not proved me wrong. However, I harbour
a deep, sincere and ardent hope that time may prove me
wrong. I would not mind at all.

131. Just two weeks ago the Council met to consider
the continued occupation of parts of the territory of
Angola by the apartheid regime of South Africa. In
adopting resolution 545 (1983), the Council was cognizant of both the tragic consequences of that occupation and the need to fulfil its. responsibility of ensuring
that Member States of the Organization act in accordance with the Charter. Accordingly,
the Council was
categorical in condemning
South Africa’s military
occupation of Angola as constituting a flagrant violation of international
law and of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Angola. At the
same time, the Council declared that the continued
occupation of Angolan territory by the apartheid regime endangers international peace and security. Consequently, the Council demanded that South Africa
unconditionally
withdraw its forces and undertake
scrupulously to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola.

124. What racist South Africa wants is peace South
African style. It wants to create a universe of its own, a
constellation
where it will be the star, while others
gravitate around that apartheid sun. It wants a world
where Lesotho and Swaziland will be the homelands,
Botswana and Mozambique will be the Ciskei, Zambia
‘and Zimbabwe will be the Venda, Angola and Namibia
will be the Bantustan, Seychelles and Tanzania will be
the Bophuthatswana.
125. The Council and the West bear a great responsibility. The latter has to make a choice of either continuing, by deeds or silence, to encourage racist South
Africa to or dissuade it from thinking of itself as the last
citadel of white-minority
rule in Africa, billed as virtually impregnable, an industrial fortress ringed by the
most modem weapons.

132. Hardly two weeks later, however, the Govemment of Angola has been compelled to bring its case to
the Council again. The apartheid regime has chosen
to respond to the call of the Council with bombings of
the towns of Cahama, Cuvelai, Caiundo, Kassinga and
Mulondo. With a force estimated at over 10,000 troops
the apartheid regime is attacking more villages and
towns. As pointed out by the representative of Angola,
the apartheid regime has attacked areas as far as 200 kilometres inside Angola. The human and material toll of
this new wave of attacks complementing
the aggression
resulting from the ongoing occupation is again said to be
very heavy.

126. We should not lose sight of what happened in
Iran where the Shah played the same role. Racist South
Africa is a giant in Africa, but with clay feet. The West
has to decide whether it wants to arrest the present
violence and allow genuine independence or whether it
prefers to continue to allow its finances and expertise to
be used to perpetuate racism and apartheid, to prolong
the violence and bring about a bloodbath.
127. The Council has two choices to make: either
it declares that it is satisfied with racist South Africa’s behaviour and encourages it to continue to flout
the purposes and principles of the ,United Nations embodied in the Charter, or it will take the necessary
measures to+force it to respect international
law and
practice, namely, through the imposition of sanctions.
1 have no doubt that the Council will not take the first
course of action; we shall see whether it is ready to take
the second. It is high time that racist South Africa were
told in no uncertain terms that the world is in the last
years of the twentieth century and not in’the dark.days
of the Middle Ages.

133. The Council has before it a case of continuing
aggression against a sovereign, independent,
peaceloving Member of the United Nations. The situation
prevailing in southern Angola today needs no further
elaboration. The Council has already pronounced itself
on it. But what is, perhaps, important is to look at this
new campaign of aggression and to understand what it
means.
134. By launching these renewed acts of aggression
even before the ink was dry on a resolution of the
Council calling upon it to cease its acts of aggression,
the apartheid regime has yet again demonstrated, with
characteristic arrogance, absolute contempt for the
resolutions of this body. At the same time, this cam-

128. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]: The next speaker is the representative
of the
United Republic .of Tanzania. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
12

paign provides further proof that South Africa does not
intend to abandon its aggressive militaristic policies in
the region unless compelled to do so. Therefore, if some
members of the Council or other friends of South Africa
need further proof of the apartheid regime’s lawlessness, let them look no further.

illegal demands of the apartheid regime. Today, it
is those demands; tomorrow, the countries of the region
will be occupied and told that unless they sign treaties of non-aggression South Africa will not withdraw.
Clearly there is no end to these apartheid demands; and
those who are so anxious to appease that regime know
the dangers of this.

135. What we discern in the latest campaign of aggression against Angola is a continuation
of a larger conspiracy. This campaign, in both its characteristics and
its magnitude, seeks to achieve the same objectives
which were resoundingly thwarted in 1975 by the gallant forces of the People’s Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA). South Africa has pursued an
active policy of open hostility and aggression aimed
at crippling the Angolan revolution. Yet these incessant
attacks and acts of destabilization
and aggression,
including the infamous Operation Protea, which resulted in the ongoing occupation of parts of southern
Angola, have not daunted the people of Angola in their
resolve to resist the racist aggression. Now the upartheid regime seems to have launched what it hopes will
be the final offensive solution resulting in the bantustanization of Angola; for if it succeeds, not only will
the apartheid regime have managed to cripple the
MPLA Government, but it will also have dealt a deadly
blow to the independence of Namibia.

139. Like other acts of aggression committed by the
racist regime in the past, this new campaign is neither
isolated nor random. Rather, it forms part of a clear
pattern, well timed to coincide with long-contemplated
objectives of the apartheid regime. The history of
United Nations dealings with the apartheid regime
speaks for itself. Every action of the international community attempting to censure the apartheid regime of
South Africa or to find a peaceful solution to any of the
problems in southern Africa has been reciprocated with
an act of aggression by the apartheid regime.
140. It was not by coincidence that the Kassinga massacre in 1978 coincided with the adoption of Council
resolution 435 (1978). The Cumato offensive was timed
to coincide with the wrecking of the pre-implementation meeting at Geneva in January 1981. The Maseru
raid in December 1982 was aimed at diverting the attention of the international
community from South Africa’s occupation of Angola and its obstruction of the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), especially
after the conclusion of the proximity talks held here in
New York in the middle of the same year. Only last
May, the Maputo raid was launched to disrupt the
Council debate on the fate of resolution 435 (1978), and
as recently as two weeks ago, the empty pronouncements on a so-called disengagement.of
troops had the
purpose of splitting the international
community and
diverting attention from the occupation of Angolan territory. And now the apartheid regime has launched
another campaign, timed to coincide ,with the’issuance
of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 539 (1983) [SIZ6237J;

136. The objectives are the same also with regard to
the other neighbouring
independent African States.
The excuse of operations by SWAP0 or the African
National Congress of South Africa (ANC) is only a
smoke-screen to cloak the larger ambitions of the
apartheid regime. This new wave of aggression against
Angola-like
those to which Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe have been subjected
in the past-are
part of apartheid’s grand design to
terrorize, subvert, destabilize and strike its neighbours
into total submission, thus-according
to South Africa’s ‘reasoning-making
the region safe for apartheid.
This objective will be pursued whether or not there are
Namibian or South African refugees in those countries.
If that were not true, on might ask, why is Seychelles,
for example, a target of the apartheid regime? Was the
mercenary attack against that defenceless island nation
also directed against ANC or SWAP0 combatants?

141. Thus, there are before the Council four very
important questions affecting southern Africa. .First,
there are the continuing acts of aggression against the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
Member State of the Organization. Secondly, there is
the illegal occupation by South ‘Africa of the inteinational Territory of Namibia, .over which the United
Nations has assumed legal control. Thirdly, there is the
question of apartheid, which is, after all, at the core of
the problem in southern Africa. And, fourthly, there is
the future of other independent African countries in the
region, whose future security hinges on the resolve of
the Council to take effective action against the lawlessness of the apartheid regime. We ‘have maintained that
apartheid South Africa is the problem and is the only
obstacle to peace in southern Africa. The record of that
regime testifies to the correctness of this position. It
is the position of the Organization
of African Unity
(OAU), of the General Assembly, of the Non-Aligned
Movement and of the international
community
as.a

137. A corollary of this conspiracy is the unending
campaign of the so-called creation of new facts. This is
a scheme whose genesis goes beyond even the upurtheid regime itself. It is an attempt to present the international community,
and Angola in particular, with
fuits uccomplis. Yesterday we were presented with the
linkage of the independence of Namibia to the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola; today it is the
withdrawal of South African invading troops-which
are in perpetual aggression against Angola-which
is
being linked to the question of the Cuban troops. An
attempt is even being made to relegate the priority
question of Namibia to secondary importance.
138. The Council too seems incapable of acting, as the
implementation
of its resolutions is held hostage to the
13

whole. We therefore expect the Council
position.

to echo that

142. ’ As we have said before, it is not the intention of
any delegation to ask of the Council more than we
believe is the right of Angola. Only two weeks ago
[2505th meeting] we made the same appeal. Angola, as
a State Member of the Organization, is entitled to and
must be granted protection by the Council. It is clear
that the magnitude and intensity of the ongoing acts of
aggression directly threaten its existence. The Council,
being the guarantor of international peace and security,
therefore has the duty to ensure that Angola continues
to exist as an independent, sovereign and secure State.
That is the primary responsibility
of the Council.
143. We seek from the Council a categorical condemnation of the South African aggression, a demand for
the cessation of its acts of aggression and the unconditional withdrawal of the apartheid occupation forces
from Angola. Equally, the payment of prompt and adequate compensation by South Africa for the damage to
human life and property brought about by its aggression
must be demanded. Moreover, the Council must leave
it in no doubt that if South Africa persists in its aggression the Council will have to consider the adoption of
effective measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Nations,

New York

145. For its part, Tanzania will unreservedly support
any measures taken by the Government
of Angola,
whether now or in the future, when Angola is faced with
such acts of aggression. We believe this is also consistent with the position taken by the OAU.
146. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]: I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/16247, containing the text of
a draft resolution proposed by Angola, Egypt, India,
Mozambique,
Nicaragua, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The meeting

rose at 6.35 p.m.

NOTES

’ White Paper on Acts of Aggression by the Racist South Ajkcan
R&ime against the People’s Republic of Angola 19751982. This
document has not been reproduced; it may be consulted ia the files of
the Secretariat (S/16198, annex).
1 Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 9th meeting, para. 17.
’ Ibid., para. 5.

144. The Council, must reaffh-m the rights of States
under the Charter. Accordingly we also ask the Council

Litho in United

to reaffirm the right of Angola to take all measures
necessary under the Charter, in particular Article 51, to
safeguard its sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.

00300

90-61313~Jbnualy

1993~2,050
