UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

JUN2 9 1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pop>

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1873)

.....................................

1

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

1

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question. ...............

1

S/PV. 1873

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Slrpplmwnts
of the Official Rcxvrds of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly voIumes of Resolutions and
Decisions qf the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1873rd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

(United

15 January

Mr. Salim A. SALIM
Republic of Tanzania).

more than 27 years-years
of upheaval, conflict and
violence in the Middle East-violence
which, in recent
years, has tended to extend beyond the confines of
the region. The significance of the present series of
meetings lies in the fact that, for the first time in these
many years, the Council has been brought to take
up the problem created by its own decision of 1947.

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

3. Pakistan’s position on the issue is well known; but
I shall briefly restate its essential features. We continue to believe that injustice was done when, without
consulting the people of the territory, against their
known wishes and in the face of their open resistance,
the United Nations decided to partition Palestine.
Many foresaw at the time that turmoil and bitterness
would follow. At that time the representative
of
Pakistan, Sir Choudhri Mohammed
Zafrullah Khan,
warned: “We much fear that the beneficence, if any,
to which partition may lead will be small in comparison
to the mischief it might inaugurate”.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l873)

1. Adoption
2.

The Middle
question
The meeting

of the agenda
East problem including
HWS culled

to order

the Palestinian

ut 11.10 u.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The ugendu

1976, at 10.30 a.m.

4. My country is not oblivious to the wrongs and
indignities the Jewish people have had to suffer and
endure over the centuries at the hands of their compatriots in some countries. Speaking at the Islamic
summit conference at Lahore in February of 1974,
Prime Minister Bhutto said that “the progroms inflicted
on the Jews during the centuries and the holocaust
to which they were subjected under nazism fill some
of the darkest pages of human history*‘. He went on
to point out that “as Moslems, we entertain no hostility
against any human community; when we say so, we ‘do
not exclude the Jewish people. To Jews as Jews we
bear no malice”.
But, declared the Prime’ Minister,
“redemption
should have come from the Western
world and not have been exacted, as it was, from the
Palestinian people”.

wus adopted.

The Middle East problem including the
Palestinian question

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council previously [1870th-1872nd
meetings],
I invite the representatives
of Egypt,
Jordan, Mauritania,
Qatar, the Syrian Arab Republic,
the United Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia, in conformity with the usual practice and with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of
procedure, to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote. In accordance with the decision taken
previously by the Council [1870th meeiing],
I invite
the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to participate in the discussion.

5. Indeed, the creation of a separate homeland for the
Jews was not the only possible solution for the discrimination
suffered by Jews in Europe and America;
nor could it promote-rather
the contrary-their
full
assimilation
into the body politic of the societies to
which they belonged. The founders of the Zionist
movement themselves had not at first insisted on a
homeland in Palestine but were willing to accept
territory elsewhere. When, instead, the decision was
made to set up a Jewish State in an already inhabited
territory and against the wishes of its inhabitants, it
was inevitable that turmoil and upheaval would ensue.
For how could you set up a Jewish State in an area

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Ahdel Mquid
(Egypt),
Mr. Shuruf (Jordun)
Mr. Alluf (Syrian Arub
Republic)
and Mr. Khuddoumi
(Pulestine
Liherution
Orgunizution)
took places
ut the Security
Council
table; Mr. El Hussen (Muurituniu),
Mr. Jumul (Qutur),
Mr. Ghohush
(United
Arub Emirutes)
and Mr. Petri:
(Yugosluviu)
took the places reservd
for them ut the
side of the Council
chamber.

Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): The issue before. the
Council at its present series of meetings is not new to
the Organization.
It has been the subject of debate for

2.

I

where the Jewish population in the beginning was only
8 per cent of the total, and their land ownership only
2.5 per cent, without changing its demographic and
economic character? How could you bring in hundreds
of thousands of Jews from all over the world to this
new “homeland”
without turning out from it hundreds
of thousands
of its original
inhabitants?
This
ingathering led inevitably, to a new dispersion. Thus,
the people of Palestine were turned into a nameless,
amorphous multitude,
reduced to living on international largesse in refugee camps, within sight almost
of their ancestral homes and properties, the farms on
which they had worked and the orchards which they
had planted. True, the Council adopted a resolution
calling for the return to their homes of refugees
wishing to return, but that resolution has remained a
dead letter. It was assumed, no doubt, that the victims
would eventually accept their lot as being divinely
ordained and immutable and learn to live with their
misfortune. As late as 1973, not long before the October
war, the then Prime Minister of Israel, Mrs. Golda
Meii-, was able to explain in reply to a query: “Who
are the Palestinians? They never existed.”

settlement which will bring peace and stability to the
area and lay the foundations on which the nations of
the region may, as history takes its course, evolve
their relationship. It is equally possible, of course, that
the opportunity will be allowed to slip away and, one
thing leading to another, war may break out in .the
region once more, visiting death and destruction upon
peoples which are today so manifestly and unanimously
desirous for the return of peace and tranquillity.
10.. It is asserted that the Security Council is not a
suitable forum for the concrete negotiations through
which alone the parties, to the conflict ‘can probe
each other’s intentions and arrive at agreement. We do
not agree that the Council is not qualified to intervene
in disputes among nations or that it does not have the
responsibility
to take measures to preserve peace and
security in the world. The Council was establihed to
perform these very tasks and functions. Now we do
not advocate that at this stage the Council should
take a hand directly in the peace-making process, A
forum exists for this purpose, having been set up under
the co-chairmanship
of the United States and the
Soviet Union, though one must admit that the Geneva
Peace Conference on the Middle East has not yet
been used as it was meant to be since its establishment. Nevertheless, things have not stood still. The
endeavours undertaken by the United States and its
Secretary of State, Mr. Henry Kissinger, have led to
three accords which, although important, are limited
in both their territorial and political scope.

6. Yesterday I saw in a newspaper a rather laboured
explanation of what precisely she meant; and .I am
afraid, speaking for myself, that I find things no clearer
than they were before. And then, what are we to make
of the absence from this table today of the Israeli
representative?
7. The rest of the world, however, has come to
recognize that the issue of Palestine lies at the root
of the conflict in the Middle East-a
recognition
which we are not granting them but which, in the
words of Prime Minister Bhutto, was “earned by the
heroic sons and daughters of Palestine through their
suffering,. their fortitude and the constancy of their
commitment”.

11. Speaking in Sri Lanka during his recent visit
there, our Prime Minister, Mr. Bhutto, said: “It is a
matter of concern to us that the Sinai Disengagement
Agreement
[S/l/8/8
and Add. I-51 has not been
followed by other steps to defuse the situation on the
Syrian front and other Israeli occupied Arab territories.”
He called on the Security Council at its
current meetings to address itself at once to the task
of promoting a comprehensive
settlement. The Prime
Minister declared:

8. There is no longer any question, if there is to be
peace and an enduring settlement among the peoples
of the region, that the issues created by that fateful
decision of 1947 must be addressed and resolved. The
existence of Israel cannot be built on the extinction
of Palestine. The Council can no longer turn away
from the reality of Palestine, a whole nation displaced
and rendered stateless, a nation whose existence was
provided for in the very resolution’-adopted
by a
narrow and unconvinced
majority
mechanized
by
means of the most extraordinary
pressures and manipulations-the
very resolution which established a
homeland in the Middle East for settlers from Europe
and America, who even today often have to be cajoled
and urged to go there.

“The present state of no war, no peace in the
Middle East is a precarious one. Time is not in favour
is certainly not in
: of peace”- he warned--“it
favour of Israel. At the same time, all the signs
and portents indicate that the moment has come to
find a solution on the basis of Israeli withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories,
including
Jerusalem, which also takes into account the national,
aspirations of the Palestinian people.”
12. I said a moment ago that Pakistan does not
expect the Security Council to take upon itself the
conduct of Middle East negotiations.
We believe,
however, that the Council can and should enunciate
broad .principles which ,would guide the negotiating
process and enable it to arrive at a speedy and successful conclusion. We believe that, if all concerned are
so minded, the Council can take an important
and
constructive step at this stage towards facilitating the
process.
:

9. I refer to these matters because we consider that,
if the Council is to take action which will be truly
effective, it must view the situation in perspective and
in its entirety. We believe that the affairs of the
Middle East are at a turning-point.
We believe that a
generally beneficial settlement can be reached, -a
2

‘.

13. My delegation considers it essential that in this
series of meetings the Council should take cognizance
of the national rights of the Palestinian people-the
right to self-determination,
the right to restore their
national entity and sovereignty and the, right to return
to receive compensation
for their lost homes and
properties. In doing so, the. Council, as the Syrian
representative
reminded us the other day ,[187/st
meeting],
will be doing no more than calling for
the full and faithful implementation
of its own existing
and valid decisions.
14. As I stated in the course of a previous meeting,
my country recognizes the PLO as the sole legitimate
representative
of the Palestinian
people and fully
entitled to speak and negotiate on its behalf here
and in all forums. Its status as such was recognized
by all the Arab countries at the Rabat summit held in
October 1974. We heard the other day here from
the representative of Jordan [ihid.] that the decision
had the approval of Jordan and that Jordan recognized
the representative character of the PLO. I take the
occasion to pay a tribute, in this context,, to the
wisdom, selflessness and patriotism
of Jordan’s
courageous and far-sighted monarch. The Lahore
summit of the Islamic countries has.also recognized
the status of the PLO. So have the Organization
of
African Unity and the non-aligned movement. The
General Assembly has accorded observer status to the
PLO in recognition of its representative character.
15. In Israel itself, the more far-sighted people have
declared the need to recognize the reality of Palestine
and to deal with its representatives.
It is odd-it
is
perhaps significant-that
the people of Palestine,
whom the United Nations divided and displaced, are
represented at the Council today and that it is the
representative
of Israel, a State which owes its
existence to the United Nations, who remains absent
and carries on outside a campaign of vilification
and
calumny against the Organization.
Israel, which has
accused the Arabs of refusing to negotiate, is today
refusing to negotiate unless it can choose its negotiating
partners. It refuses to live in peace with its Arab
neighbours unless it can choose who those neighbours
shall be.
16. It is the responsibility
of the Security Council,
in our view, to review the developments, which have
taken place since the adoption of Council’ resolution 338 (1973) and the progress made, or the lack
thereof and the reason therefor, towards the objectives
enunciated in that resolution. Resolution 242 (1967),
to which the Council stands committed,
was adopted
nearly nine years ago. We have always taken the
view that the resolution laid down quite clearly the
elements of a lasting settlement between the Arab
States and Israel and, above all, that it called for the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from the territories they
occupied in. the 1967 war. If ambiguity there be .on
this issue, it lies in intentions and unavowed objectives;
we see none in the language of the resolution. At any

rate, the Council must not condone deliberate procrastination and calculated inaction.
,
17. In that connexion we take note of the ceaseless
references to Israel’s security and the need to provide
it with guarantees and assurances regarding its future
safety and ,existence. My delegation has two observations to make in that regard. The first, specific to the
case, is that it’is Israel which has, since the day of
its establishment,
continually extended its borders at
the expense of its neighbours. The second point, of
general application,
is that the security of one State
cannot be based on insecurity for others. The idea that
the security of a country depends onthe geographical
location. of its borders not only is .unacceptable
in
international
law and ‘under the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations but has been proved
fallacious by the history .of the Middle East. Prime
Minister Bhutto said to the Islamic summit at Lahore
that “no State can arrogate to itself the right to
determine its secure borders... the security of a State’s
frontiers depends on their conformity to international
law”.
,
18. For more than a quarter-century Israel has sought
security ‘through war. and military supremacy. But
every war, every new conquest has been purchased at
the cost of security and -peace. Today, occupying
many times the amount of territory it had in 1948,
Israel has to spend $12 billion a year on its military
forces for the purpose of protecting its conquests. Is
it conceivable
that the Arabs, from whom Israel
demands peace and recognition, will give it peace and
recognition as well as territory? If Israel has decided
not to return the occupied territories. if the establishment of settlements in those territories is a token of
Israel’s real intentions,
then Israel has once again
chosen to make the future of the region hostage to
the fortunes of ‘war. The tragedy-indeed
the hopeis that it need not be so. Time and the conjunction
of events are favourable to peace. We have listened
to the spokesmen of the Arab nations and of the
people of Palestine and we have heard no calls for
Israel’s destruction,
no threats to its security, no
animus towards the Jewish people.
19. If Israel seeks real peace, let it come to terms
with the reality of Palestine and the Palestinians’ and
iecognize once and for all that neither the passage of
time nor the use of force nor abuse or slander will
make it disappear. If territorial aggrandizement
is not
Israel’s aim, let its leaders cease to make declarations
which give the contrary impression and desist from
creating so-called facts in the occupied territories and
from attempting
to change the demographic
and
cultural character of Jerusalem. If it will have security,
let Israel declare its readiness to withdraw from the
territories occupied since June 1967.
20.. The people of Pakistan have ties of brotherhood
and faith with the Arab people of the Middle East.
But were there no such bonds we would still support
k
~ ‘,
3
‘.
\

their cause, for it is a just cause, based on the principles, which Pakistan holds dear, of self-determination, respect for United Nations principles and decisions, rejection of force and intimidation-principles
that we have supported near home and far. Yet we
support the Arabs not blindly and unthinkingly
as,
one is sorry to see, Israel seems to expect its supporters to do, in its every whim, demand and tactic.

peace. The answer to that question is obvious: that
threat is maintained
because the aggressor, who
seized foreign territories that for years had belonged to
the. Arab peoples, continues to occupy those territories and deliberately
to assimilate them, ignoring
United Nations decisions and throwing down the
gauntlet to the international community. It is precisely
because of the stubbornness of Israel’s leaders and
because they continue to exercise their policy of
aggression that the well-known Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on the Middle East have
remained unfulfilled.

21. We oppose Israel not because of its system of
government,
as one of our colleagues professes to
believe-and
most certainly and emphatically
not
because its people are Jewish. We say to Israel, not in
hostility but in common sense: see in which direction
lie the true interests of all the peoples of this ancient
and once peaceful region where, in the words of the
absent Israeli representative,
Jew and Arab lived
together for thousands of years and where even in
1919 Jews were welcomed in friendship by Arab
leaders. Let the leaders of Israel consider how they
have repaid that welcome and how they might win
back that earlier amity and acceptance.

26. Obstacles to the process of political settlement
in the Middle East continue to be erected by certain
States, which for some time now have showed their
true colours as the protectors and instigators of Israel’s
aggressive policy. They are trying to bypass the
machinery specially created to seek a political settlement-that
is, the Geneva Peace Conference. These
friends and patrons of the aggressor are trying to
complicate and confuse the clear way leading to a
solution of the Middle East problem; they are doing
so by having separate transactions
on individual
issues, leaving to one side the key issues relating to a
general peace settlement in the Middle East.

22. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(itlterpretrrtic~n from Russian): Before I begin my
statement on the item now being discussed by the
Security Council, my delegation would like to join in
the condolences expressed by other members of the
Council on the untimely death of the Premier of the
People’s Republic of China, Mr. Chou En-lai. In that
connexion, the Council of Ministers of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics has extended its condo.lences to the people and State of the People’s
Republic of China on the death of their Premier,
Mr. Chou En-lai, and has requested that its sympathy
be expressed to the family of the deceased.

27. Now, more than ever before, it is obvious that the
dangerous source of tension in the Middle East can
be eliminated only if its roots are removed and if the
key problems relating to a political settlement are
solved. Can anyone really hope to prove today that
purely piecemeal measures achieved on a separate
basis have removed the explosive situation in the
Middle East and have created any basis for a stable
peace in that area? The actual state of affairs fully
refutes any such illusory conception of the situation
-in the Middle East. The method of so-called partial
measures cannot lead to a durable settlement of the
Middle East problem because it would leave to one
side the main crux of the problem, the key issues
relating to a political settlement. The heart of a political
settlement must be seen to be the necessity.of the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the Arab territories which were occupied in 1967. This is a key
point which has been acknowledged and reaffirmed by
decisions of the United Nations. Also, the legitimate
national rights of the Arab people of Palestine must
be fully satisfied, including their inalienable right to
create their own State. This would guarantee due
recognition of the right to independent existence and
the free and peaceful development
of all States and
peoples in the Middle East region.

23,. Among the most urgent and timely international
problems of the present day, it is difficult indeed to
find one that has been considered as many times in
the Security Council and the General Assembly,
throughout the existence of the United Nations, as the
problem of the Middle East-or,
to put it more
accurately, the conflict that has been going on for more
than a quarter-century
now between Israel and the
Arab peoples of that region.
24. Today, once again, the United Nations and its
principal organ for the maintenance
of peace and
security-the
Security Council-are
dealing, with
understandable
disquiet.
with this question.
This
feeling of disquiet is by no means accidental. It can
be explained by the fact that the Middle East region
has been and continues to be a dangerous source of
military
tension and armed conflict, a permanent
source of danger to universal peace and security.

28. The Israeli and American press and other propaganda organs, as usual distorting the facts, have
spread a false account to the effect that these conditions for bringing about peace and security in the
Middle East are being presented only by the Soviet
Union and the Arab countries. This is incorrect.
It is an untruth and a misrepresentation
of the real
state of affairs. These demands have also been voiced

25. Everyone who has participated
in the present
consideration of the situation in the Middle East has
naturally wondered why, despite the many efforts
made by the United Nations, the Middle East crisis
has continued to be a potential threat to universal
4

by all non-aligned countries which today represent
a considerable majority in the United Nations.
29. This is also shown by a recent decision taken at
the Lima Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Non-Aligned
Countries,
which, as is known,
involved the participation of Ministers from more than
80 countries. In the political declaration of the Lima
Conference,
the Lima
Programme
for Mutual
Assistance and Solidarity, the following statement was
made:
“The Conference considers that the interest of
security and peace in the world rests on the immediate implementation
of relevant Upited Nations
resolutions and reiterates that a just and durable
peace in the Middle East must be based on the two
following principles:
“1. The immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from all the territories occupied
since 5 June 1967;
“2. The exercise by the Palestinian people of all
their national rights, including their right to return
to their country and to self-determination
and
political independence”.2
30. This is then the position, this is the will of and
these are the demands expressed by all non-aligned
countries throughout the world, and not just by the
Soviet Union. These demands are at present to be
found also in decisions adopted by the General
Assembly which expressed the united will of the
Organization,
that at present has a membership
of
144 States.
31. The Soviet Union is therefore quite justified in
considering
that only a comprehensive
solution of
these questions and all aspects of the Middle East
settlement can lead to the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East and prevent fresh
military conflicts. The Soviet Union has constantly
and unwaveringly been, and will continue to be, in
favour of establishing in this tense region a just and
durable peace and not simply the usual precarious
truce. The Soviet Government has frequently stated
its genuine concern to achieve this end, both as a
matter of principle deriving from the firm basis of our
peace-loving
foreign policy and for the perfectly
obvious reason of our country’s geographical proximity
to the Middle East region. If, for many countries, the
explosive situation in the Middle East is simply the
threat of a conflagration
on the “other side of the
river”, so far as we are concerned it repreents the
danger of a fire breaking out under our very windows.
32. The present discussion in the Security Council on
the Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question, as well as the statements made by Arab
representatives,
has once again fully borne out that
the situation in the Middle East remains extremely

tense, fraught with the constant threat of military
clashes; it must be stated quite bluntly that this tension
which has been deliberately maintained is hindering
the ongoing process of international detente and of the
extension of the various positive changes which have
occurred in various regions of the world, a process
which is a matter of vital concern to all peoples of
the world.
33. Is it possible to achieve a just and lastihg peace
in the Middle East, and what is the most realistic
way of attaining this end? The delegation of the Soviet
Union, with full awareness of its responsibility,
is
convinced that such a peace is possible, and that the
only effective way of achieving it is through implementation of the well-known decisions of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly on the Middle
East. In this light, it is obvious what is the main
obstacle towards achieving peace. This obstacle is the
gross and cynical refusal of Israel to observe the
elementary principles of contemporary
international
law and accepted morality and of the code of conduct
for relations between States during the last third of the
twentieth century. Peace in this region is possible if
Israel refrains from attempts to use for its own selfish
purposes the results of its aggression against neighbouring Arab countries.
34. If the United Nations and the international
community are genuinely desirous of putting an end to
the instability and explosive situation in this part of
the world, it is essential that satisfaction be given to
the just, legitimate and sovereign rights and demands
of the Arab peoples, including the Arab people of
Palestine which has suffered from aggression and the
violence of hostile incursions. The logic of life itself
would discount any notion of the possibility
of
becoming reconciled to a situation whereby a part
of the patrimony of the Arab land would remain in the
hands of an odious aggressor which seized those
lands by force of arms.
35. We, the Soviet people, know this through the
experience of our own country in the sacred and
heroic struggle against the Fascist incursions. The
Arab peoples are quite right in seeking the return of
their undoubted
heritage, and to give them the
necessary assistance and support in this is the natural
and bounden duty of each and every Member of the
United Nations which cherishes its right to maintain
its own territorial
integrity and the integrity of its
State.
36. The Israeli leaders, with the knowledge of their
protectors and patrons, are still trying to procrastinate,
or even to fail, in implementing
the decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly on the
Middle East question. They, and many of those who
support them, are uttering threats and resorting to
methods of blackmail with regard to the Arab countries, their friends, and even the United Nations,
recklessly refusing to carry on constructive talks on

the Middle East settlement, including the question of
Palestine. The non-participation
of Israel in the present
discussion in the Security Council is further proof of
this heedless policy. This ,is the position.of the leaders
of a country which owes its very existence and its
very foundation to the United Nations. It is quite easy
to see that such a position on the part of Israel is
one that is dangerous to peace.
37. The urgent need to eliminate ,this source of
tension in the Middle East requires the adoption of
effective measures which would lead to a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict. The
Soviet Union ,considers that for this there is already
a sufficiently sound international
basis being devised
by the United Nations which is enshrined in the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly. Those resolutions provide for the
just settlement of this question, taking into account
the national interests and inalienable legitimate rights
of all peoples of the Middle East. It is precisely for
this reason that they enjoyed the support of the overwhelming.majority
of States Members of the United
Nations. It is precisely because of this that those decisions of the United Nations were actively supported
by the Soviet Union and by all socialist countries,
which have consistently been in favour of affirming the
principles of peace, security and equity in relations
among States, principles which are enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and in its resolutions.
38. The bedrock of a peaceful solution of the conflict
in the Middle East is the need to observe and strictly
implement the principles of the Charter and the decisions of the United Nations with regard to the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territories by force; this
signifies that the key to the settlement is the unconditional and complete withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all Arab territories occupied in 1967. Only the
implementation
of this generally recognized principle
of the inviolability
of borders, once more confirmed
at Helsinki; will open the broad and clear road to a
constant and durable peace in the Middle East..
39. .Gne cannot seriously talk about a desire for
peace. and continue to occupy the territories of others:
nor can one seriously talk about peace in that region
while covertly working to ensure that the withdrawal
of troops from the occupied territories is used for
various forms of underhand deals and unsavoury
manceuvres in a political game in which- the Arabs
are presented with unacceptable
conditions
and
demands which offend their national dignity. It is high
,time to accept the realistic conclusion that the freedom
and independence of peoples cannot be the subject
of bargaining and covert political
deals,- however
attractive they may seem on the surface.
. ’
40. The Soviet Union has consistently been in favour
of the sort of settlement which would guarantee the
independence and national sovereignty of all countries
and peoples-in the Middle East and, in this connexion,

we cannot fail to refer to the very obvious positive
change which has occurred in the international are’na
regarding the Palestine question and which was
reflected in the adoption by the General Assembly of
important resolutions and also in the recognition by
the Security Council of the legitimate right of ,the
Arab people of Palestine to be represented in the
Council when the Middle East question was discussed.
These decisions of the United Nations quite clearly
and unambiguously
have confirmed the inalienable
national right of the Arab people of Palestine to selfdetermination,
without any interference from outside
and the right to national independence and sovereignty
of which they have been deprived for more than a
quarter of a century.
*
41. The present. discussion in the Security Council
obviously bears out the undoubted fact that when
talking about a Middle East settlement no one should
forget that such a settlement organically must include
a solution of the question of Palestine, which is by
no means new to the United Nations. Dozens of
resolutions have been adopted in the United Nations;
hundreds of speeches have been made; tons of papers
have been written. However, because of the chauvinist
folly and expansionist wage and stubbornness of the
Israeli leaders, based on completely obsolete myths
and legends 2000 years old, the tragedy of the Arab
people of Palestine, 3 million of them, goes on. Grossly
flouting the basic principles of the Charter of -the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and international
treaties and decisions, the
Israeli ruling circles continue to pursue their expansionist and imperialist policy, as a result of which the
long-suffering
Arab people of Palestine have been
reduced to the situation of refugees expelled from
their homeland by this hostile force.
42. Can the United Nations sit with arms folded and
observe the tragedies and sufferings of these people
without concern for the situation of those who have
been expelled from their homeland
and violently
deprived of their homes? No; the United Nations
cannot and should not look on without being moved
by the situation, because such an attitude is irreconcilable with the lofty principles proclaimed
in’ the
Charter. Representatives of certain countries that are,
directly responsible for the tragedy of those people
like to shout loudly in the United Nations and its
assemblies about human rights. But they are studiously
silent about the human rights of the Arabs of Palestine,
who-have been chased from their homeland by foreign
usurpers. Perhaps’ these false apologists of human
rights will finally speak about the rights of the Arab
people of Palestine here in the Security Council when
the Palestinian problem is taken up.
43. Until now Israel and its patrons have managed
to reduce the discussion of the Palestinian problem
in the United Nations to a simple consideration of its
humanitarian
aspect, that is, the problem of the
Palestinian refugees. .However, Israel has completely

‘,

~

ignored ail the numerous decisions of the Unite-d
Nations, even on this very narrow and individual
aspect of the Palestinian problem, and systematically
refuses to comply with them. Even the term “refugee”
already says a great deal. Why have the Palestinian
Arabs become refugees? Because Israel “forcibly
expelled them from their homeland, depriving them of
it, turning them into refugees. Is this supposed to’ be a
moral action? No; it is a criminal, racist action on the
part of those who preach the theory of the superiority
bf one nation over all others. The Palestinian problem
is not a problem of refugees. It is not so much a
humanitarian
problem.
First and foremost it is a
political problem.

possible further to enhance the international authority
of the PLO and to increase the isolation’of,Israel.
Experience in the last three decades shows quite clearly
that peace in the Middle East cannot be built on, truces
only between individual countries or even individual
groups of countries.
..
47. It is equally obvious that peace in ‘the Middle
East can be neither just nor durable even if peaceful
relations are established and an end is put to the state
of war only among individual countries without taking
intp account all the parties directly concerned in this
conflict and unless all aspects of a settlement are gone
into.

44. Can -the United Nations and its main organ.
whose job it is to combat aggression, allow the ra;ists
to legitimize violence and illegal acts against the, Arab
people of Palestine? No; this cannot be, nor will it be.
Events in recent years and, in particular, the resumed
discussion in the United Nations of the Palestine
problem,-with the adoption of positive decisions, have
borne out the correctness and the propriety of the
position of the Soviet Union and many other countries. Despite all the efforts that have been made by
the enemies of the Palestinian people, the public in
most countries is becoming more and more convinced
that the Palestinian problem in the context of a Middle
East settlement can and should be solved on a just
and legal basis. Otherwise there cannot be, nor is there,
any true peace in the Middle East.

48. Furthermore, the entire history of the crisis in that
region quite clearly shows that the method of dealing
only with separate and partial aspects of the problem,
particularly on a separate basis, and consigning other
key problems to oblivion, has not promoted, nor can it
promote, the establishmen!
of a durable and longlasting peace in the Middle East. The entire set of
problems has to be settled not to the benefit of some
parties dr to the detriment of others if we want -to
put an end once and for all to the dangerous and
explosive’ situation in the Middle East, where so many
important
and complex
political
problems
have
become accumulated.
49. The constructive and true way to create a durable
and just peace in the Middle East undoubtedly is to be
found through implementing
fully the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly
and making them applicable to all the parties to the
conflict-consequently,
to all the parties concerned.

45. The resolutions adopted at the twenty-ninth and
thirtieth sessions of the General Assembly recognize
and reaffirm the inalienable
national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine to seif-determination,
national independence and sovereignty. Those decisions
of the United Nations also contain international
legal .recognition
of the PLO, which has shown in
its selfless heroic struggle that it is the genuine and
authentic representative
of the interests and aspirations- of the Arab people of Palestine. Those decisions
also contain a direct indication that the PLO should
participate in all efforts, discussions and conferences
for the achievement of peace in the Middle East. This
is correct and perfectly just. Unless some heed is paid
to the opinion of the Palestinian people itself, one of
the main parties to the establishment
of a just peace
in the Middle East, any actions along those lines
would be devoid of sense.

50. For the purpose of bringing abtiti1 a radical
improvement
in that situation we should remove the
most dangerous sources of tension. A positive contribution in that connexjon has to be made by the
Security Council as well. The discussion in the Se&uity
Council of the ,Middle East problem, including the
Palestinian issue, ,should help to achieve a decision
on the main issues relating to a Middle East settlement.
That ‘2s why we must make maximum
use of the
opportunity
provided at this time by the Council,
which is the main body of the United Nations responsible for maintaining
international
peace and
security. The very fact that there is a situation of
conflict in the Middle East and the nature of that
conflict make it abundantly
necessary to consider
the problem of settlement as a single whole. It is
perfectly obvious that these demands to implement the
resolutions of the United Nations on the Middle East
are fully covered by the international
body that has
been set up, that is, the Geneva Peace Conference on
the Middle East, the speedy resumption
of whose
effective work is made necessary by life itself.

46. In this connexion, we cannot fail to welcome the
very resolute, decisive and correct step taken by the
Security Council when it invited representatives
of
the PLO to participate in the discussion and in the
elaboration of a resolution by the Security Council
on the Middle East question including the problem of
Palestine. Those who opposed that decision have once
again suffered a fiasco and their isolation has been
revealed. The important decisions recently adopted
at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly on
the Palestine question and Zionism have made it

5 1. In making an appeal for a cardinal and compre*hensive solution of the radical pqoblems of a peace
settlement within the Geneva Coriference, the Soviet
7

Union is firmly convinced that without the full participation of the Arab people of Palestine it would be
impossible and pointless to attempt to settle the Middle
East problem. Thus the question of the participation
of representatives of the Arab people of Palestine in
the work of the Geneva Conference is directly related
to the very substance of a Middle East settlement.
Anyone who takes a stand against the equal participation of the representatives of the PLO in the work of
the Geneva Conference is doing something which is
tantamount to coming out against a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East,
regarding both those participating
in the Conference
and also the aims to be served by renewing that work.
The Soviet Union has a very serious attitude to the
question of the resumption of the work of the Conference and is prepared with other interested parties
to make the necessary efforts in order to find a cardinal
solution to all those questions which relate directly to
establishing a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
56. The present situation in that area urgently
demands that further efforts that will have to be
deployed by those, who are genuinely concerned that
the peoples of the Middle East acquire peace and that
tomorrow will not bring them new tragedies and
sufferings or require fresh victimes of them. The Arab
countries-and
they have already frequently proved
this point-have
shown their readiness to reach a
settlement on a reasonable and just basis. That position
has been greatly valued and supported by the United
Nations and its main organs, the General Assembly
and the Security Council, and also by the overwhelming majority of Member States. We are entitled
to expect that the other party and those that are its
disciples, if they are determined to bring about peace
and to establish good neighbourly relations with the
Arab countries, will show the necessary spirit of
realism. The prospects for peace in this region that
is so very important for general peace and security
will hinge to a large extent on the kind of decision
the Security Council takes on the problem of the.
Middle East. The opportunities of achieving a genuine
and durable settlement between Israel and the Arab
countries exist. We should not give up those opportunities. We must not pass them by if we all genuinely
wish to bring about a just peace settlement in the Middle
East.

52. The Soviet Union, as members know, insists that
the Geneva Conference from the very outset of the
resumption of its work should involve the participation
of all directly concerned parties-Egypt,
Syria, Jordan
and the representatives of the Arab people of Palestine
in the form of the PLO, which has been recognized
by the international
community,
Israel, and also the
Soviet Union and the United States, the Co-Chairmen
of the Conference. Only the joint and collective efforts
of all the parties directly concerned can get the Middle
East out of its chronic state of crisis, which may
again explode at any time. The results for peace and
security of such an explosion would be difficult to
foresee.
53. The participation of the PLO in the consideration
of all aspects of the Middle East settlement is something
which has been brought out not only by the practice
of the General Assembly, but also by that of the
Security Council. The Soviet delegation would like to
take this opportunity to welcome at this meeting the
representatives of the Arab people of Palestine, who
have waged a heroic struggle for their inalienable
national rights.
54. In its message to the Government of the United
States of 9 November last year, which received worldwide support, the Soviet Union took the initiative of
suggesting that the United States and the Soviet
Union; as Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference,
should invite all the parties concerned to resume the
work of the Conference with that membership.
That
step was aimed at developing the main policy which
has always been pursued by the Soviet Union in the
question of the Middle East settlement. As before,
we are in favour of establishing a durable and just
peace in that area. We are in favour of achieving
genuine progress in that settlement.
The aggressor
should not be able to rely on any type of bonus as
payment for the aggression which it has perpetrated.

57. The present situation in the Middle East, as was
declared in the recent statement of the Soviet Government of 9 January [S/I 1928, dnnc>.r], urgently demands
the further intensification
of efforts by all those who
truly want the peoples of that region to find peace and
confidence in the morrow. In fact, history will not
forgive us if we do not use the present favourable
circumstances in order to solve the very explosive
and dangerous conflict in the Middle East which has
been going on for so long now.
58. The Soviet Union for its part is prepared to do
everything in its power, in the Security Council and
elsewhere, to promote the earliest attainment of an
over-all political settlement in the Middle East. That is
a position held by the Soviet Union as a matter of
principle. It was once again expressed in detail and very
clearly in the Soviet Government’s
statement to which
I have just referred. I assume that members of the
Security Council and all others participating
in these
meetings of the-Council
have already had an opportunity to read that statement issued by the Government of the Soviet Union on the Middle East.

55. I trust that the leaders of Israel harbour no hopes
in attempting
to impose on the Arab countries, the
victims of aggression, separate and bilateral agreements as the result of concessions and the partial
withdrawal of its troops from the occupied territories,
thus trying to make people forget about the legitimate
demands of the Arab peoples. The present task,
therefore, is properly to prepare and renew the work of
8

59. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the next
speaker, I wish to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received a letter from the representative of Saudi Arabia containing a request to be invited,
in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules
of procedure, to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. I propose, if I hear no objection,
to invite that representative
to participate
in the
discussion in conformity with the usual practice and
the relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure. There being. no objection,
I invite him to take the piace reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table whenever he desires to address the
Council.

Force at the present time. The actions taken by the
Security Coimcil following the wars of June 1967
and October 1973 also had a major effect. And, finally,
by the resolutions
which it has adopted, and in
particular by resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
the Council expressed the principles ,upon which a
negotiated settlement in the Middle East could be
achieved and established the framework within which
negotiations towards a settlement colild take place.
The role which the Council has played in &he past,
together with the status and the influence which is
conferred on it by the Charter, therefore gives us
today a special capacity to influence the course of
events in the Middle East. However, this makes our
responsibility
all the greater to ensure that this
influence is used positively and helpfully.

At the invitation
of the President,
(Saudi Aruhiu)
took the pluw
reserved
side of the Council
chumher.

64. It also imposes a duty on the .parties to the
conflict in the area ,to take part in this search for
peace. It is therefore disappointing
that not all the
parties are represented
here today. Though. my
Government understands the reasons which have led
the Israel Government
to decide to stay away from
this debate, we regret its decision. The Security
Council is the most authoritative
organ of the United
Nations, charged with keeping the peace. Such progress as has been made towards resolving the Middle
East question has always been achieved in the context
of negotiations authorized by the Council. It cannot
be maintained
that the Council is not fit place to
discuss Middle East issues.

Mr. Buroody
for him ut the

60. Mr. RICHARD
(United
Kingdom):
Before
turning to the subject on the agenda, might I begin by
expressing the condolences of the British Government
and the British people to the Government .and people
of the People’s Republic of China upon the death of
Premier Chou En-lai. My own Prime Minister said the
other day that Chou En-lai was widely respected as
one of the princ‘ipal architects of modem China and as
a distinguished
international
statesman, and that he
would be particularly
remembered
by the British
people for his contribution,
indeed perhaps his unique
contribution,
to the development of relations between
the United Kingdom and the People’s Republic of
China. On behalf of my delegation, I would therefore
like to express our sympathy with the Government
and people of China at this sad time.

62. This debate, which is the first that the Security
Council has held on the Middle East question as a
whole since 1973, offers us a great opportunity,
but
also it confers on us a great responsibility.
We have
an opportunity
to provide a fresh impetus to the
processes of negotiation.
At the same time we have
the responsibility
to ensure that by the actions which
we take here we do -not imperil the very processes
we are trying to help.

65. But United Nations concern and involvement
have not yet brought peace, and this debate is taking
place at a difficult and a delicate moment in Middle
East affairs. After 27 years of continuing
hostility
and tension-indeed
after four major wars-a solution
to the problems of the area remains far off. But we
should not, I think, ignore nor seek to minimize the
progress that has been made over the .last few years.
The Disengagement Agreements that have taken place
between Israel and Egypt [S//1/98], on the one hand,
and Israel and Syria [.Y//1302/Add.I
cd
21, on the
other, and the additional Disengagement
Agreement
concluded last September between Egypt and Israel
[S/11818 und A&/./-5] are signs of a gradual evolution
in the attitudes of all the parties to the dispute. Nor,
I think, should we’underrate the value of the instruments which have made this evolut’ion possible.- But
we cannot afford to stop there: much more remains
to be done, and to be’done soon, if the danger bf a
new war-is not to grow.

63. Of all the major issues which the international
community
has had to face over the last 30 years,
the Middle East question is surely the one in which
the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, have played the largest part. One has only
to retail the contributions made over the years to peace
-ihI the area by United Nations peace-keeping forses,
particularly
the United Nations Emergency Force
and the United Nations Disengagement
Observer

66. If there are comparatively
few grounds yet for
feeling optimistic,
we should equally deny the inevitability of catastrophe. In the view of my delegation,
therefore, the primary aim of the Security Council
now should be to act i.n such a way as to encourage
the renewal of serious negotiations. What is needed is
not a new framework but a new atmosphere. If we
are to help in this way, however, it means that we
must avoid one-sided actions w,hich. would make it

61. Might I also thank those members of the Council
who have said kind and indeed over-generous things
about my period as President of the Council in December. The words were indeed much appreciated.

9

even more difficult to create that climate of confidence
necessary for successful negotiations to take place,

71. My Government understands the frustration-a
frustration expressed eloquently by several representatives who have already spoken-which
is felt by those
whose territory has for so long’been under foreign
occupation and, in particular, by those who have for
nearly 20 years’been homeless refugees.

67. The views of the United Kingdom on the considerations which should govern a Middle East settlement are well known. The problem should be resolved
by, peaceful means, through negotiation
and not
through war; and a settlement should be based on
three main requirements. The first is Israeli withdrawal
from occupied territories; the second, respect for and
acknowledgement
of the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and political independence of every State
in the area and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries. Those are the
basic principles laid down in Security Council resolution 242 (1967), brought into effect as provided in its
resolution 338 (1973). Those two resolutions form
the widely accepted foundation for a settlement and
my Government
will oppose .‘an unilateral attempt
to alter them or detract from them. ‘But there is a third
requirement,
one not. expressed. in resolution
242
(1967), that the right of the Palestinian people to the
expression of their national ‘identity
must also be
recognized. In the eight years that have passed since
that resolution was adopted there has, I think, been a
growing recognition of the essential part that Palestinian interests must play in any settlement.

72. But we also believe it cannot be in the interests
of any one to ignore realities. Isreal exists, and the
principle of its existence is supported by the great
majority of States Members of the United Nations.
Those who do not yet recognize this fact-most
of
all, those Palestinians who do not do’so-must
come’to
recognize it and begin the task of considering how they
can live at peace with Israel. This will involve an
arrangement which, will almost certainly, give neither
side everything it wants-no arrangement can do thatbut which‘will be one which is acceptable to all the
parties concerned and can provide a basis on ‘which
a lasting peace can be built.
73. But there is need for forbearance on the other
side, too: Israel must accept that Palestinian nationalist
sentiment will have to be taken into account and, more
important, that it will have to do something about it.
It is not enough simply to express willingness
to find
. .
. .
a solution.
:
74. What then should be our’aims today? First, as I
have said, our primary aim must be to assist the
resumption of negotiations,
with the participation
in
them, as appropriate, of all the parties concerned.
‘/
75.. Secondly, we should reaffirm the existing resolutions of the Council-in
particular, resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973)-which
set out the essential
principles upon which a settlement in the Middle East
must be based and which establish a ‘negotiating
framework recognized and accepted by all sides.

68, As I said in a statement which I made in the
debate on Palestine in the General Assembly in 1974,
the United Kingdom therefore believes that,
,
“.The resolutions I have cited must be supplemented-but
not supplanted and.not distorted out
of shape or recognition-by
an acknowledgement
that the intergovernmental
settlement for which they
provide must now be broadened to include a place
for the Palestinian people as well.Y3
That; surely, is the crux of the whole-matter.

76. Thirdly,
we must recognize the fundamental
importance of the Palestinian problem and take account
of the legitimate
political rights of the Palestinian
people. -We believe that if the Council were prepared
to follow .this course we should in this ‘debate be
making a significant contribution
to progress towards
peace in the Middle East.

69. In’any final settlement in the Middle East a way
must be.found to take account of the political rights
of the Palestinian people and to enable them to express
their national identity. How the rights of the Palestinian
people are to be further defined is, we believe, a
matter for negotiation between the parties. But this
must be done in a way which is consistent with the
right of all States in ‘the area, including Israel, to exist
within secure and recognized boundaries. It is these
two facts which need to be recognized and reconciled.

77. The .Security
Council
cannot solve these
problems: only the countries and the peoples of,the
area can do that. .It is therefore-unrealistic
to expect
more from. this debate ,than we can properly hope
to achieve. We can express the principles on which we
believe a settlement might be based. We cannot impose
that settlement on the, parties directly concerned, since
a lasting peace will only come from negotiations
between those parties. The Security Council is not a
mediator in this dispute. It cannot be. The most we
can do is to try and bring the parties closer so that,
onthe basis of the principles we articulate here,‘they.
are better able to settle their differences. The basic
elements of a solution are already present: Israeli

70. The important .question which therefore faces us
now is’how best the negotiations for a settlement can
be given a new momentum.
First, we must seek to
check-.‘what seems to be a growing rift lbetween the
parties. SecondIy, we must emphasize ,that ‘fixed and
inflexible attitudes, however justified the parties may
feel in adopting them, can only decrease the chances
of peaceful progress towards a solution.
When
problems seem difficult the important’thing‘is
surely,
to seek common ground, not to insist upon positions
which are incompatible.
10

82. Since 26 October 1972, the people of Benin have
been fighting to put an end to the political domination
and economic exploitation
which we have had to
endure for more than half a century. The irreversible
revolutionary process which we have started and which
is effectively developing at the present time is intended
to make the people of our country a proud, free and
sovereign people, and is designed to create a truly
Beninese society in which each and every one may
enjoy life. These profound aspirations of the people
of Benin .are the aspirations of all peoples throughout
the world that love peace and justice. That is why
our delegation fully understands the real motivations
of the .heroic struggle that the valiant people’ of
Palestine have been waging for years.

withdrawal, secure borders for all States in the area
and some place in this solution for a Palestinian
identity. .What is now needed is the willingness, the
confidence and the resolution by all parties to translate
those elements into practice.
78. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling ,on the -next
speaker, I should like to inform the members of the
Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative
of Kuwait containing a request that
he be invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. I propose, if I
hear no objection,
to invite the representative,
in
conformity
with the usual practice and the relevant
provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of
procedure, to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote.

83. The delegation of Benin takes this occasion to
bid welcome tothe representatives of that courageous
people, and is indeed pleased to see the participation
in our work of the PLO-participation
thanks to which
new facts will be presented to the Council which
should enable it to move forward on the path of
justice and equity that will lead to a settlement of the
crisis in the Middle East. It is no longer appropriate
to resort to expedients which, since they only serve
to create. and perpetuate “no-peace, no-war” solutions, are powder kegs whose explosive potential
could engulf the region and, perhaps, the entire world.
It is now time to act quickly to prevent such an
explosive situation, which would have ,incalculable
consequences.

79. Mr. BOYA (Benin) [interpretdim
from French):
Mr. President, first of all, may I be allowed to discharge a painful duty by associating. the delegation of
Benin with the condolences which you have conveyed
most eloquently and movingly, on behalf of the members of the Council and of. the entire international
community,
to the delegation of the People’s Republic
of China on the cruel loss of that illustrious; immortal
son of China, Premier Chou En-lai. Through you,
I should like to ask the delegation of.China to convey
to the family of the deceased, and to the Government
and the people of China, an expression of the sincere,
profound.sympathy
of the Government and people of
Benin.

84.. The delegation
of Benin believes that if .the
Council wishes to serve a useful purpose, all its members must be guided by the necessary political will
to seek a settlement of the crisis. Therefore first,,
certain errors of the past must be corrected and the
profound
aspirations
of the Palestmian
people
-nameiy,
to exercise their right to exist as a State
and their right to self-determination
and independence-must
be recognized and accepted. Secondly,
Israel must withdraw from all occupied Arab territories, an action that would create conditions conducive to an atmosphere of trust among nations of
the area and help to fulfil the profound aspirations
of the Palestinian people. Thirdly, the right of all the
States of the area’ to existence and independence
within secure boundaries must be recognized and
affirmed.

80. Sir, may I join with other members of the Council who have conveyed congratulations
to you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month, when the Council will be dealing with a
number -of issues of primary importance, for intemational peace and security througout the world. I wish
to thank you for the kind words’ of welcome you
addressed to the new non-permanent
members of the
Council who are participating
in its’ work for the
first time, and through you I should like to thank also
all the members of the Council who have bid ,us
welcome and congratulated us on our election, as well
.as all Member States that worked for that election.

85., The delegation of Benin would not wish to
conclude this statement without making a solemn
appeal to the major Powers to do their utmost to
help the international
community
to find a just, equitable and durable settlement to the distressing problem
of the crisis of the Middle East, the crux of which is
the Palestinian
question. Peace and international
security depend on that. The cause of the Palestinian
people is a just one, and that is why the delegation
of the People’s Republic of Benin is convinced that the
future of the people of Palestine can be ensured
provided that it persists in its struggle and courageously
confronts all obstacles on the path to victory.

81. My delegation is convinced, Mr. President, that,
thanks to your tact, your intelligence,
your courtesy
and, above all, your experience in the practices of the
Organization
and of the Security Council, our work
will be crowned with success. For our part, we pledge
to dobur utmost to deserve the trust which the General
Assembly has placed in our country by electing it to
sit in’ the Council, which is charged with the task of
maintaining international peace and security.
11

world for democracv: - , it was fought so that the victors
might gain some of the spoils. The European Powers
had in mind the partition of the Ottoman Empire. They
did. so. Czarist Russia was to have Constantinople
and the Dardanelles. The revolution
saved Turkey
from that aim of Czarist Russia-I
am speaking of the
Bolshevik Revolution of 1917-and put it out of the
picture.

86. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. In conformity with the
understanding I spoke of before the Council yesterday
[/872nd meeGzg], I would now ask the representative
.of the Palestine Liberation Organization to withdraw
temporarily
from the Council table in order that his
place be taken by the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I call on that representative to take that place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
87. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
allow me to tender my thanks to you and all the other
members of the Council for allowing me to address
myself to the item under discussion. I am heartened
to see Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim presiding over the
Council, as he has indeed been conducting our deliberations with poise and dignity, which, incidentally,
are
reflected in his name. Felicitously,
that name means
“wholesome,
praiseworthy*‘,
and again, “wholeof being true and
some’*, with the connotation
genuine. It augurs well to have such a gentleman
whose name reflects his character, and vice versa, in
the Chair. Let us hope that under your guidance, Sir,
the Council will act with more harmony than one would
expect when it is dealing with such a thorny question
as this, which has beset the United Nations for
28 years.

91. But France and the United Kingdom sent High
Comissioners to the four countries I have mentioned:
Palestine, Lebanon, Syria and Iraq-they
called those
countries Mandated Territories.
Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations was very clear:
the Mandated Territories
were to be prepared for
self-determination.
92. In Palestine,
the indigenous
inhabitants-the
people who were not Jews-were
considered to
constitute between 91 and 93 per cent of the population.
Only 7 or 8 per cent of the population were Jews,
and mostly Sephardic Jews-our
own Jews. There
was never any problem between the Arabs and the
Jews then. In fact, the Jews were Arabs in culture, in
language, in customs, in traditions.
Ironically,
we
discovered that the incursion of the Zionists into our
area was actually an extension of the old colonialism.
93. Did the French and British prepare the foregoing
countries for self-rule? Had it not been for the Second
World War, we would still be grappling with those
two Mandatory
Powers. Of course, we decry what
Hitler did, but had it not been for the struggle between
the so-called Allies and the Central European Powers
-that is, Germany and Austria-the
foregoing Territories would still be under the foreign yoke. Why
do I refer to all that, when it has been repeated time
and again? To remind everyone that the Zionists, or
the Israelis-whatever
you want to call them-use
religion for political and economic ends. No one can
be fooled about that.

88. I shall not let this occasion pass without mentioning our friend, Mr. Ivor Richard, who presided
over the Council last month and as usual demonstrated
how singularly skilful and naturally eloquent he is in
handling other thorny problems that were brought
before it. The loss of the British Parliament in having
the United Kingdom appoint him as representative
among us is our unmistakable gain.
89. For well-nigh three decades the question of
Palestine has embroiled us, and I do hope that we are
beginning to see the light of a solution on the horizon.
Although the representative of Israel is not physically
present,in this chamber, I am sure that he is following
our proceedings closely. We trust that the moderation
which was manifested by the representative of the PLO
will make Mr. Herzog and his Government
listen to
the voice of reason for the sake of all the parties
concerned in the Middle East.

94. Where were the principles of Woodrow Wilson?
They were cast by the wayside. One of Clemenceau’s
friends told me in that great country France-and
I
mean great in liberty, because, of course, colonialism
served certain cliques in every European country-that
Clemenceau had taken Wilson by the tie and told him,
“Go back where you came from. We fought the
war”- as if the Americans had not been there--‘&and
we will do what we want”. And they remapped
Europe to their liking. They placed part of the Middle
East under a colonial suzerainty, which they called
Mandates. They did not fool anyone. We were young,
but we were not fooled.

90. Let us obiectivelv
analvse the fears and misgivings of the IIsraeli Government that have driven it
to boycott the meetings of the Council on this question.
Before doing so, I shall draw on my humble experience
of this question, which I have studied since 1922 when
I was a youth of 17. We found then that the League of
Nations had put the countries of the Fertile Crescent
-namely,
Palestine, Lebanon, Syria and Iraq-under
British and French Mandates. We Arabs thought that,
as the late Mr. Woodrow Wilson declared, all colonial
peoples should become free. We know that Mr. Wilson
returned to the United States a sad man, because the
old colonial spirit still prevailed. In so far as our region
was’concemed,
the war was not fought to save the

95. There was no Hitler at that time. In 1922 the
British had a problem on their hands. Many Zionists
were rallying to the call of the late Theodor Herzl
and wanted to come to Palestine.
96. In 1925 I made a trip to Palestine. I was 20 years
old. For the third or fourth time I remonstrated with
12

.alian himself with Hitler. Who told me that? Dame
Sylvia Pankhurst.
I am not inventing this. It is in
books now. The scholar A. J. P. Taylor has written
about this. I am not imagining it.

the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem. As a pan-Arab I said
to him, “Let these people come if they want to. They
will trade here. Let them stay”. I did not realize at
that early stage that a religion, Judaism, was to be
used for political and economic ends. I thought that
those Jews were imbued with a noble religious sentiment. I thought that because Judaism had flourished in
that area they wanted to come and settle there. I did
not see anything wrong in that. But I was naive.
The Grand Mufti of Jerusalem was not naive; He was
a Palestinian.
He was a notable. He understood the
designs of the Zionists. He said to me, “They want a
country and a flag. We shall have to make our exit
sooner or later because we cannot agree to live under
Europeans, whether they be Jews or Gentiles”.
And
here is the point: “whether they be Jews or Gentiles”.
It was not a question of religion.

101. Palestine became a victim of colonialism, a new
colonialism.
In place of the British or the French it
got Central and Eastern Europeans-forget
about the
fact that they were Jews. It got these Khazars, whose
forebears had never even seen Palestine. They came
from the northern part of Asia by way of the Caspian;
they outskirted the Caspian and in the first century
A. D. settled in what is today southern Russia.
102. Time and again I must recall this fact to our
Israeli colleague. I must repeat it again, for it bears
repetition when none other than Mr. Eban in the
Security Council as well as in the General Assembly
Then 1 researched
says, “God gave us Palestine”.
this question of the indigenous people of Palestine
and I found out that many of the Palestinians had
been Jews; they came to be Christians during the
Byzantine
Empire. Incidentally,
the Zionists were
not the first to use religion as a motivation
for a
political and economic goal; so did the Byzantines.
They were Greeks.

97. Those were the days of Zaghlul Pasha of Egypt,
of the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem. Those were the days
of the Syrian, Iraqi and Lebanese leaders who were
fighting the incursion of Europe in our midst.
98. The First World War was not fought to save
the world for democracy. We have to take that background into account; we have to repeat this time and
again. The British had the problem of moderating
between the new Jewish immigrants and the indigenous
people of Palestine. Need I tell the Council again that
in the framework of that moderating process the United
Kingdom
sent two or three Royal Comissions
to
ascertain what could be done? That did not sit well
with the Zionists. They hanged British Tommies from
trees-and
probably olive trees, the symbol of peace,
because there are not many pine trees in that region.
They destroyed the King David Hotel-it
was not
Arabs, or Palestinians who were Arabized, who did
that. They killed Lord Moyne. They killed Bemadotte.
And they call the Arabs “terrorists”.
The Arabs
learned terrorism from them.

103. So those Palestinians who became Christians,
some of whom were pagan Canaanites and Amorites
or Jews, wanted to get rid of the yoke of Byzantium,
which again had used another noble monotheistic
religion as a motivation for a political and economic
end, and when Islam came on the scene many of those
Jews living then in Palestine, and who had become
Christians, embraced Islam. So look at the irony. Those
pagan tribes which, as I said, came from the northern
part and settled in the first century A. D., were
converted to Judaism in the eighth century A. D.
because of the detente-here
again we have the word
“detente” -between
Islam and Christianity
in the
eighth century. Have I to repeat this time and again?

99. Years ago I used to say to my Palestinian friends,
“Do not resort to the same methods. It is inhuman to
kill people who may be innocent*‘.
But can anyone
blame the Palestinian Arabs? They decided that the
Zionists had succeeded by using terrorism. These were
not the Palestinians
of today, who have gone to
European universities and can analyse the situation.
They thought that the Zionists had won because of the
use of terrorism. But the Zionists won because the
major Powers were behind them. That is why they
won, not because of terrorism.

104. Our friend, your friend,-if
he sees reason, let
us.call him our friend too-Abba
Eban, says, “God
gave us Palestine”.
I retorted from the podium of the
United Nations. “Since when was God in the realestate business?” You British and you French: show
us since when you had the power of attorney from
God. Did you have any wireless contact with God?
God, the frightful concept of God, was used by
graduates of Oxford and Cambridge. And then they
believed.. They studied Darwin and evolution.
The
rib of Adam became our great-great-great-great
grandmother Eve, and that eloquent serpent, they also
believed in it. That eloquent serpent went to Eve and
said “Eat of that apple”. I told our friend from the
United States one day: “Why are you adhering to that
fundamentalism?
There are so many luscious apples in
the United States. Eat them here.” It is all fiction.

100. What can one do if one’s rights are being
trodden under foot? One has to resort to rebellion.
What is the alternative?
Did the League of Nations
mete out justice? I was an ex-c@icio observer at the
League of Nations. Did the League of Nations do
anything for-may
God rest his soul-Haile
Selassie?
I saw him in England in 1936 or 1937. Mr. Chamberlain
sent his brother Austen to Rome to tell Mussolini that
he would have a green light in Ethiopia if he did not

105. They colonized Palestine. They are colonizing
it. Well, all right, we said. These people had suffered
13

a great deal- I mean the European Jews-and they
were human beings. There is nothing wrong with a
European being a Jew, a Gentile, an atheist, or
what have you. Let them have a State. I was present
at Lake Success when, under pressure, Palestine was
partitioned.
And even then the non-Jewish Palesti:
nians-forget
that they were Arabsdonstituted
two
thirds, or 60 per cent, of the population. The war was
fought for what? For the Four Freedoms, for liberty
and freedom and self-determination.
106. This is the situation. Now, why should the
Israelis have misgivings?
Because they thrive .‘on
tension. Should there be no tension, they could not
get aid from our friend, the United States. I do not
know how many billions they have given them-20
billion? I do not know how many billions the. United
States has given them. Twenty billion, this is how
they survived. And philanthropic
Jews, on whose
sentiments they played, contributed maybe 20 billionand. tax-free, incidentally.
Most of that money came
from United States rich Jews. The Zionists do not wishthe American people to know about that. Forty billion
dollars given. Well, that is their business. We do not
want to interfere in the affairs of the United States,
but why should the United States, and before it the
United Kingdom, for that matter-the
United Kingdom
at a distance of 3,000 miles and the United States at
7,000 miles-interfere
in our affairs? Is it a question
of the balance of power and spheres of influence?
If the Western Powers consider the Middle East a
western sphere of influence, well, all right, we would
not mind. And here emerges a new Power on the
horizon. Czarist Russia disappeared,
and a great
Power, the Soviet Union, appeared. And if one
considers that the Soviet Union is not even a few
hundred miles from Palestine, why should not the
Soviet Union also consider that, if there is a policy
of spheres of influence, somebody might‘ perhaps
:
conspire against it and hurt it.

108. What have’we Arabs done, not just the Palestinians, to our friends, the Americans-and
I mean
“friends” -and
to the United Kingdom
that they
should interfere in our affairs and play power politics
not with wooden pieces on a chequer-board but with
the destiny .of a people? What have we done? To
whom did we give our oil concessions? To the .Soviet
Union? We gave them to American and to British
companies. To whom did we open up our gates of
trade? The Soviet Union was developing industrially.
They were not at that time in a position to export
after the World ‘War. .We are always reminded by
Mr. Malik that they lost 60 million people. So they
were in no position to sell, although now I believe
that there are some Soviet goods being sold in the
Middle East. Why not?
109: What have we done to our good friends, the
Americans and the British? The illustrious General
de’ Gaulle found fhat’it was not fair that this question
should trail ‘on. And what did the Zionists do? They
began for that to curse the man who revived the spirit
of France, that great nation.
110. Anybody who is not with them is against them,
even though justice may not be on their side. Therefore
the Zionists thrive on tension. If there is no tension,
the United States will not send them money and other
Jews will not send them money, and they will become
insolvent., They have devalued their pound several
times within two years. They are not a viable State
unless they trade with their neighbours. Therefore
we come to the conclu‘sion that they do not want only
a political peace; they want an economic peace. If
they see reason and admit the fact that the Palestinians
have a national right to self-determination,
perhaps one
day we will trade with them. Why not!. They are
Europeans. We will forget that they are Jews. But
they have a fear ,here, and I must tell them this:
that we cannot have any control over this fear. : ‘.

107. Well, there was a sort of confrontation.
But
since Mr. Khrushchev came on the scene we no
longer have the “cold war” and he established the
foundation of detente. We are not so simple as not to
know that. I hope that they will not clash, the
Soviet Union and the United States, because this might
mean a world war. But mind you, through miscalculation-after
all, leaders are human-there
might be a
great world war, and because the Zionists want to
have their own way, they would say: “Accept a fait
accompli. We are there. We suffered a great deal”.
The Europeans have a sense of guilt; at least they
seem to have developed one. But why not allocate
European land and let the Zionists have their State?
Why should it be at the expense of another people?
Europeans, forget that they are Jews. We established
the fact that they are Europeans and that they are
colonialists.
Why? Because the Jews permeated all
Western society and have become very powerfulbankers, traders. They clothe the United States. Go
to Seventh Avenue. More power to them. ‘We like
them to prosper, but not at our expense.
:

11 I. Supposing they agree tomorrow to a Palestinian
State in juxtaposition
to theirs, whether it be Gaza
or the West Bank or even a binational. State,
whatever it is, although they may perhaps want to
preserve their integrity, subconsciously they know that
sooner or later-because
there, are scholars amongst
them-they
will be assimilated, and then the Jewish
identity or Zionist identity will be lost. But why blame
us? We want them to preserve their identity, but we
know from history that Alexander the Great, the
Byzantines, the Crusaders, all those who came to that
area, were assimilated, not by design but by the force
of the Semitic culture of the land, by language, by
customs, by tradition. This is the fear of the Zionists,
that they will be assimilated,
but what is. the alternative? If they maintain that tension, what is the
alternative?
The alternative
might be endangering
world peace, because the tenacity of the people of the
area is, proverbial.
As I said, it is, assimilatory.
It
assimilates. You know those Africans called Algerians.
They are not from the peninsula. Most of them were
14

Berbers from Europe. The Arabs did not have what
you may call a proselytizing
process. :They became
Arabs. There are forces in Arabism over which we have
no control. It spreads as in Isiam. We never had
missionaries in Islam. The Chinese can tell me. They
have’ Moslem Chinese too. They went there as traders,
the Arabs from Hadhramaut,
and some Chinese liked
the way of life of some of those Moslem traders and
became Moslems. We did not have missionaries to
proselytize like the Christians, whether Catholic or
Protestant. I am telling you now that these are historical
facts.

are here today; tomorrow we are gone. Had it not
been that we were prone to have such a ‘belief .and
phiIosophy, ,we ‘should not have produced prophets
or have had to guide us prophets who preached.
Micah, the so-called Jewish prophet said “Do justly,
love mercy, walk humbly with thy God.” We should
not have ,produced Jesus, the son of Mary. When he
was asked;“‘What
is God?“, he said, “God is love:”
We should not have produced the prophet Mohammed,
who started the Koran, not with the epithet of God
the great, the supreme, the sublime, but: “In .the
name of God the merciful and compassionate.”

I Ii.
The same is true of ideology. .Although propaganda was tried during the days of the Corninform,
many became Communists
irrespective
of Russia,
because they thought communism
might be a good
ideology.
We never proselytized
anybody. Those
Zionists are afraid that they will be assimifated, and
then there will be no Israet, but is it our fault? I will
tell our Palestinian brothers and sons., They. are a
peaceful people. If they so restored, to terrorism, what
did the Zionists do? What did the Haganah do? What
did the Zuai Leumi do? I have mentioned some of
their atrocities: Deir Yassin, the King David Hotel.
Shall I repeat them .by rote? They used terrorism.
Everybody who is frustrated uses terrorism. Do you
know why men beat their wives? They get frustrated.
Nowadays the wives are -beating the men-and
then
they make up. Frustration drives people to madness.
At one time under Anglo-Saxon or European law it
was not a crime to beat one’s wife, although in our
part of the world anyone who beat another person
would be called an outcast.

115. Then here come the Khazars and they want to
revive colonialism
among us-“Khazars”
meaning
those Zionists -from Europe. How do you like that?
This is pm&. It cannot go on. Arafat said from the
will offer them the
podium: “We want peace-we
olive branch.”
It may be said that he had a gun
also. I do not know whether he had the gun then or
his people had a symbolic gun. Suppose I offer
Someone the olive branch and, figuratively speaking,
he cuts my, hand; at least I will have something to
defend myself with in the other hand, No, those
Zionists rationalize everything, and I feel terribly sorry
,
for-them:
_,

113. Here is the.question.
How can we bring those
Israelis to reform? We cannot tell them we will not
assimilate them, because we do not want to assimilate
them. In the Arab world we do not have any system,
any creed, missionary or otherwise. This is the subconscious fear of the Zionists, but are we to.blame
also for their fear? Now, what is the alternative?
Suppose there is always tension and no peace. Can
the world afford such a stcrtrrs quo-or
relative stutrrs
quo, because there is no such thing as a fixed shtm
q/o--or
such a situation? I declare that we cannot
afford it. Forget that I am an Arab. We cannot afford
it, whether we are Arabs, ‘Africans, Europeans or
Asians or whatever ethnic or cultural origin we may
have. Therefore I am now addressing the Israeli
Government
in obscytia.
These people manifested
and demonstrated-this
gentleman is one of themthat they are willing to live in ,peace. It may be
said, “No, you are terrorists”.
Let them wash their
mouths before they call other people terrorists. Those
who started terrorism are the tyrants, according to a
verse in the Holy Koran.
114. This is the situation. Baroody does not beat
about the bush. I am talking here as a humble
student of the situation. We do not .hate the Jews.
1 do not hate my enemies. Why should ,I hate them?
They are guests in’ this world. We are all guests, We
‘.

116. I was hoping that my good friend Mr. Moynihan
would speak, but he has put his alternate in his seat.
I do not know whether my voice irritates his eardrums or whether he is busy elsewhere. But I shall
have occasion to speak again after I have listened to
him. I hope that he will say something that will lead to
the establishment of peace. After all, the key to this
problem, my dear representative of the United States,
is in your hands. We all know very well that this is an
election year, but what is an election? A President
comes and a President goes, a President is confirmed
or he is not confirmed. That is your problem as well
as ours. You want peace, we want peace and .those
people want peace. I shall have occasion to speak
again after our friend Mr. Moynihan has spoken and
1 hope he will be as moderate as we expect him to
be-1 mean his Government,
of course. We all love
the United States. Who does not love the people
of the United States?, We do’ not love the CIA, of
course, but the’ CIA is not the United States; nor is
the KGB the Soviet Union. We do not want war by
proxy. Let us open our hearts.
117. Incidentally,
before I conclude I want to say
that’ 10 years ago a rather mischievous
correspondent-he
must have been an outside correspondent,
the correspondents here are good-said
to me, “Would
you not be happy if you saw Abba Eban molested or
beaten‘on First Avenue?” I said, .“What?” He ,said,
“He is your enemy”. I said, “Yes, in‘politics, but as
a human being he is like me. I would go and snatch
him away and save him if I could: He said, “What?“’
I said to. him,’ “ You are a barbarian. Did we not
reprieve Richard the Lionhearted? We could have cut
his head off.” I said, “We are not like you; like what

approach to international
will become extinct.

you did in Europe or in the Tokyo tribunals.”
He
shut up. They surrendered to them and then they were
hanged. Have you ever heard of anything more
lacking in chivalry? We are not like that. We want to
assure the Israelis that they have nothing to fear once
peace is established. The people, including our Jews,
are magnanimous
and chivalrous.
I said to the
Europeans, “You are still children, since, had it not
been for the Renaissance in Italy, you would still be
barbarians. And you, the United States, with all due
respect we love you, you are great in technology and
in industry, but in culture you are babies-some
200 years, 1776”.

affairs, the human species

119. Mr. President, I have promised you that there
will be another occasion on which I shall speak,
especially after my good friend Mr. Moynihan
has
spoken. If he goes off at a tangent, in my view, I
shall address him in an amicable way, not using any
epithets or obscene terms. We shall talk together and
reason with him, noting that the United States has
the key to solving the problem. Do not underestimate
the Soviet Union either. They can also push the door
once the key to peace is in it. Would you not do that,
Mr. Malik, if the United States opens the door for
peace? I am sure the Soviet Union would push the
door ajar and we would have concord and harmony
between the great Powers, and peace would also reign
between Jew and Gentile in the land of Palestine,
regardless of the ethnic origin of those who are now
at war.

118. We have had our heyday. We had empires which
fell, and rightly so, because we got drunk with power.
We had three Arab empires which fell, and rightly
so. But we have a legacy of magninimity
and of
chivalry. If he were here, I would tell Mr. Herzog
and his Government
not to be afraid. Those Palestinians are their brothers in humanity. We want peace
and I am sure that the people-leave
aside the Govemmerit---of Israel want peace. The people of the Soviet
Union, who are maligned day in and day out by the
Zionists want peace. The people of the United States
want peace. It is those darned politicians who do not
want peace, not maliciously so, but because they are
still following an antiquated system. If there is no new

The meeting

rose at 1.20 p.m.

I See General Assembly resolution 181 (IX).
* A/10217, para. 54.
’ See Oflcicrl Records of thi> Gmrrul Aswmbly,
Srssbn, Pkncrry Matings, 2292nd meeting.

16

Twnty-ninth

.’

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
tl : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

oo400

83-60801-May

1984-2.200
