198

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, adopted by the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities at its thirty-first session, 46 with a view to consideration of the matter by the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session,
I. Takes note of the constructive work undertaken
by the open-ended working group which has been established to elaborate a final version of the draft Body
of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under
Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, which task,
however, it has not been able to conclude;
2. Decides to refer to its thirty-sixth session the draft
Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, for consideration by the Sixth Committee:
3. Decides to establish, at its thirty-sixth session, an
open-ended working group with the intention of concluding the consideration of the draft Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form
of Detention or Imprisonment, with a view to its adoption by the General Assembly.

96th plenary meeting
15 December l 980

35/178.

and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment:
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
complete as a matter of urgency, at its thirty-seventh session, the drafting of a convention on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
with a view to submitting a draft, including provisions
for the effective implementation of the future convention, to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to forward the
replies submitted by Governments of States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
to the questionnaire on torture to the Human Rights
Committee for the use of Committee members when
dealing with questions relating ~o torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment:
4. Invites Member Statt.s which have not yet done so
to deposit the unilateral declarations with the SecretaryGeneral, as called for under General Assembly resolutions 32/64 of 8 December I 977 and 33/ 178 of 20
December 1978;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment

The General Assembly.
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Bearing in mind article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,'"
Recalling once again its resolutions 32/62 of 8 December 1977, in which it requested the Commission on
Human Rights to draw up a draft convention on torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment in the light of the principles embodied in the
Declaration, 32/63 of 8 December 1977, in which it requested the Secretary-General to draw up and circulate
among Member States a questionnaire soliciting information concerning steps they had taken, including legislative and administrative measures, to put into practice
the principles of the Declaration, and 32/64 of 8 December 1977, in which it called upon Member States to
reinforce their support of the Declaration by making
unilateral declarations against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Welcoming resolution 11 adopted on 5 September
1980 by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,'' in
which the Congress expressed the belief that the draft
convention should be finalized at the earliest possible
time,
I. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/32 of 2 May 1980, by which the Council authorized an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human Rights to meet for a period of one week
prior to the thirty-seventh session of the Commission to
complete the work on a draft convention against torture
•• E/CN.4/1296, para. 109; see also A/35/401, annex.
" Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
"See A/CONF.87/14/Rev.l, part one. chap. I. sect. B.

35/ 179.

Draft Code of Medical Ethics

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 / 168 of 17 December I 979.
in which it requested the Secretary-General to circulate
the draft Code of Medical Ethics to Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned, interested intergovernmental organizations and interested non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council for comments and suggestions,
Taking note of resolution 11 adopted on 5 September
1980 by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,"' in
which the Congress expressed the hope that the General
Assembly would adopt the draft Code, subject to any
amendments which appear to be necessary.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the draft Code of Medical Ethics,'''
Having been unable for lack of time to decide the matter during its thirty-fifth session,
Believing, however, that the elaboration of a draft
Code of Medical Ethics constitutes an important step in
the establishment of international standards in the field
of human rights,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to renew his request for comments and suggestions on the draft Code
of Medical Ethics to Member States, the specialized
agencies concerned, interested intergovernmental organizations and interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council which have not yet responded to his
earlier note, and to submit a revised report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session:
"'" A/35/372 and Add.1-3.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
--- - --

--

--

2. Invites those Member States which have not yet
done so to submit their comments and suggestions on
the draft Code;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider the draft Code at its first regular session of
1981, taking into account the comments and recommendations submitted, with a view to presenting it to
the General Assembly for adoption at the thirty-sixth
session;
4. Invites Member States to take an active part in the
future deliberations on the draft Code;
5. Decides to consider again the question of the draft
Code of Medical Ethics at its thirty-sixth session under
the item entitled "Torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment".

96th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
35/180.

Assistance to refugees in Somalia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/61 of 29 November 1979
on the situation of African refugees, by which it requested the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to make every effort to mobilize additional resources to meet the needs of refugees in Africa,
Having heard the statement of the High Commissioner100 on the situation of refugees in Somalia,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/9 of 28 April 1980, by which the Council, inter
alia:
(a) Took note of the report of the interagency mission which visited Somalia from 10 to 16 December 1979
to study the refugee situation in that country and to
draw up a programme of assistance to deal with the
urgent humanitarian needs there, 101
(b) Endorsed the appeal of the Secretary-General of
11 February 1980, as well as the appeals launched by the
High Commissioner, the Director-General of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, for urgent international assistance to help
the Government of Somalia to provide the necessary
care and attention to the refugees,
(c) Recognized the heavy burden placed on the
Government of Somalia in caring for the refugees and
the need for international assistance to share that burden,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council
resolution 1980/53 of 24 July 1980, by which the Council, inter alia:
(a) Noted with concern the dramatic increase in the
refugee population in Somalia,
(b) Requested the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to consider the necessity
of dispatching a review mission to Somalia to assess current developments in the refugee situation, as a followup to the earlier report of the interagency mission,
Recofnizing the heavy burden placed on the Government o Somalia in caring for the refugees and the need
for international assistance to share that burden,
100
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifih Session.
Third Committee, 51st meeting, paras. 1-8.
IOI E/ 1980/44.

199

- -- -

Mindful that Somalia is classified as a least developed
country and that its meagre resources and inadequate
infrastructure are not capable of coping with the refugee situation alone, without jeopardy to its social and
economic development and without endangering the
general well-being of the population,
Expressing deep appreciation for the assistance which
has been rendered by several Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
Somalia in support of the refugee programmes,
Deeply concerned, however, that the response of the
international community to date has not been commensurate with the needs of the refugees, as described in the
report of the interagency mission,
l. Commends the Secretary-General for taking steps
to promote continued and concerted international action to assist the Government of Somalia to provide relief aid for the refugees;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts undertaken by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to provide humanitarian assistance to the refugees in Somalia;
3. Takes note of the measures which the Government of Somalia is taking in order to provide shelter,
food and other services to the refugees in Somalia;
4. Endorses the appeal of the Secretary-General of
11 February 1980 and the appeals launched by the High
Commissioner, the United Nations Children's Fund and
the World Food Programme for urgent international assistance to help the Government of Somalia to provide
the necessary care and attention to the refugees;
5. Endorses also the appeal of the Economic and
Social Council to all Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and all
voluntary agencies to increase further their assistance to
the Government of Somalia and to the various refugee
programmes sponsored by the Office of the High Commissioner so as to ensure the adequate and continuous
provision of emergency relief and humanitarian assistance to refugees in Somalia;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to dispatch a mission to
Somalia to make a comprehensive review of the refugee situatitm in that country in the light of developments since the publication of the report of the interagency mission which visited Somalia in December
1979:
7. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the High Commissioner, to arrange for
the report of the review mission to be circulated as soon
as it is published, so that the international community
may have an updated report on the condition of the refugees in Somalia and an assessment of their over-all
needs, including measures for strengthening the social
and economic infrastructure of the country;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner to continue their efforts to mobilize humanitarian assistance for the relief and rehabilitation of
the refugees in Somalia:
9. Urges Member States, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and intergovernmental and financial institutions to assist
Somalia in strengthening its social and economic
infrastructure so that essential services and facilities can
be strengthened and expanded:
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General. in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to submit the report of the
