United Nations

S/PV.9220

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9220th meeting
Wednesday, 14 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jaishankar/Mrs. Kamboj

(India)

Members:

Albania
Brazil
China
France
Gabon
Ghana
Ireland
Kenya
Mexico
Norway
Russian Federation
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Cleland
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Al Kaabi
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
New orientation for reformed multilateralism
Letter dated 25 November 2022 from the Permanent Representative of India
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2022/880)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75095 (E)
*2275095*

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

14/12/2022

I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The Secretary-General: Strengthening multilateralism to address today’s global challenges has been
my highest priority since assuming office as SecretaryGeneral. My report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982)
and the process it has initiated are aimed above all at
reinvigorating multilateralism to deal with today’s interconnected threats.

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
New orientation for reformed multilateralism
Letter dated 25 November 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2022/880)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General and the distinguished Ministers
and other high-level representatives. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Chile, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany,
Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta, Morocco, Nepal,
Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Singapore, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, President of the General Assembly,
to participate in this meeting.

Even during the darkest periods of the Cold War,
collective decision-making and continuous dialogue
in the Security Council maintained a functioning,
if imperfect, system of collective security. The
international system created after the Second World War
succeeded in preventing a military conflict between
the major Powers. States armed with nuclear weapons
cooperated to cut their numbers, prevent proliferation
and avert a nuclear catastrophe. Peacemaking and
peacekeeping by the United Nations helped to end
conflicts, saving millions of lives.
Notwithstanding that important progress, we are
still grappling with many of the same challenges we
have faced for 76 years: inter-State wars, limits to our
peacekeeping ability, terrorism and a divided collective
security system. And at the same time, conflict has
evolved dramatically. We have seen fundamental
changes in how it is fought, by whom and where.
Lethal weapons are cheaper and more sophisticated
than ever. Humankind has the capacity to annihilate
itself entirely. The climate crisis is now contributing to
conflict in a host of ways. The negative implications of
digital technologies are proliferating. Misinformation
and hate speech poison democratic debate and fuel
social instability.

its

Many elements of modern life are weaponized:
cyberspace, supply chains, migration, information,
trade and financial services and investments.
Frameworks for global cooperation have not kept pace
with this evolution. Issues quickly become zero-sum
and polarizing. Our toolbox, norms and approaches
need upgrading.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/880, which contains the text of a
letter dated 25 November 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

The declaration on the commemoration of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations asked
me to make concrete recommendations on a broad range
of threats — on land and at sea, in space and cyberspace.
In response, as part of my report Our Common Agenda,
I proposed a New Agenda for Peace, which I hope to
submit to Member States in 2023. The New Agenda

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2/31

begin

22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

for Peace will take a long view and a wide lens. It will
speak to all Member States and address the full range of
new and old security challenges that we face — local,
national, regional and international. It will examine ways
to update our existing tools for mediation, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and counter-terrorism. It will also look at
new and emerging threats in less traditional domains,
including cyberspace and outer space.
The New Agenda for Peace will recognize the
links between many forms of vulnerability, human
rights, State fragility and the outbreak of conflict. It
is our opportunity to take stock and to change course,
because business as usual does not mean things will
stay the same. In a world in which the only certainty is
uncertainty, it means things will almost certainly get far
worse. The New Agenda for Peace will aim to address a
host of tough questions. It will articulate a vision for the
United Nations work in peace and security for a world
in transition and a new era of geopolitical competition.
It will set out a comprehensive approach to
prevention, linking peace, sustainable development,
climate action and food security. It will consider how the
United Nations adapts its peace and security instruments
to an era of cyberthreats, information warfare and other
forms of conflict. It will look to Member States for
new frameworks to reinforce multilateral solutions and
manage intense geopolitical competition. It will call for
new norms, regulations and accountability mechanisms to
strengthen the multilateral system in areas in which gaps
have emerged. And it will consider how we can further
engage with non-State actors, including the private
sector and civil society, to meet the challenges of our day.
The New Agenda for Peace will also consider
how the existing United Nations toolbox can be
enhanced. The Black Sea Grain Initiative shows that the
United Nations still has a unique and important role in
brokering solutions to global challenges. We must build
on and expand such innovative approaches. Our existing
tools and operations also have enormous value and have
contributed to saving many lives. We must do everything
we can to invest in them and adapt them to new realities.
Where they fail, it is often because they are asked to do
the impossible. I look forward to further discussions
with Member States on this important process.
(spoke in French)
Preparing for the future is a challenge for the
entire United Nations. Member States are working hard
to evolve the organs of intergovernmental meetings

S/PV.9220

according to the needs and realities of today, and I
welcome the negotiations that have been taking place
in the General Assembly since 2008.
A majority of Member States are now aware that
the Security Council should be reformed to reflect
contemporary geopolitical realities. I hope that
regional groups and Member States can work together
to achieve greater consensus on the way forward and on
the terms of the reform. The Organization and I stand
ready to provide the necessary support. The Council is
already taking advantage of the new working methods
put in place, including public debates and informal
mechanisms aimed at strengthening collaboration with
all States Members of the United Nations.
The contribution of women’s rights organizations
to the Council has made it possible to advancing our
prevention work and strengthening our actions in
response to ongoing conflicts. Consultations open
to a wider range of stakeholders, including women’s
rights organizations and people affected by conflict,
displacement and human rights abuses, cannot but be
beneficial to the work, influence and credibility of
the Council.
I also note the calls of Member States for the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly and
the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
in the framework of a reformed multilateralism. The
General Assembly has shown that it plays a valuable role
in bringing the Member States to consider the issues on
its agenda. Just this year, it adopted many important
resolutions, in particular on the war in Ukraine, the
right to a healthy environment and the use of the veto
by members of the Security Council.
With regard to any decision by Member States to
streamline General Assembly practices — resolutions,
the presentation of reports and the functioning
of committees — or to reinforce the work of the
Assembly’s high-level week, the Secretariat stands
ready to provide support.
With regard to the Economic and Social Council,
the proposed biennial summit to be organized between
it, the Heads of State and Government of the Group
of 20, the Secretary-General and the international
financial institutions would constitute an important
step towards better coordination of global governance
and the creation of a global financial system adapted to
today’s world.

22-750953/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

The challenge ahead is clear. We have the
opportunity and the obligation to remember the promise
of the Charter of the United Nations: to safeguard future
generations from the scourge of war. We must keep this
promise with a revitalized, effective, representative and
inclusive multilateralism.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the President of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Kőrösi: I thank Minister Jaishankar and
the Indian Mission for organizing this critically
important debate. I also commend India and the four
other outgoing Security Council members — Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico and Norway — for their important
contributions to international peace and security over
the past two years.
We are at a watershed moment for multilateralism — at
a historic crossroads. The international rules, norms,
instruments and institutions that have guided inter-State
relations for over 75 years are facing deep — and some
would say existential — questions of relevance at a
time when the world needs them most.
But as we emerge from the coronavirus disease
pandemic, grappling simultaneously with the climate
crisis and protracted debt, food and energy emergencies,
one thing is clear: these global challenges are far too
great for any one nation to handle alone. Our best hope,
our only hope, is always to find a multilateral solution,
designed in line with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law.
Let us recall that the actions taken here in the
United Nations have an impact on the 8 billion people
out there. We must improve the lives of the people who
count on us, and we must do so at a time of profound
global change and polarization. But just as our actions
have profound effects across the globe, so too does
our inaction — in the General Assembly or, more
frequently, in the Security Council. Too often, sharp
geopolitical divides have prevented responses and
progress in the Council.
The question I have for the members of the Council
is simple: will those rifts continue to upstage their
collective ability to maintain international peace and
security? A reminder of their mission hangs above
4/31

14/12/2022

them daily — will they choose Per Krohg’s phoenix
rising from the ashes of war or the pain and destruction
depicted in Picasso’s Guernica just beyond these doors?
Multilateralism can work, but it must work better.
The 193 Member States of the General Assembly
have placed their trust in the 15 Security Council
members. As members of the General Assembly and of
the Security Council, they elected the majority of the
States here represented and trusted the rest though the
Charter. They expect each Council member to act for
the good of all, to uphold the Charter. Council members
have done so on countless occasions and, in doing so,
they have saved countless lives.
Just last week, the Council decided to establish
a humanitarian exemption across United Nations
sanctions regimes. That will have a direct impact on
so many people living under dire conditions— yet
there are also examples of failed collective action.
Let me mention just one. After nearly 10 months of
war in Ukraine, not a single Council resolution has
been adopted to mitigate the exact type of crisis the
United Nations was created to prevent.
For the United Nations to reinforce its relevance — its
raison d’être — and for the Organization to survive,
it must deliver solutions for end-users, all 8 billion of
them. The people we serve do not neatly organize their
lives into boxes labelled “human rights”, “development”
and “peace”. It is our responsibility, individually and
collectively, to respond to that complexity.
It makes sense that we collaborate across bodies,
organs and processes and build on efforts already
under way. The so-called veto initiative has opened
an important door for a new form of collaboration and
accountability. The Assembly has been obliged to step
up when decisions by the Council are blocked. Following
the mandate given by the Member States, I will convene
a formal debate during the seventy-seventh session of
the General Assembly on the use of veto. This will
allow them to reflect on the initiative, and on how to
bring our two organs to working more closely together
in discharging their functions in support of both peace
and prosperity.
Outside this Chamber, Member States are
participating in 15 negotiating processes on a range of
issues, from counter-terrorism and health to sustainable
development and digital governance. Several of the
facilitators are sitting at the Council table today. One of
those processes is the intergovernmental negotiations
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

on Security Council reform, with the participation of
all 193 States Members of the United Nations. It has
been a mandated duty of the General Assembly for
many years, but the outcome is still less than what
was expected.
During the high-level week in September, more
than a third of world leaders highlighted the need for
Security Council reform. I fully support today’s focus on
tangible steps that Members States can take. I ask each
Council member, as members of the General Assembly,
to take up this challenge, to move from a position
of “no” or “later” to a position of “yes” and “now”.
As we embark on our discussion, I urge Council
members to think about those who rely on them and their
ability to come to agreement to ensure their safety and
well-being; to guarantee the delivery of humanitarian
aid that will save their lives; to support inclusive peace
processes with full, equal, and meaningful participation
of women and marginalized groups, which will end the
fighting and suffering in their communities; to support
the demobilization of former combatants and child
soldiers that will reunite their families; and to ensure
protection from conflict-related sexual violence that no
one should ever have to endure.
As the adage goes, there is nothing more uncertain
in its success than to take the lead in the introduction
of a new order of things. For us today, I would add that
there is nothing more necessary. Deadlock translates to
a dead end for the millions of children, women, men and
families who are all suffering the consequences. They are
putting their trust in us to step beyond power dynamics.
I am imploring the Security Council to respond
by prioritizing dialogue and diplomacy, trade political
differences for genuine political will to find solutions, go
beyond the calculations of distrust and old rivalries and
focus on what unites us all. Together with my Office, I
stand ready to support Member States to that end in any
way possible.

S/PV.9220

We have come together in this Chamber today
for an honest conversation about the effectiveness of
multilateral institutions created more than 75 years ago.
The question before us is how best these institutions
can be reformed, particularly as the need to reform is
less deniable with each passing year. This debate and
its outcome will not only help determine what kind of
United Nations we wish to see, but also what kind of
global order best reflects contemporary realities.
The need for a new orientation for a reformed
multilateral system flows from this widespread
recognition. While the matter concerns the fullest
constituency of States Members of the United Nations,
the Security Council also has an important stake in
the consideration of this crucial question, because, at
the end of the day, it has direct implications for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
it is in the fitness of things that such a discussion takes
place as an open debate.
All of us are aware that the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council has been on the General Assembly
agenda for well over three decades. While the debate
on reforms has meandered aimlessly, the real world has
changed dramatically. We see that in terms of economic
prosperity, technology capabilities, political influence
and developmental progress. The broad dispersal of
capabilities and responsibilities has been expressed,
for example, in the emergence of the Group of 20.
That realization is now steadily percolating through
the wider membership of the United Nations. At the
high-level week of the seventy-session of the General
Assembly, we were all witness to a growing sentiment
in favour of reform. Our challenge is to translate that
into concrete outcomes.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for External Affairs of India.

The call for change has been accelerated by
growing stresses on the international system that we
have experienced in recent years. On the one hand, they
have brought out the inequities and the inadequacies
of the way the world currently functions. On the other
hand, they have also highlighted that a larger and deeper
collaboration is necessary to find solutions.

I thank all participants for joining us at today’s
Security Council open debate on a topic of growing
relevance. We particularly appreciate the presence of
the Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly. This is a reflection of the importance of the
subject at hand.

Let me give a few examples. During the coronavirus
disease pandemic, many vulnerable nations of the
global South got their first vaccines from beyond their
traditional sources. Indeed, the diversification of global
production was itself a recognition of how much the old
order had changed.

The President: I thank Mr. Kőrösi for his briefing.

22-750955/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

The knock-on effects of conflict situations have
also underscored the necessity for more broad-based
global governance. Recent concerns over food, fertilizer
and fuel security were not adequately articulated in the
highest councils of decision-making. Much of the world
was therefore led to believe that their interests did not
matter. We cannot let that happen again.
When it comes to climate action and climate justice,
the state of affairs is no better. Instead of addressing the
relevant issues in the appropriate forum, we have seen
attempts at distraction and diversion.
On the challenge of terrorism, even as the world
is coming together with a more collective response,
multilateral platforms are being misused to justify and
protect perpetrators.
Each one of the foregoing examples makes a strong
case for why it should not be business as usual in the
multilateral domain. We need not only to increase
stakeholdership but also to enhance the effectiveness
and credibility of multilateralism in the eyes of the
international community and in the eyes of global
public opinion. That is the purpose of new orientation
for a reformed multilateral system.
If this is to happen, Member States from Latin
America, Africa and Asia as well as small island
developing States should have credible and continuing
representation in the Security Council. Decisions
about the future can no longer be taken without their
participation. It is equally important to make the
working methods and processes of global institutions,
including the Council, more accountable, objective and
transparent. Failing to do so would only expose the
Council to charges of politicization.
Let us recall that at every milestone in multilateral
diplomacy, the desire for reform has been expressed at
the highest levels. That ranges from the Millennium
Declaration to the 2005 World Summit Outcome and
the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventyfifth Anniversary of the United Nations in 2020. This
year, too, the General Assembly heard calls for reform
from more than 70 leaders — more than double the
number in 2021. Why, then, are we failing to deliver on
such a strong desire for change?
The answer lies in the nature of the intergovernmental
negotiations process itself. First, it is the only such
process within the United Nations that is conducted
without any time frame. Secondly, it is also singular in
6/31

14/12/2022

being negotiated without any text. Thirdly, there is no
record-keeping that enables progress to be recognized
and carried forward. And that is not all. It has even
been suggested that negotiations should start only
when consensus has been achieved. Surely there can
be no more extreme case of putting the cart before the
horse. Three decades after the formation of the Openended Working Group on Security Council Reform, we
have nothing to show for precisely those reasons. That
is creating an intense sense of frustration among the
wider membership. They will not accept attempts to
propose piecemeal changes as an alternative.
The Secretary-General has rightly called for
“transforming this moment of crisis into a moment
of multilateralism”, but that moment must capture
the sense of change and cannot remain a prisoner of
the past — after all, Our Common Agenda (A/75/982)
and the Summit of the Future will deliver results
only if they respond to the growing calls for reform
multilateralism. Reform is the need of the day, and I
am confident that the Global South in particular shares
India’s determination to persevere.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Cabinet member and Minister of
Culture and Youth of the United Arab Emirates.
Ms. Al Kaabi (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank India for organizing this
open debate, and I am grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, for their briefings. I also
want to congratulate you, Sir, and the Indian Mission
on a very successful eighth term on the Security
Council. Your voice in this Chamber is necessary and
the United Arab Emirates reiterates its endorsement of
India’s bid for permanent membership in a reformed
Security Council.
Since 1945, the multilateral system, anchored in
the United Nations and based on international law,
has evolved into a large and complex architecture.
To multilateralism’s great credit, our institutions
and responses have adapted and expanded over time
to address humankind’s emerging needs, yet any
survey of the global landscape reveals the widening
gap between the aspirations of multilateralism and
contemporary reality. To begin addressing that
disconnect, reform must adapt the multilateral system
to three fundamental dynamics.
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, the Global South is severely disadvantaged
in multilateral governance. That is particularly
stark here, in the most consequential United Nations
organ for maintaining international peace and
security. The Security Council’s structure does
not reflect geopolitical reality or the international
community’s diversity. As a result, the Arab world
and Africa — the regions with the most at stake on
the Council’s agenda — are still disenfranchised in
both categories of membership. The same applies to
the Bretton Woods institutions, where an outdated
formula for determining voting shares preserves a
deeply unrepresentative governance structure, creating
a situation where the developing world’s two largest
economies are profoundly underrepresented.
Secondly, rising geopolitical tensions threaten
cooperation on pressing global challenges. Inherent in the
founding vision of the Council is a notion that pervades
the entire multilateral system. Regular interaction — and,
for the major Powers, a privileged position — would
incentivize peaceful and sustained international
cooperation. However, the escalating polarization is
increasingly disrupting critical multilateral processes.
Here in the Council, for example, it is becoming
more difficult to arrive at a consensus on issues that
usually produce unanimity, such as vital mandate
renewals for peace operations. Likewise, coordination
within international financial institutions is suffering,
including with regard to multilateral action on the
$2.5 trillion debt crisis looming over the Global South.
Thirdly, middle Powers, developing countries
and smaller States are increasingly stepping up to
ensure continued multilateral dialogue and progress.
That has been evident at the Group of 20 summit in
Bali; in Türkiye’s work with the Secretary-General
on the Black Sea Grain Initiative; and at the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Egypt,
particularly with the historic inclusion of loss and
damage as an agenda item. Similarly, in recent years
elected members of the Council have assumed greater
responsibility for drafting and negotiating outcome
documents, which has helped to break deadlocks and
produce more inclusive and responsive texts, including
some landmark Council decisions. As the United
Arab Emirates’ Minister responsible for our efforts
on the protection of cultural heritage in conflict, I
am especially grateful to Italy for its partnership with
France on resolution 2347 (2017).

S/PV.9220

The multilateral system is an extraordinary
achievement. When the Nobel Committee awarded
Kofi Annan and the United Nations the Nobel Peace
Prize in 2001, it explained the delay by confessing that
the United Nations could have won the award so often
that in the end it never did. In many parts of the world, it
has restored peace, rebuilt societies, eradicated disease
and fought hunger. That is only part of what we lose
by not committing to meaningful change. Invariably,
the starting point for reform is equitable representation
in decision-making and norm-setting — but it is just
a starting point. Beyond that, multilateralism must
adapt to a world where non-State actors influence
global processes. Climate change, the pandemic, food
insecurity and the debt crisis all underscore the need
for more public-private partnerships. Likewise, civilsociety organizations reinforce multilateral action
around the world with vital work. In Mosul, for
example, where the United Arab Emirates is partnering
with UNESCO to restore cultural heritage, I witnessed
first-hand just how dependent reconciliation and
peacebuilding are on civil society.
Reforming multilateralism will not be easy.
Achieving concrete outcomes will require us all to
make concessions and agree to compromises, whether
at the intergovernmental negotiations or the general
review of quotas. But like all of us here, we have heard
the increasing calls for reform and we recognize that
resisting them means that we are living on borrowed
time. We also know that the United Nations and,
arguably, the entire multilateral system came out of
one of the bleakest periods in human history. Today
the world faces what the Secretary-General called our
biggest shared test since the Second World War. We
must heed his warning with the determined ingenuity
that is humankind’s hallmark and work collectively
to ensure that multilateralism is fit for purpose in the
twenty-first century.
The President: I call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States and member of
President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Minister Jaishankar, for
choosing to focus on the future of multilateralism and
the importance of United Nations reform during India’s
presidency of the Security Council. I would like to
welcome you to the Chamber, during India’s last month
on the Council, and congratulate India for a successful
two-year tenure. I thank the Secretary-General for his

22-750957/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

statement. I also thank the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Kőrösi, for his statement and his efforts
to advance a United Nations that is flexible and fit
for purpose.
What does it mean for a 77-year-old institution to
be fit for purpose? What is the ultimate purpose of the
United Nations? In 1945, when delegates from around
the world met in San Francisco, President Truman
outlined that purpose in his opening remarks. He said
that the conference would devote its energies and
labours exclusively to the single problem of setting up
the essential organization to keep the peace — I repeat,
to keep the peace. That was our original purpose. Of
course, we have not always succeeded. Wars have still
started, including one by a permanent member of the
Security Council this past year. Deadlock has often
prevented progress, and human suffering has persisted.
But at the same time, we have also seen enormous
success in realizing the original vision of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is a vision that has expanded
beyond maintaining peace and security to include
human rights, the rule of law and development.
Together, we have curtailed nuclear proliferation.
Together, we adopted the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Together, we sent United Nations peacekeepers
to stop mass atrocities and forged truces and permanent
peace agreements through negotiations and mediation.
Together, we have lifted more than 1 billion people out
of poverty and provided humanitarian aid on a scale
that no single country could contribute alone. Those
are remarkable accomplishments, but they cannot leave
us satisfied with the state of the world today. We have
to contain climate change, eliminate the coronavirus
disease pandemic and end the global hunger crisis. We
have to defend human rights, improve humanitarian
efforts, address a persistent pandemic, prevent the next
pandemic and — most important of all — defend the
United Nations Charter and hold accountable those who
seek to undermine it.
To do that, the United States believes that we
can and must advance an affirmative agenda for the
future of the United Nations. Our hope is to build
consensus around a future that we collectively seek.
It is a future where we all uphold the United Nations
Charter. It is a future where we solve the consequential
global challenges of our time, such as food security,
global health threats, extreme poverty, sustainable
development and conflict mediation. It is a future where
we safeguard our shared interconnected resources. It
8/31

14/12/2022

is a future where we champion universal respect for
human rights. To see that future, we need to strengthen
the United Nations. The United States is therefore
pursuing a United Nations modernization agenda that
is consistent with that vision — one that includes
Security Council reform. That is why, during a visit to
the United Nations birthplace in San Francisco, I laid
out our six clear principles of responsible behaviour for
Security Council members, including our commitment
to refraining from the use of the veto, except in rare and
extraordinary circumstances. Those are the standards
we are setting for ourselves and what we welcome all
members to hold us to.
That is why we were proud to co-sponsor an initiative
by a group of forward-leaning countries, spearheaded
by Liechtenstein, which requires the General Assembly
to convene a meeting after any veto has been cast. It is
also why, at the current session of General Assembly,
President Biden announced that the United States
supports Security Council expansion in both permanent
and non-permanent categories, including permanent
membership for Africa and for Latin America and
the Caribbean (see A/77/PV.6). The Security Council
should reflect our global realities today, not the global
realities of 77 years ago. But given how difficult Security
Council reform will be to reach, we must be flexible in
our approach to change. As President Kőrösi said during
last month’s General Assembly debate on the topic
(see A/77/PV.36), Security Council reform can be achieved
only if major groups and Member States are willing
to make compromises from their long-held positions.
As participants know, I have begun a series of
wide-ranging consultations with Member States, regional
blocs and reform groups to discuss expansion proposals
and other ways to make the Council more effective,
transparent and inclusive. We are open to creative ideas
and credible, sensible and politically viable paths forward.
This is a listening tour — to hear ideas from all members,
as it is critical that they all see themselves in the process.
I look forward to continuing that engagement, including
through the intergovernmental negotiations process. I
am thankful to the incoming co-Chairs of that process,
Kuwait and Slovakia, for answering the collective
United Nations membership’s call for change, and I look
forward to us working together in the months ahead.
Of course, the United Nations is not only the
Security Council, far from it. Just as the Council
needs to be updated for our modern era, so too must
we reform and reinvigorate the United Nations system
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

more broadly. We need to develop a more robust and
responsive global health security architecture to prevent
and respond to future pandemics. We need to make
the United Nations development system more coherent
and accountable. We need to make the United Nations
humanitarian system more responsive, effective and
efficient to meet the extraordinary humanitarian needs
brought on by conflict, displacement, migration and
a rapidly changing climate. The Secretary-General’s
initiative, Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), is a welcome
vehicle for that conversation. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for that initiative. We believe that it can serve
as the foundation for that important discussion and the
work ahead. Next year, let us commit to doing that work.
Let us build a new consensus — one that will propel us
towards the Secretary-General’s Summit for the Future,
with both a renewed commitment to the Charter and a
shared vision for a stronger United Nations system. Let
us build the United Nations for our children and their
children — one of which they can be proud and that fosters
a more peaceful, open and prosperous world for us all.
Mr. Cleland (Ghana): I begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, as Minister of External Affairs of India,
and the delegation of India on your country’s presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December. We
welcome the focus of today’s open debate and support its
intention to reinforce discussions on the kind of orientation
required to realize the much-anticipated reform of the
multilateral system. We thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for the depth and clarity of his
statement. We also thank Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, President
of the General Assembly, for his insightful remarks.
Seventy-seven years ago, the founding fathers of the
United Nations bequeathed to us a multilateral system
that was designed to ensure global peace and stability.
That system was anchored on the absolute prohibition
of the unjustified use of force and the quest to realize
the aspirations of a more interdependent world. When
we look at history, we see the coordinated efforts that
have been made over the years to maintain international
peace and security, promote the international rule of law
and prevent a calamitous world war. We can conclude
only that the founders were right in their ambitions and
largely justified in their tireless efforts in San Francisco.
However, we are also not oblivious to the fact that the
nature and frequency of global crises in the post-1945
era have evolved. Today we are witnesses to complex,
interacting and mutually reinforcing crises, including
stark geopolitical differences, the escalating risks of

S/PV.9220

the use of nuclear weapons, increasing numbers of
asymmetrical and transnational conflicts, widespread
and systematic violations of human rights, debilitating
pandemics and the adverse effects of climate change on
food systems, livelihoods and the general management
of societies. The challenges of the present era underpin
the need for comprehensive and integrated reform of
all the pillars of the multilateral system, especially the
peace and security architecture and the development
and financial systems. We would indeed be remiss
if we lost sight of the fact that inadequacies in one
pillar will certainly have consequences for the overall
effective functioning of the multilateral system.
While reforms are not an end in themselves, they
are often necessary catalysts for calibrating a better
approach to collectively realizing the objectives we
seek. It is therefore not surprising that over the three
decades of frustrating discussions on Security Council
reform, there have been several calls for global solidarity
to ensure that this noble institution is reformed as soon
as possible. The most notable recent call in that regard
was made by our Heads of State and Government in
the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventyfifth Anniversary of the United Nations, asking us to
instil new life into the process of Council reform under
the aegis of the intergovernmental negotiation process.
In recalling the convergence of that global aspiration,
we also reiterate the call by President Akufo-Addo to
the Council a few weeks ago on the need to
“revisit the vexed issue of reform of the
United Nations system, particularly the Security
Council, and to do so on the basis of the African
Common Position on United Nations reform, as
expressed in the Ezulwini Consensus, if the authority
of the Council, which, in recent times, appears to
have been devalued because of its anachronistic
structure, is indeed to be restored.” (S/PV.9188, p.10)
Ghana believes that the conversations around reform
of the Security Council must necessarily be underpinned
by the imperatives of the arguments of Africa, the
only continent without permanent membership on the
Council. The historical injustice to the 54 Member
States of Africa — a continent with a population of
more than 1.3 billion people and a combined economy
in excess of $3.5 trillion — must be prioritized. Like all
the permanent members of the Council, Africa, even
while under colonial domination, played a major role in
ensuring the successful end of the Second World War, in
terms of both resources and lives sacrificed.

22-750959/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

We were encouraged by the positive statements in
that regard by several world leaders at the high-level week
of the General Assembly, and we urge that the process
of reform must produce real changes to the structure
and practices of the Council across the five clusters
of reform under discussion in the intergovernmental
negotiation process in an effort to make it innovative in
its approach. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), including
on the New Agenda for Peace, and believe that a goodfaith engagement by Member States on those proposals
could help bring about a new orientation in the nature
and focus of the peace architecture. It will be important
for a reformed Security Council to aspire to operate
differently. We must therefore refrain from putting old
wine in new wineskins, and vice versa.
There were many assumptions underpinning the
multilateral system that no longer hold today. In seeking
new orientations for a reformed multilateralism, we
should therefore be cognizant of the assumptions we
establish as bases for reforms. In that regard, we need to
acknowledge that the challenges of today are beyond the
reach of a few powerful countries to resolve. Resolving
those challenges requires a shared responsibility and a
common understanding. We therefore believe that the
General Assembly, which is the most representative
organ of the United Nations, should be made to find
new space in the reform agenda. We also believe that
the regional arrangements envisaged under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations regarding
the effective collaborators of the collective security
mechanism should be worked with more closely than
ever before. For instance, we cannot arrive at any
legitimate solution to the problem of terrorism on
the African continent without the collaboration of
institutions such as the African Union and regional
economic communities such as the Economic
Community of West African States.
The emerging threats, and our clearer
understanding of the impact of other crises on peace
and security, also imply that a reformed multilateralism
will have to embrace an integrated approach to peace
and security that accommodates the nexus linking
climate change, global public health emergencies
and financial meltdowns. Furthermore, a renewed
multilateral system should take into consideration a
number of the international development institutions
and processes outside the United Nations, including
the Bretton Woods institutions, which are failing to
10/31

14/12/2022

respond adequately to the pressing needs of the peoples
of the world, especially the developing world. When
there is a global financial and food crisis, as we are
currently experiencing, we have to expect that further
down the road there will be greater manifestations of
sociopolitical instability, a diminished capacity for
conflict management and further conflicts.
In conclusion, Ghana therefore believes that a
holistic renewal of multilateralism characterized by
the inclusion of new concepts across the pillars of the
work of the United Nations is essential if we are to get
far closer to seeing multilateralism work for all rather
than just a few. Time is not on our side, and we need to
act now.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to start by
commending India for organizing today’s very timely
high-level open debate, as well as the President of the
General Assembly and the Secretary-General for their
inspiring remarks. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Brazil, Mr. Carlos Franco França, has asked me to
convey his deep regret about being unable to be present
at today’s debate, as he had intended, since Brazil
attaches great importance to our subject matter today.
The post-war global governance structure was
created in an entirely different international context
to the one we are facing today — equally challenging
and complex, but very distinct. The crises we have been
facing and may yet face in the not-too-distant future,
whether related to health, climate, economic and trade
issues or peace and security, have clearly demonstrated
that the world has changed at a much faster pace
than our multilaterally agreed norms and rules, as
well as the governance structures of the multilateral
institutions responsible for negotiating solutions and
setting those rules.
As a result, the international community remains
unable to provide timely and effective coordinated
solutions to the old and new challenges that affect us,
so much so that we are beginning to lose the confidence
of our peoples and the entire fabric of multilateralism
indeed seems to be unravelling. There seems to be
widespread agreement that we are facing crises on
multiple fronts. Nevertheless, the consensus that none
of those issues can be truly overcome by one nation,
or even in small groups, exists in parallel with the
slow but steady fragmentation of the multilateral
order and growing lack of credibility of the post-war
international regimes.
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

The development gap between nations should
be at the centre stage of international governance
if we want to address the root causes of many of the
interconnected problems the world is facing today.
Discussions in the Security Council clearly show that
poverty and inequality, within and between nations,
are intrinsically linked to conflicts. In that regard, we
could devote more time to discussing the links between
poverty, inequality and conflict on an equal footing
with the other emerging challenges that have captured
the Council’s attention in recent years.
The conflict in Ukraine reignited old disputes
and brought the world once again to the brink of
disaster. The deadlock in the Security Council and
the spillover effect of the conflict in other multilateral
forums — some of them unrelated to the situation
itself — had a destabilizing effect on the institutions
we rely on to uphold the principles we share. More than
that, the conflict in Ukraine exacerbated long-known
shortcomings and unveiled the consequences of our
inability to adapt old institutions to new realities. Since
the Second World War, many new issues and threats
have emerged, and the multilateral system has created
new tools to address them. If the main international
organizations in the economic domain, such as the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank,
were able to initiate a reform process to update their
composition and working methods, we would expect
the same from the world’s main political organization.
It is shocking that entire regions are excluded from the
Security Council’s central decision-making processes,
with the complete absence of Africa and Latin America
and the Caribbean among permanent members.
Although reform is needed on many fronts, peace
and security is an area of particular concern. That is
where reform talks are completely stalled, despite
the blatant inadequacy of the current structure of the
Security Council. While world governance has become
increasingly more complex and the challenges more
serious, the reform of the Security Council has become
only more urgent and essential to make the body more
representative, legitimate and effective. Sadly, we have
already started to bear the consequences of our inaction.
An instrument designed according to the interests of
twentieth-century Powers to solve twentieth-century
problems, the Security Council is no longer fit for
purpose. It is proving unable to uphold international
law and defend the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Above all, it no longer spurs

S/PV.9220

the peaceful resolution of conflicts, or diplomacy and
dialogue. As a consequence, we are now regretfully
confronted with a political crisis, without the tools
in place to remediate it in a legitimate and effective
manner. The world outside these halls is taking note
of that. We are glad, however, that the vast majority
of the membership agrees on the need to act swiftly.
The urgency of reform was clearly acknowledged by
many of our leaders at the general debate in September,
including by those from both developing and developed
countries and from all regions of the globe, as well as
most of the permanent members of the Security Council.
Turning to the main elements of reform, there are
two points I would like to stress.
First, the deadlock that emerged in the Council
in the context of the conflict in Ukraine increased
the support for initiatives aiming at curtailing and
regulating the veto power. Brazil agrees with the
general intention behind most of them, such as the
French-Mexican initiative on veto restraint in the case
of mass atrocities. The veto, however, is an expression
of the great divide that stalls the Council rather than
the main reason why the organ has become ineffective.
A veto is cast only after diplomacy and dialogue have
not prospered.
That brings me to my second point. The composition
of the Security Council remains the central and most
important issue of the reform. The Security Council
cannot, and will not be, a legitimate and effective body
as long as the global South remains sidelined and whole
regions, such as Latin America and the Caribbean
and Africa, are not represented in the permanent
category. We need to pave the way for the inclusion
in the Council of new members capable of taking on
major responsibilities in the field of international peace
and security, representing all regions of the world.
For effective diplomacy, the Security Council needs
to be fully attuned to today’s reality. Furthermore,
it is imperative that the lack of representativeness
of the Council be addressed in the reform of both
categories of membership. A half-hearted reform that
does not address the fundamental problem of the lack
of representation — and by consequence the lack of
legitimacy — in the permanent category will be merely
window dressing.
Besides the composition itself, it is imperative to
make progress in the discussions of the Council`s working
methods with a view to bringing more transparency and

22-7509511/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

14/12/2022

accountability to its activities. The Security Council
must be more open in relation to non-member States,
more efficient in its decision-making process and
seek greater coordination with other United Nations
bodies, especially the Peacebuilding Commission. The
international system is at a critical juncture, facing a
multifaceted crisis, while its central body in the field of
peace and security seems unequipped to provide us with
answers and solutions. The Council should be much
more than a forum for mutual accusations or a stage to
entertain a specific audience. Reform is needed so that
the Council once again becomes a forum for constant
dialogue and diplomacy, an organ where mutually
agreed compromises are found and tensions subside.

honest enough, to admit that today multilateralism is
struggling. In this Chamber, charged with the critical
mandate to maintain international peace and security,
too often we are unable to rise to that challenge. During
the past two years of our term, we have seen Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine, in clear violation of the Charter
of the United Nations, a vetoed climate and security
draft resolution (S/2021/990), continued resistance
to the women and peace and security agenda and no
progress on realizing a two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, despite monthly discussions on that
issue. There is therefore much room for improvement.

We take this unique opportunity to express our
great disappointment with the fact that the Security
Council reform is not mentioned in the proposals
concerning a new agenda for peace proposed in the
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). Brazil firmly
believes that any agenda for peace that does not include
Security Council reform cannot be considered new. The
formulation of a new agenda for peace must include a
profound discussion of how to relaunch the discussions
beyond the intergovernmental negotiations format,
which has run its course. Let us finally go for the highhanging fruit. After almost a decade in which some
delegations effectively took the reform process hostage,
we need to untangle ourselves, galvanize Member
States to negotiate in good faith and act with a sense of
urgency. Too much is at risk, and therefore we all need
to rise to the occasion. In the current circumstances,
more of the same has become irresponsible at best. If
we fail to advance reform in a timely fashion, the entire
multilateral architecture constructed at the end of the
Second World War will be in peril.

My first is that multilateral institutions and the
rules and norms that underpin them must evolve to face
the realities of today. Reform is never easy, but where
there is political will we have seen that it is achievable.
In April, we were pleased to be part of the core group
of States, led by Liechtenstein, that brought the veto
initiative to the General Assembly. The adoption of that
resolution (General Assembly resolution 76/262) was a
significant step towards increased scrutiny of the use of
the veto, and indeed of the Council.

Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank the Indian presidency for organizing this very important debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the President of the
General Assembly for their briefings today and for
their participation.
Just last week, we marked the hundredth anniversary
of an independent Irish State. One of its first acts was
to seek membership of the League of Nations. Ever
since, Ireland has remained steadfast in its commitment
to multilateralism. We believe it remains essential to
address the global challenges of today. To sit at this table
with the mandate of election by the General Assembly
is both a great honour and a great privilege. Those
of us lucky enough to do so should be frank enough,
12/31

I would like to make three points.

Last month in Dublin, the Political Declaration
on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians from the
Humanitarian Consequences arising from the use of
Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas was adopted
by 83 States. The Declaration is an important new
instrument that will help to protect civilians from
explosive weapons. And just last week, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2664 (2022), which will
help to ensure that humanitarians can continue their
vital work without fear of inadvertently falling afoul of
United Nations sanctions regimes. There are many other
examples, but the lesson for the Council is clear — when
we cooperate and act in good faith, progress and reform
are possible and new norms can be established.
Secondly, Security Council reform is long overdue.
The Council, as other speakers have said, simply does
not reflect the world of today. Ireland has worked in
close partnership with our African colleagues and
partners on the Security Council. The historic and
unjust underrepresentation of Africa on the Council
must be addressed. Those that are most often the
subject of Security Council discussions must have a
meaningful, representative say at this table. But a more
representative Council will not be enough. We must
also change how the Council takes decisions.
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine is an affront to
the principles on which this Organization was built. It is
a violation of international law and the United Nations
Charter, the very foundations of multilateralism. But,
as in so many other cases, the Security Council has
been unable to respond to this outrage due to the use or
threat of use of the veto. That cannot continue. The veto
is an anachronism. It prevents the Security Council
from implementing its mandate; it allows aggressors to
evade accountability.
The urgent calls for Security Council reform grow
ever louder. They must not go unanswered. History
will not judge us kindly if we allow this moment to
pass. At a very minimum, all members of the Council,
elected and permanent, should agree to refrain from
blocking any draft resolution intended to prevent or
stop mass atrocities.
Finally, the Secretary-General’s Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) offers a path forward. Ireland will
play an active role in its implementation. We look
forward to working with partners on the New Agenda for
Peace. We also look forward to supporting efforts to get
back on track towards sustainable development, notably
by co-facilitating negotiations for the outcome of the
Sustainable Development Goal Summit in September.
Ultimately, however, reforms alone will not make
multilateralism work. The responsibility rests with us,
the Member States. Ireland will finish its term on the
Security Council at the end of this month. Over the past
two years, we have seen how an absence of trust has
prevented the Council from effectively implementing its
mandate. If Council members, particularly permanent
Council members, deeply distrust each other, this
organ cannot hope to meet the immense challenges it
faces. Member States will continue to have differing
perspectives on many of the issues on the Council’s
agenda, but all Council members, permanent and
elected, must find a way to work in genuine partnership
and in good faith so that the Council can act with the
ambition and determination that are required of it
today — and that the world demands of it today.
Too often, we have seen narrow self-interest take
precedence in the Council. We have seen Council
members block crucial decisions to protect themselves
or their allies. Council members, whether permanent or
elected, have reached this table in different ways. But
once we are here in this Chamber, we have a shared and
collective responsibility to defend international peace

S/PV.9220

and security. We must live up to that responsibility, not
abdicate it.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join others in thanking the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly for opening our
debate and for their leadership on this issue.
The United Kingdom has long supported
multilateralism, and we remain deeply committed to
it today. We take seriously our role in strengthening
the multilateral system and supporting the rulesbased international order. That is more important than
ever, as we heard today during the debate. We face
extraordinary, complex and interconnected challenges.
That includes the global threat posed by climate
change and violations of human rights, which have a
disproportionate effect on women and girls.
With Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine, we
have also witnessed a permanent member of the
Security Council violating the Charter of the United
Nations and flouting the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In the face of those challenges, the
United Nations as a whole and the Security Council
must continue to take decisive action. But the world
today is very different to the one that gave birth to the
United Nations in 1945, so it is right that we consider
how the United Nations and the multilateral system
should evolve.
The Security Council must, as others have said,
become more representative of the world today, and
the United Kingdom has long called for its expansion
in both the permanent and non-permanent categories.
As the United Kingdom Foreign Secretary publicly
reiterated this week, we support new permanent seats
for Brazil, Germany, India and Japan, as well as
permanent African representation.
We also look forward to the resumption of the
General Assembly’s intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform and hope to see those progress
to a text in the new year. Beyond the Security Council,
the United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General’s
efforts to advance wider United Nations reform.
We strongly support his reform agenda and vision
for a United Nations 2.0 that is better adapted to the
challenges of the twenty-first century.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s report
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), which seeking
to turbocharge the delivery of the Sustainable

22-7509513/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

Development Goals. As we know, they have been set
back by the pandemic and the global energy and food
crises. The New Agenda for Peace in particular will
set new ambitions for the Organization’s response to
international peace and security. And we welcome
the further detail the Secretary-General set out today.
Through better data use, analysis, innovation and
strategic foresight, we can unlock the full potential of
the United Nations. That must also be accompanied by
a focus on results.
Beyond that, we support reform efforts with
international financial institutions and admire the
momentum built by the Prime Minister of Barbados,
Her Excellency Ms. Mia Mottley. The United Kingdom
is driving forward many of the objectives of the
Bridgetown Agenda for the Reform of the Global
Financial Architecture, including on greater finance
provision, climate change financing and the Capital
Adequacy Framework review of the Group of 20.
In conclusion, I quote from the Foreign Secretary’s
speech this week:
“We all benefit from the wisdom and compassion of
those leaders who created the laws and institutions
that prevent a relapse to the old order where the
strong prey on the weak”.
We will continue working with our partners in order
to ensure that the United Nations and the multilateral
system as a whole is best positioned to respond to the
complex challenges of today’s world. I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s debate.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this debate. I
would like to welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly.
The international multilateral order is currently
being undermined by those who support the idea that
might makes right. The idea that an international system
based on rules is the best way to guarantee our security
and our prosperity is no longer obvious to everyone.
The challenges that the international system faces
nevertheless require collective responses. That is true
for economic, development and health issues, or indeed
when it comes to the fight against climate change.
France is deeply committed to a multilateralism that
is based on international law in all its dimensions,
including human rights law and humanitarian law. That
is the best response to these common challenges.
14/31

14/12/2022

The reform of multilateralism naturally requires
a revitalization of the General Assembly, constant
attention to multilingualism and vigilance in the face
of the risks posed by disinformation and the attitude
of certain States towards peacekeeping. In this context,
the Security Council remains the cornerstone of the
collective-security architecture.
I wish to strongly reaffirm that France is in favour
of reforming the Security Council, as the President of
the French Republic Emmanuel Macron reiterated at
the General Assembly this year (see A/77/PV.4). We
support the enlargement of the Security Council to
take into account the emergence of new Powers that
are willing and able to assume the responsibility of a
permanent presence in the Security Council. France
therefore supports the candidacy of Germany, Brazil,
India and Japan to seats as permanent members. France
also wishes to see a stronger presence of African
countries among the permanent members and among
the non-permanent members. An enlarged Council
could have up to 25 members, which would make it
more representative of today’s world, while preserving
its executive and operational nature.
France calls for the new round of intergovernmental
negotiations to produce concrete and substantial results.
This implies that we now move forward based on a text.
While a permanent member of the Security
Council is waging a war of annexation in violation of
the United Nations Charter, many of us are calling for
a framework for the veto to strengthen the Security
Council’s ability to fully assume its responsibilities.
In this spirit, France, along with Mexico, proposed, as
early as 2013, that the five permanent members of the
Council voluntarily and collectively suspend the use of
the veto in the case of mass atrocities. This voluntary
approach does not require a revision of the Charter but
just a political commitment by the permanent members.
We call on all States Members of the United Nations to
support this initiative, which has already received the
support of 106 of them.
Let me conclude by quoting President Emmanuel
Macron who, before the United Nations General
Assembly, stated:
“[M]ultilateralism … is about the rule of law, about
interaction between peoples and about equality for
us all. It is what will enable us to achieve peace and
overcome our challenges” (A/72/PV.4, p. 8).
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
world today is undergoing major changes unseen in a
century, and the world economy, international security,
geopolitics, energy, environment and global governance
are all facing daunting challenges. The international system, with the United Nations at its core, is both carrying
higher expectations and facing unprecedented pressure.
How can multilateral mechanisms better tackle threats
and challenges? What direction should multilateralism
take? These are questions on the minds of all those who
care about the well-being and future of humankind.
The essence of multilateralism is that international
affairs are jointly handled by all through consultation
and that the future and destiny of the world is jointly held
by all countries. First of all, we must recognize that the
world is facing various challenges today, not because
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter have become obsolete, but precisely because
they have not been effectively implemented, not
because multilateralism itself has gone wrong, but
precisely because the essence of multilateralism has not
been truly practiced.
True multilateralism means the world is one family
and that humankind has a shared destiny. All countries
should strengthen their unity under the United Nations
banner to achieve common development, safeguard
common security and build a shared future. Seeking
artificial decoupling is neither desirable nor feasible.
Drawing lines based on ideology and forming camps
and small exclusive circles targeting certain countries
run counter to the spirit of multilateralism and will only
push the world towards division and confrontation.
True multilateralism means maintaining the
international system with the United Nations at its
core, safeguarding the international order based on
international law and defending the basic norms of
international relations based on the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. International
rules should be based on international law and
formulated by all, rather than unilaterally developed by
a few and imposed upon the international community,
not to mention exceptionalism and double standards.
The so-called rules-based international order is
ambiguous and does not represent the common will of
the international community.
True multilateralism means acting together to
achieve win-win cooperation. The United Nations should
proceed from common challenges and give priority to

S/PV.9220

the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, so as to ensure that all countries, in
particular developing countries, benefit fairly from
multilateral cooperation. The United Nations should be
a platform for dialogue and cooperation, and no country
should base its policy towards the United Nations on
strategic gaming or unilaterally seek monopoly at the
cost of other countries’ interests.
China has always firmly upheld and practiced
multilateralism. During its presidency of the Council
in May 2021, China proposed convening a high-level
Council meeting on safeguarding multilateralism and
the international system with the United Nations at
its core to promote the reaffirmation of all parties’
commitment to multilateralism and to build consensus
on its use to tackle pressing global problems and ensure
a greater role for the United Nations and the Security
Council in international affairs. Not long ago, when
meeting with Secretary-General Guterres, President Xi
Jinping highlighted that China would continue to
uphold genuine multilateralism and firmly support the
work of the United Nations.
The Security Council is at the core of the
United Nations collective-security system and is
an important platform for translating the ideas of
multilateralism into actions. At present, it is the
shared expectation of the general membership of
the United Nations for the Council to better fulfil
the mandate entrusted to it by the United Nations
Charter. In this regard, China would like to share a
few observations.
First, in terms of improving the unity and
cooperation of the Security Council, no matter how
profound the differences are, Council members
should respect each other, hold fast to dialogue and
consultations, accommodate each other’s concerns to
the greatest extent possible, and avoid stoking division
and confrontation. No matter how complicated the
challenges are, it is always our greatest responsibility to
stay united and work together to maintain international
peace and security.
Secondly, we should always aim for the political
settlement of disputes, since pushing the Council
to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter or to resort to
sanctions or other coercive measures is often not as
effective as it should be. The Council should make
greater efforts to make use of negotiation, good offices
and mediation, and the role of regional organizations

22-7509515/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

in conflict prevention and resolution should be fully
leveraged. Existing sanctions regimes should also be
reviewed, updated or lifted in a timely manner in the
light of developments on the ground.
Thirdly, in order to focus on resolving the root
causes of problems, the Council cannot be satisfied
merely with daily crisis management. It should also
take comprehensive measures based on the causes of
hotspot issues to help the countries concerned improve
governance, achieve sustainable economic and social
development and fundamentally eliminate any fertile
ground for conflict by focusing on employment and
improving livelihoods, thereby promoting peace
through development.
Fourthly, we must continue to improve the working
methods of the Council. The most pressing need in that
regard is systematic changes to the penholder system
and the unjust and unreasonable situation whereby
for too long a select few permanent members of the
Council or political blocs have served as penholders
on a majority of agenda items. Through the creation
of co-penholderships, jointly held and regularly rotated
among permanent and non-permanent members,
the voices of small and medium-sized countries,
among others, could be enhanced with regard to the
Council’s agenda.
The problems in the Council epitomize the
systematic flaws in our global governance. It will be
imperative to comprehensively advance reforms of
global political, security, economic, financial and trade
governance; enhance the representation and voice of
developing countries in global affairs; and promote
the development of a more just and equitable global
governance architecture. China supports reasonable
and necessary reforms of the Council, with priority
given to increasing the membership of developing and
independent countries, including small and mediumsized countries, thereby correcting the imbalance of its
composition. Africa’s unique demand for redressing the
historical injustice done to it should be fully respected
and special arrangements made to comprehensively
address its concerns and effectively enhance its
representation and voice.
The General Assembly mandated the establishment
of an intergovernmental negotiations mechanism on
Security Council reform, which is the only legitimate
channel for all Member States to engage in equal
consultations and in-depth discussions on Council
16/31

14/12/2022

reform. The Council should not encroach on the mandate
of the Assembly or interfere with the work of the
intergovernmental negotiations. Member States should
continue to conduct in-depth discussions on various
reform ideas and proposals in the intergovernmental
negotiations in order to seek a package solution that
accommodates the interests and concerns of all parties.
We should aim to reach the broadest possible political
consensus to ensure that reform brings about progress,
rather than regression; upholds the interests of the
broader membership, rather than of just a few countries;
and strengthens the role of the Security Council rather
than weakening it.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Mr. Jaishankar for
convening this important debate and congratulate India
on ably steering this year’s final presidency and on
the sustained excellence of its delegation’s diplomatic
efforts over the past two years during which we have
both been non-permanent members of the Council.
I also thank the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly for their contributions to
this debate.
As the concept note for this meeting makes
clear (see S/2022/880), the need for reform of the
United Nations, including the Security Council, has
been repeatedly embraced by our leaders. In declaration
after declaration, they have stated their commitment
to changes that can enable multilateralism to be fit to
meet the most urgent challenges. Regrettably, those
changes have not been forthcoming. There are many
different reasons for our lethargy and even resistance
to change, but the most important one is the defence of
the present global balance of power as reflected in our
institutional arrangements. That balance — or rather
imbalance — between States and peoples is often the
very cause or an important driver of the very challenges
that we need to solve. From climate change to the
inequities and inequalities of the global financial and
trading system and the abuse of military might contrary
to international law, we are witness to the impunity of
those with more power over those with a deficit of it.
We can also agree that there are serious deficits
in the balance of responsibilities and the balance of
consequences. In the case of the former, those charged
with the most responsibility and given commensurate
power in the multilateral system are failing to discharge
their duty individually and collectively. In the case of
the latter, as with the effects of climate change, those
who do not cause the problem are often the ones who
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

suffer most from it. Those imbalances were built into
the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions at
the end of the Second World War, with those occupying
the commanding heights given responsibility to the
collective. Almost eight decades after the founding
of the United Nations, they sometimes try to balance
their worldwide interests and their responsibilities. But
as the challenges grow, fed to no small extent by their
pursuit of gain, they are unable to solve them and their
appeals to collaboration ring hollow.
As a result of those imbalances, the world’s
confidence in our multilateral institutions is low
and falling rapidly. In a visible manifestation of that
unfortunate trend, we are witness to peacekeeping
missions mandated by the Security Council facing
heated popular protests about their perceived
ineffectiveness in multiple countries. We cannot help
but compare that to the worldwide enthusiasm for the
football World Cup, which is under way as we debate
today. There is little doubt that such passion is fed by
the perceived fairness of the rules. All teams must
submit to the will of the referee, who is neutral. Despite
our agonies about referee decisions against the team
we support, we ultimately respect the outcome of the
match. The United Nations needs to become a referee
whose stature is equal to that of the men and women
serving that function in Qatar. The question now is what
is to be done. To that end, I will make four proposals for
consideration by the membership.
First, we need a stronger referee, as reflected in our
regard for the Secretary-General and the Secretariat. For
all who frequently praise a rules-based order, we urge
commensurate praise for a stronger referee. In regard
to that, I would like to point to Kenya’s statement on
26 October this year during a discussion on the integrity
of the Charter of the United Nations (see S/PV.9167). As
we did then, we urge adherence to Article 100, which
protects the Secretary-General and United Nations
staff from external influence and instruction so that
they can speak truth to power in defence of the letter
and spirit of the Charter. The Secretary-General must
be fully on the side of the Charter and should fully
observe its Article 99 without regard for the approval
or disapproval of any State or party.
Without overdoing the parallels with the World
Cup, our second recommendation is that we should
strengthen our referee by changing the way the
senior ranks of United Nations funds, agencies and
specialized agencies are chosen. We can no longer have

S/PV.9220

major institutions whose leadership is the exclusive
preserve of a few Member States. Such practices sap
confidence in those institutions by offending our sense
of fair play, since many of their shortcomings — fairly
or unfairly — are often laid at that door.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the links among the
Security Council, other United Nations bodies and
regional arrangements. Strong regional mechanisms
have increasingly played a key role in preventing the
escalation of conflicts and in their termination in the
Security Council. We commend Africa’s Peace and
Security Architecture and its deployment of multilayered
good offices — from the role of peers, the Chairpersons
of the Union and the Commission to the Panel of the
Wise and the regional economic communities. As Chair
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa, Kenya has facilitated
productive meetings between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council. Those
meetings have produced important recommendations
that now need to be implemented. Kenya’s role for the
past two years as the informal link between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission has strengthened
our conviction in the immense potential good that
can be realized by their cooperation. Change should
start with the Council’s openness to the Commission’s
recommendations and complementary role.
Fourthly, we must focus on the substantive
and procedural reform of the Security Council.
We welcome today’s expressions of support for the
expanded membership of the Council and look forward
to progress in realizing the changes needed, which
must take into account Africa’s historical exclusion
and the level of attention that the Council pays to its
conflicts. One extra seat among permanent members
for Africa will not do. We fully align ourselves with
Africa’s Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration
of 2005 and want the membership to understand that
Africa — and the other members that are in solidarity
with it — will insist on its position being met if reform
is to move forward. Africa will no longer accept a
junior position in global affairs. We will not accept
skewed numbers. We will not accept imbalances when
our security is at stake. Listening to the many fine ideas
that were shared today, we are in particular agreement
with the observation shared by the representative of
Brazil, who said that the New Agenda for Peace must
include Security Council reform if it is truly to offer a
new chapter for multilateralism.

22-7509517/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

For lack of time, I will end by emphasizing the
need to change the existing practice of penholding in
the Security Council. Existing penholders often do a
commendable job. However, a strong perception that
they use the pen to sustain the history of its use to pursue
national interests is almost inevitable, even when that is
not the case, not least because of our increasing ability
to inject misinformation and disinformation into the
popular discourse. The immediate reform to address
that issue is to ensure that all penholders are sensitive
to that reality. Existing penholders should be subjected
to a review by members of the Council and changes
should be made. In addition, we urge that all new files
from Africa have one of the three African members of
the Security Council, or the collective, as penholders
during their terms. That will better enable members who
are linked to the African Union’s Peace and Security
Architecture to draft mandates and statements that
are more in keeping with the required solutions and to
enjoy greater confidence among African members and
our citizens, whose security is directly at stake. It also
means that African States seeking membership will need
to have the competencies and resources required to be an
effective penholder.
I conclude by reaffirming Kenya’s commitment to
the letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter, as
applicable to all Members, in all situations.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico welcomes the fact that India proposed to hold
today’s debate during its presidency in order to collectively seek new and better ways for the multilateral system
to meet current demands and the challenges ahead. We
thank the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly for their statements.
It is up to us, the States Members of the United Nations,
to preserve and protect what has worked and reform everything that has not yet enabled us to achieve the legitimate
aspirations outlined in the Charter of the United Nations
and the vast legal and institutional framework of global
governance. A superficial approach might suggest that we
face an issue of institutional structure and that reform of
the Security Council would be the answer — and even
perhaps the solution — to the monumental challenges
faced by the United Nations system. However, a more
thorough analysis compels us to make a harsher and more
accurate diagnosis.
First, we must recognize that the multifaceted crisis
that afflicts us is the result above all of the loss of trust in
multilateralism’s ability to respond to the countless situa18/31

14/12/2022

tions that affect us all and to create expectations of swift
and effective solutions. That loss of global trust is reflected
in the increasingly frequent use of unilateral decisions that
in many cases seek to channel people’s frustration and despair towards alleged solutions that, due to their simplicity, may be attractive but are not very effective. Reassured
by societal support, some States have committed flagrant
violations of their political and legal commitments and
have withdrawn their support from the multilateral institutions to which they made those commitments. At such
times, it is impossible to talk about reforming multilateral
governance without highlighting the urgent need to address the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic, which
disproportionately affected international economies and
markets. Increasing inequalities among countries make
it even more urgent to reform the international financial
system and move towards a more inclusive, equitable
and fair model if we truly want to leave no one behind.
A new debt crisis is upon us. At least 54 countries
are extremely debt vulnerable and in need of a larger share of the International Monetary Fund’s special
drawing rights. Furthermore, the debt moratoriums
and debt service suspension initiatives launched by the
Group of 20 and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development have failed to provide genuine support to the most affected countries. As a result,
fewer resources are allocated to economic and social
development, and progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals is already being rolled back. The
picture has been made even more bleak by hate speech
and unilateral sanctions, whose adverse effects often
impact the most vulnerable. On the other hand, we must
not forget that some of the situations that we inherited
from colonial times, such as regional conflicts, religious-based wars and ethnic rivalries, were able to find
avenues for their solution in an unprecedented context
of institutional cooperation — the multilateral system.
It must also be acknowledged that current overall
public opinion makes no distinction among the various
entities of the multilateral system or what actually prevents the Security Council from better fulfilling its responsibility. The United Nations and the institutional architecture as a whole are perceived by many as sclerotic
and condemned to irrelevance. That perception, legitimate or not, is worrisome. Against that backdrop, it is
naive to think that merely adding more Member States to
the Council, and consequently more permanent members,
would magically generate the consensuses that the Council needs to fully discharge its mandate.
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

As we stated in an open debate under our Council
presidency in November 2021 (see S/PV.8906),
although the Security Council is the organ tasked with
dealing with threats to international peace and security,
the United Nations system as a whole has a direct and
indirect impact on the maintenance of peace. The
relationship between sustainable development and the
rule of law is undeniable. It is clear that the success of
the Security Council in discharging its responsibilities
in accordance with its mandate therefore depends
largely not only on non-abuse of the veto by its members,
but also on the success of the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the International
Court of Justice in fulfilling their own mandates, in
conjunction with the work of the Secretary-General. It
is therefore necessary to create the social and economic
conditions conducive to a truly sustainable peace.
If the Security Council were to remain similar to
what it is today but with more members and perhaps
more vetoes, it would not be capable of truly acting on
behalf of all the Member States of the United Nations,
as stipulated in paragraph 1 of Article 24 of the Charter
of the United Nations. A reform focused on increasing
the number of permanent members is contrary to
the principle of the legal equality of States. What is
required is a reform that allows more countries, not
fewer, to participate in the Council. Can we ignore the
fact that nearly 70 States have never been members of
the Security Council?
Mexico supports and will support proposals that
consider an increase in the number of seats for elected
members, through periodic elections — with term
limits — and under new modalities. For example,
mandate terms could last for longer periods and
immediate re-elections could be considered. As in any
democracy, those who serve on the Security Council
must submit to periodic elections in the General
Assembly in order to ensure genuine accountability.
Undergoing periodic elections is the true test of
accountability. And in any case, the Assembly remains
the only organ for debating and analysing that reform.
Mexico believes that we can move forward as
long as we consider our collective interest and not just
the interests of a few. The best way to do that is by
conducting good-faith negotiations aimed at drafting a
text that reflects in a balanced manner the agreements
reached and takes into account every aspect of reform,
as outlined in the resolutions of the General Assembly.
That approach — and no other — has been the method

S/PV.9220

that has enabled the United Nations to establish
landmark treaties and agreements that have transformed
the world.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank you, Madam
President, as well as your team, for organizing today’s
important debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Guterres and President of the General Assembly Kőrösi
for their thoughtful remarks.
Multilateralism brings together collaboration,
inclusion and solidarity, which, together with diplomacy,
are central and essential to our collective efforts for
peace and security in the world. At a time when key
principles of the rules-based international order and
essential instruments of international cooperation are
being challenged, we believe that strong and effective
multilateralism, based on the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and justice, is indispensable for securing peace,
stability and prosperity. Over decades of efforts and
dedication, we have together agreed to build a global
security system based on key principles, such as the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States, the
peaceful resolution of disputes, the protection of
human rights, sustainable development and solidarity.
A genuine commitment to multilateralism and joint
efforts have contributed to holding that remarkable
system together. Our biggest challenge today concerns
our ability to maintain, reform and adapt the system
to changing times and keep it effective. As we know
very well, that is not a given and requires continued
dedication and sustained efforts.
Unfortunately, as we have witnessed several
times, multilateralism is not always synonymous
with success. We can see that when the rise of
nationalism and authoritarianism undermines effective
decision-making. And we can see it when self-centred,
narrow interests prevent this very organ from acting
and discharging its responsibilities. As a result, many
conflicts remain unresolved — in Syria, Yemen and
Myanmar to name only a few places — with thousands
of civilians and entire communities suffering. That only
highlights the limitations and the grave consequences
we see when States act only in their own interests.
In particular, the aggression in Ukraine has
transgressed all our principles and rules. It has
disregarded the Charter, breached international law
and broken the promise of the peaceful settlement of
disputes. It has challenged multilateralism to its core

22-7509519/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

and shattered the desire of nations to work together
in peace and for shared benefits. That is why it has
been crucial that in the face of a Security Council
paralysed by a blatant conflict of interest, the General
Assembly has responded decisively by confirming
the sound moral ground of a world that is not ready
to condone aggression or accept the annexation of
territory by force. That response, together with the veto
initiative, has confirmed the necessity for strengthened
cooperation among the main organs of the Organization
and has contributed to revitalizing and empowering the
General Assembly, the main deliberative body of the
United Nations. That has clearly shown the imperative
of improving the functioning of the Council and its
ability to take action, remain credible and act on behalf
of the entire United Nations membership.
Albania supports comprehensive reform of the
Security Council in order to make it more effective,
transparent, democratic, representative and accountable.
As we all know, one of the key issues affecting the work
and efficiency of the Council remains the use — or,
better, the misuse — of the veto. In that respect, Albania
supports the efforts to restrain the use of the veto, such
as the French-Mexican initiative regarding cases of
mass atrocities, as well as the proposals contained in the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct regarding Security Council action on
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Owing to their nature and global scope, the serious
and manifold challenges of our time cannot be addressed
by countries separately. The traditional challenges and
risks to peace and security, amplified by new threats
posed by climate change, pandemics, cyber attacks,
new types of weapons, non-State actors and terrorist
groups or mercenaries, do not affect one country alone.
They transcend borders. In order to prevent the use and
proliferation of nuclear weapons, as well as to properly
address threats linked to cyber warfare, biotechnology
and artificial intelligence, we must therefore join hands
to act together and find common solutions. We therefore
need to rethink the future of United Nations operations
so that they are fit for addressing the challenges, old and
new. In that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
call for a new agenda for peace while recalling that
regional organizations can also play a key role in
preventing and addressing crises.
For Albania, preserving the values of
multilateralism and international cooperation that
underpin the United Nations Charter and the 2030
20/31

14/12/2022

Agenda for Sustainable Development is fundamental.
We cannot contemplate the erosion of the values
enshrined in the Charter and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. We cannot undo what all of us
together have meticulously built in our common interest
to create a more stable, fair and peaceful world for today
and tomorrow. We must not allow the United Nations
system to lose its power and capacity to save lives and
help those in need and to become ineffective, corroded
by institutional sclerosis or ideological infighting. We
must not let multilateralism become a stumbling hotair balloon.
We need and want a more responsive, effective and
accountable United Nations that can deliver better and
adapt to global challenges, an Organization that strives
for the full enjoyment of human rights everywhere,
especially by all women and girls, empowered and
in all their diversity. In our view it is the only way to
respond to our current and future challenges and invest
in a better future for all.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the Indian presidency
for convening this meeting. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly for
their briefings. They have both deftly illustrated the
changing nature of our multilateral system, one that has
served us well for more than 75 years.
Many of the problems that we face today can be
solved only though multilateral cooperation. Yet
multilateralism and multilateral institutions are under
pressure. As a small State, Norway feels that acutely. In
these turbulent times, we need a well-functioning and
well-regulated international community where small
and large States cooperate to find common solutions.
Defending and strengthening the international rule
of law and multilateral cooperation is a core priority
for Norway, and we have had the privilege of doing
that from our seat on the Security Council for the
past two years. While some may look at the Council
and see only challenges, Norway sees a Council with
a vital role in upholding international peace and
security and a significant, if often underutilized,
capacity for preventive diplomacy and early action.
It is from that perspective that Norway will continue
to support the ongoing General Assembly discussions
on comprehensive reform of the Security Council. Yet
to make the Council more effective, transparent and
accountable there are steps we can and must take now
that do not require amendments to the Charter of the
United Nations. Let me outline three musts for Norway.
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, the Security Council must hear from more,
and more diverse, voices. We need to create a more inclusive multilateralism with a Council that is more representative. We have already seen the vital role that the
three African members of the Security Council (A3) play,
and we commend them for voicing strong African positions in the Council. In a comprehensive reform, Norway
staunchly supports increasing the number of permanent
and non-permanent seats for Africa, but we must also
work now to ensure broader ownership of Council decisions and products. We therefore support the A3’s request
to be penholders or co-penholders on African dossiers.
We encourage the A3 and indeed all 10 elected members
to approach relevant permanent members for a more active role on files that concern them, and we encourage
the permanent members to welcome that constructively.
Secondly, the Council must be more in touch with the
direct impact of its decisions on the lives of people on the
ground. The Council should involve more diverse civilsociety briefers, including women human rights defenders. That should be done in a systematically inclusive, safe
and meaningful way. The shared commitments on women
and peace and security have paved the way for that work.
The Council should also draw more regularly on the expertise of human rights institutions and capacities within
the United Nations system to detect situations that can
develop into major security crises. Similarly, the Council
would benefit from more informal situational-awareness
briefings from the Secretariat and more visiting missions
by the Council. In that regard, we see great potential for
impact through joint visiting missions, including with
the African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council.
Thirdly, the Council must be more connected
to the rest of the multilateral system. The Council
cannot resolve all challenges alone. We welcome the
vital role the General Assembly has played this year
through Uniting for Peace, adopting and successfully
implementing the veto initiative, and continuing work on
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct. There must be greater accountability
and transparency around the use of the veto. The
Council should better align its work with that of other
parts of the United Nations such as the Peacebuilding
Commission and with vital regional bodies such as the
AU. It should also be more vocal in its support for the
good offices of the Secretary-General. The very hallmark
of multilateralism is to commit beyond one’s own selfinterest. Let us all use this occasion to recommit today.

S/PV.9220

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I congratulate
India on its initiative in convening this important
debate, which has given us an excellent opportunity to
mobilize our ideas with a view to reaching a critical
mass that will enable us to shape our common future
within the multilateral system. I thank the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly for
their enlightening guidance for our debate.
The United Nations is a great idea, a fantastic
experiment. I would not dare to imagine the world
without the United Nations. It would undoubtedly
resemble a vast hunting ground where nations are either
the hunters or the hunted. One might wonder whether
in some respects we are not approaching that bleak
image. But regardless of that, thanks to the current
United Nations system, we have an international order
founded on rules. We have a broad architecture of
peace and collective security. We have the ambitious
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and other
road maps. The fact is that we have tools that are far
from deficient. The question is how to make them more
relevant, efficient and appropriate. How do we reform
our Organization to make it more effective in providing
security and dignity to the peoples of the world?
We should always remember that the United Nations
was created with the clear purpose of saving future
generations from the scourge of war, as is stated at the
beginning of the Charter of the United Nations. This was
the brilliant idea of the victors of the Second World War,
who were joined by some 50 other States in San Francisco
in adopting the Charter, which today forms the bond that
holds our coexistence together. More than 75 years later, the
world has completely changed. The international context
has completely changed. The geopolitical landscape has
completely changed. The nature of warfare has literally
been transformed. Technology has completely changed
our daily lives. Yet the structure of our institutions
remains essentially unchanged, especially with respect to
our collective security.
The democratic values demanded and promoted
by most States at the national level have not yet been
translated to the global level in the composition and
functioning of the main centres and epicentres of
the current international order. It is as if democracy
were good for States and unsuitable for international
organizations with a universal vocation.
To meet the challenges of the future, our security
architecture should reflect current and future realities.
We need to update our international institutions, our

22-7509521/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

mindsets, our perceptions of sustainable peace, shared
prosperity and living together. We need to reinvent
solutions to contemporary threats, including climate
change and the insecurity of cyberspace. We must
address the crisis of international solidarity that fuels
the underlying economic, humanitarian, health, climate
and food crises. We cannot meet these challenges of the
present century with the tools of another century.
A continent like Africa, the second-most populous
continent, which is estimated to account for at least a
quarter of the world’s population by 2050 and which
today accounts for about 70 per cent of the Security
Council’s agenda, has no permanent seat where its
important issues are decided. Similarly, other nations
have legitimate claims to a permanent seat at the main
and decisive table of the Security Council. Let us put
aside this distressing fact. We are convinced of the
urgency to act in order implement three fundamental
concepts that we believe will make the multilateral
system for credible and inclusive.
First, we must reform the Security Council without
delay. It must be representative of today’s reality and
of current and future challenges. As an African, I
hope that this reform will give priority to the African
common position and its legitimate claim, as reflected
in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
Africa will not wait indefinitely for the convulsions
of an intergovernmental reform process that to our
peoples appears to be an insurmountable stumbling
block. As President Ali Bongo Ondimba recently
recalled at the General Assembly rostrum (see A/77/
PV.6), Africa will wait no longer. At the time of
reckoning, we will remember every instance of
support, but also every show of indifference and every
manoeuvre to keep Africa as a mere power play.
Secondly, we need to redefine our rules and
mechanisms to adequately deal with the evolution of
insecurity and terrorism. As far as rules are concerned,
we must ensure inclusiveness and solidarity and leave
no room for double standards, including the policy of
solidarity with variable geography. Furthermore, we
must deliberately tackle the root causes of conflicts
and crises. In terms of our mechanisms for action,
our response must be robust, when needed, and
proportionate to the challenges on the ground.
Thirdly, we must build a new social contract, a
new global compact between generations, between the
rulers and the ruled, between the global and regional
22/31

14/12/2022

spheres, with a special focus on youth, women, civil
society and the private sector. In that new social
contract for the future, bridges must replace walls
everywhere. Education must push back the shackles of
ignorance and intolerance everywhere. Multilateralism
must prevail over unilateral postures. And the logic of
dialogue must always prevail over antagonism.
It is an illusion to think that humankind will
survive with bubbles of security and prosperity
surrounded by an ocean of insecurity and poverty.
The inevitable alternative to peace and prosperity
for all will inevitably be the endangerment of all and
collective decay. We must make it our priority to build
a shield of actions and initiatives to guard against and
prevent, within and between the nations of the world,
any predation of resources, any predation of dignity
and humanity, in order to restore to the peoples of the
world their aspirations for security, prosperity and
greater freedom.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize our need
to respond to present and future generations. We owe
them a response that is commensurate with their fears,
their needs and their legitimate aspirations to live in
peace with enriched prospects. That response cannot
wait any longer.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank India for the choice of
topic for today’s debate.
The world is going through difficult times.
Crises are on the rise and international security is
deteriorating. The stance of a group of Western States
to preserve their monopoly and privilege in the world
is undermining trust in international institutions as
organs for determining collective interests, as well as
trust in international law, as embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations, and in the United Nationscentric model of the world as such. That did not start
in February 2022.
It is obvious that the future world order is being
decided today. The alternatives are clear: it is going
to be either a world order with a single hegemon that
establishes rules that only it finds beneficial or a
democratic, equitable, multipolar and United Nationscentric world free of blackmail, dominance, intimidation
of the unwanted and neocolonialism. It is clear that
the main beneficiaries of this obsolete system are not
happy with the latter option. In trying to resurrect the
unipolar model under the slogan of the “rules-based
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9220

order”, the West is drawing dividing lines everywhere
and is seeking to expand its influence into more regions
of the globe.

United States of America, together with its satellites,
is betting on creating a broad coalition with the aim
of targeting the new main alternative centres of power.

The Ukrainian crisis, which the collective West
is desperately trying to blame on our special military
operation, which began on 24 February, is only one of
the elements of this multidimensional crisis that the
world had been heading towards for a long time. It is
a systemic crisis, the preconditions of which formed
gradually over the course of two or three decades.
Having built up NATO’s absolute right to expand to
the detriment of the principle of indivisible security,
Western States have brought the European continent to
the brink of a confrontation that could set the entire
world ablaze. Moreover, NATO today has a global
ambition. In the run-up to the crisis, the West was
unwilling to engage in sensible dialogue, and that
continues to be its position.

The conceptual rules-based order is drafted based
on a map of the world boiled down from complex
international processes to primitive forms of the
confrontation between democracies and authoritarian
regimes. In the West, it is a crusade against autocracy,
and its leaders are trying to involve as many States as
possible in their efforts. This rules-based order, which
has nothing to do with international law, circumvents
universal structures and convention mechanisms, while
it creates exclusive Western controls, partnerships,
alliances, and summits on democracies that are
intended, inter alia, to discuss key issues on the global
agenda in formats that do not include countries that they
disfavour, and within these closed formats — behind
closed doors — they formulate their famous rules on
various aspects of international life.

The West is being unscrupulous when choosing its
methods and means to achieve its goals. Today they have
bet on the exhaustion and strategic defeat of Russia.
Anyone who believes that is a stance adopted only since
February is wrong. I invite them to read the report by
the RAND Corporation entitled Extending Russia:
Competing from Advantageous Ground. Although the
report was issued in 2019, it gives a full account of the
tools that the West is putting into practice against Russia
today. And that applies not only to Russia. Pressure and
unilateral sanctions have become the trademark and,
indeed, the only tool of Western policy in recent years,
and they serve as an instrument for coercion of the
unfortunate or those who dissent.
Today we see crises not only in global security,
but also in the system of international economic trade
and financial relations. One need only look at what is
happening in the World Trade Organization. Only the
laziest person would say that there is no need to reform
international financial institutions today.
We have long been saying that confrontational
concepts and the rules-based order, about which we
have heard much today, are being preserved as integral
parts of the foreign policy strategy of the collective
West. In practical terms, they are being advanced
as a framework for countering key trends in global
development, the democratization of international
relations, and the formation of a multipolar world
order. In trying to restore its dominating position and
its single-handed management of global processes, the

All of these negative trends are found in a
concentrated form within the United Nations. This
has been the case in today’s discussion of reform of
the Security Council and how the Council is allegedly
not effective. These ideas are something that we could
have heard at the dawn of the United Nations, and they
are something that we have discussed throughout the
years of the Organization’s existence. Of course, in
general, the Council and the United Nations do need to
be adapted to modern realities. Without that, it is hard
to imagine genuine representation, multipolarity and
equality in the relations among Member States.
We see prospects for the democratization of the
Security Council exclusively — and I underscore
exclusively — through the expansion of representation
of countries from Africa, Asia and Latin America. Now
more than ever, the United Nations needs to be protected
by responsible Member States. There is a need to rid
the Organization of everything that is confrontational
to restore its full membership as the platform for frank
discussions where mutually acceptable and respectful
solutions are found, so as to achieve an unambiguous
confirmation of commitment of everyone to all of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
It was with that aim in mind that, in July 2021,
the Group of Friends in Defence of the United Nations
Charter was created, with Russia as a founding
member, and which now includes approximately two
dozen countries in its membership. The Group’s aim

22-7509523/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

is to ensure strict compliance with universal norms
of international law as a counterweight to harmful
unilateral approaches. We call upon everyone that
agrees with this position to join it.
The task of building a genuinely multipolar world
has no alternative. However, getting to that world could
hardly be possible given the division between nations
and States, the crisis of confidence and the buildup of the potential for confrontation in international
relations. Humankind needs to learn from its mistakes.
It is unacceptable for “the worst students of history”,
in Indira Gandhi’s phrase, to shamelessly try to impose
solutions that only suit them on everyone else.
We must all be aware of our shared responsibility
in creating the conditions for the safe and harmonious
development of future generations. We must clearly
understand that the emergence of a genuinely inclusive
multilateralism, the establishment of a polycentric
world order and the reform of the United Nations are
interrelated processes. It is necessary simply to do away
with phobias, stereotypes and all geopolitical games to
listen to and respect the one another’s interests and red
lines — and not just when things have already gotten
to the point of conflict, but when the warning bells are
ringing. Russia was and remains ready to do that, and
we expect others to do the same.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones
will prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close
after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Pakistan.
Mr. Zardari (Pakistan): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Madam President, on India’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month.
We are at the United Nations in our capacity as
Chair of the Group of 77 and China to continue to
pursue an extensive agenda for the developing world
based on multilateralism. I am proud to say that with
Pakistan as Chair of the Group of 77 and China and
Egypt as President at the twenty-seventh session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 27),
we saw a victory for multilateralism, for the developing
24/31

14/12/2022

world and for climate justice, with the addition of “loss
and damage” to the COP 27 agenda and the commitment
to establishing a loss and damages funding facility.
There are indeed many benefits of multilateralism,
and they are quite evident. Today’s open debate gives
me the opportunity to comment on and respond to
the concept note (S/2022/880, annex) and the related
questions circulated by the Indian presidency of the
Security Council.
In our complex world, which is confronted by
multiple threats and challenges, inclusive multilateral
processes within the framework of the United Nations
offer the most promising prospects for promoting peace
and security, economic and social development, and
effective responses to the several interlocking global
challenges we face. It is therefore of vital importance
to empower and efficiently utilize all the main organs
of the United Nations — the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Human Rights Council, the International Court of
Justice and the Secretary General and the Secretariat
of the United Nations. We must also induce equality
and democracy into the structures of global financial
and economic governance, especially the Bretton
Woods institutions.
The General Assembly, which is the most universal
global forum, must play a central role in reinforcing
multilateralism and enhancing equity and justice in
international relations. The world must also turn its
attention away from pursuing narrow national ambitions
and, first and foremost, confront, collectively and
multilaterally, the existential threats that the human
race faces, whether it is in the shape of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, climate catastrophe and climate
change, the nuclear threat, terrorism and extremism or
the increasing propensity for narrow-minded populism,
authoritarianism and religious intolerance. We must
confront the rise in the ideologies of hate, xenophobia,
Islamophobia, populist extremism and racial and
religious intolerance, which inflict discrimination,
violence and even threats of genocide on vulnerable
minorities in certain countries.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Multilateral solutions under the umbrella of the Security
Council offer the most effective approach to promoting
peace and resolving conflicts. Parties to a dispute
cannot advocate multilateral processes and reform one
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

day and insist on bilateral avenues the next — nor,
ultimately, impose unilateral solutions. Pakistan firmly
believes that the major security problems, including
those in our region, Madam President, can be
effectively and peacefully resolved through the active
involvement of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral. Multilateralism must be based on universal
and consistent adherence to the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations — the selfdetermination of peoples; refraining from the use or
threat of use of force; refraining from the acquisition
of territory by force; respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and non-interference in
their internal affairs.
Strict adherence to the principles of the Charter has
become all the more essential in the context of recent
and ongoing conflicts. The Council must seek to resolve
conflicts and disputes, not merely manage them. It
should address the underlying causes of conflicts, such
as foreign occupation and suppression of the recognition
of a people’s right to self-determination. In accordance
with their obligation under Article 25 of the Charter,
Member States must implement the decisions of the
Council. The Security Council must act not only after a
conflict has erupted, but pre-emptively, to prevent and
avert conflicts before they occur. The Council should
be enabled to meet automatically, without a procedural
decision, on any item that is already on its agenda
if a Council member or concerned State requests.
The Secretary-General should be more insistent in
exercising his authority under Article 99 of the Charter
to draw the Council’s attention to impending threats
to peace and security, and no party to a conflict or
dispute should be able to refuse the Secretary-General’s
good offices when they are offered or reject recourse
to the modalities for the pacific settlement of disputes
prescribed under Article 8 of the Charter.
The Security Council should unquestionably reflect
contemporary global realities. The most significant
changes in those realities include the emergence of a
United Nations membership now composed of 193
mostly small and medium-size States and the need for
their equitable representation through expansion of the
Security Council. Adding new permanent members
would numerically reduce the opportunities for the
vast majority of Member States to be represented on
the Council. We must adhere to the principle of the
sovereign equality of all, not the superiority of some.
Surely we all believe that a further democratization

S/PV.9220

of the United Nations, including the Security Council
and the General Assembly, is what would empower this
institution and provide it with the moral authority to act.
It would not serve the purposes of the United Nations
to add more members to this elitist club and expand
the power of the tyrannical veto. It would serve this
institution to further democratize it and, as I said, to
allow for the principle of the sovereign equality of all,
not the superiority of some. In the past, the Security
Council has been unable to act due to differences
among its permanent members. Adding new permanent
members would multiply the possibility of paralysis in
the Security Council. The problem cannot be the solution.
And surely, States with a record of not implementing
Council resolutions cannot be considered worthy of
consideration for any form of Council membership.
The proposal of the Uniting for Consensus (UFC)
group to create 11 additional non-permanent elected
seats on the Council offers the most realistic option for
equitable and speedy reform. The UFC model would
provide equitable representation for all Member States
and regions, including Africa. Periodic elections would
enhance the accountability of Council members. It
would numerically and politically expand the influence
and role of elected members in relation to the existing
five permanent members and preserve the principle of
sovereign equality.
All our endeavours to promote world order,
peace and stability will come to naught unless we can
realize the Charter’s second objective — universal
socioeconomic development. As a result of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, raging conflicts and
the more frequent and ferocious impacts of climate
change, nearly 100 developing countries are in extreme
economic distress. Pakistan has convened a ministerial
conference with the Group of 77 and China for tomorrow
and the day after to adopt a plan for emergency action
and systematic reform of the international financial,
trade and technology architectures in order to ease
the suffering of a billion people in the Global South
and realize the Sustainable Development Goals and
environmental objectives.
Finally, in your concept note (see S/2022/880),
Madam President, you call on us to advise and suggest
ways and means to move the multilateralism reform
agenda forward. There is an item on the Security
Council’s agenda left unaddressed that we believe to be
a multilateral matter. If we want to see multilateralism
and multilateral institutions, including the Security

22-7509525/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council, succeed, then surely you can aid in that
process and enable the implementation of Security
Council resolutions when it comes to the question of
Kashmir. You, Madam, can prove that multilateralism
can succeed and that under your worthy presidency,
the Security Council can succeed and deliver peace in
our region.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Armenia.
Mr. Mirzoyan (Armenia): It is a great pleasure to
take part in today’s discussion in the Security Council
and I thank my colleague, India’s Minister for External
Affairs, for the invitation. The Indian presidency
has chosen a very timely and important topic for this
open debate.
International relations, as we have known them,
appear to be in transition. The global security crisis
that we are all living through heavily affects the
functioning of the system of multilateralism. Of course,
one opinion to the contrary is that the malfunctioning of
the multilateral system resulted in the situation we are
facing today. The issue is like the story of the chicken
and the egg. I therefore believe it is more helpful to
concentrate on the question of how multilateralism
should be reformed, based on the lessons that we
should learn. If I were to try to define multilateralism
in very simplistic terms, I would call it the ability to
reach and follow commitments based on compromise
and mutual agreement. If we are to find common
ground, we must adhere to the universal red lines
regarding what cannot be tolerated in a multi-sided
approach. And those red lines are reflected above all
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the Charter of the United Nations. Today’s important
open debate will hopefully serve as food for thought
in our shared struggle to maintain and improve the
multilateral system for the sake of future generations.
Armenia is firmly committed to the multilateralism
anchored in the purposes and principles of the Charter,
including the non-use or threat of use force and the
peaceful resolution of disputes. In a world where
conflicts regrettably continue to persist, a prohibition
of the use of force and strict adherence to the peaceful
settlement of conflicts are indispensable to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
United Nations must remain resilient in the face of the
damaging practices of imposing unilateral solutions
and prioritizing violence over peaceful settlements.
26/31

14/12/2022

Attempts to normalize the use of force in inter-State
relations or to unleash wars and commit atrocities are
incompatible with the core values and objectives of the
United Nations and should be unequivocally condemned
and rejected at all times. Strengthening the capacities of
the United Nations and the Security Council to prevent
and respond to such disturbing challenges is crucial to
delivering on the objective of upholding international
peace and security. Armenia supports efforts, including
the efforts of India, to reform the institutions of
multilateralism and make the Security Council more
inclusive and effective in responding to the current and
emerging challenges and threats to international peace
and security.
Armenia has witnessed first-hand the effects of
multilateralism’s decline. The international community
proved unable to prevent Azerbaijan’s unjustified use of
force against the people of Nagorno Karabakh, which
resulted in thousands of dead and wounded and a new
wave of displacement. The issue of the rights and security
of the people of Nagorno Karabakh still remains to be
addressed. The people of Nagorno Karabakh should be
able to live in dignity and peace in their own homeland.
The decline of multilateralism has also been manifested
in the inability of the co-Chairship of the Security
Council-mandated Minsk Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to fulfil its duties.
One of the parties to the conflict has essentially blocked
the platform’s activities and has unilaterally declared
that the Nagorno Karabakh conflict has been resolved by
use of force, thereby preventing a potential resolution of
the conflict through international mediation.
In the face of limited interest on the part of the
international community, the security challenges in our
region have only grown. Armenian sovereign territories
have been continually under attack. The last major
incident occurred in September, and we requested an
emergency meeting of the Council (see S/PV.9132)
to assess the situation in full and remain seized of the
matter. I regret to say that the security situation has
not really seen any significant improvements. Despite
the calls of the international community, Azerbaijan
continues to keep sovereign territories of Armenia under
occupation. We continue to face Azerbaijan’s growing
military rhetoric, which is openly threatening our
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Two years after military hostilities ceased in Nagorno
Karabakh, the issue of the return and repatriation of the
Armenian prisoners of war remains unresolved. The
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Azerbaijani side has continued its manipulations in
order to artificially counterbalance the humanitarian
issues and turn the return of Armenian prisoners of war
into a bargaining chip, which is totally unacceptable and
should not be tolerated by the international community.
Moreover, the international humanitarian bodies,
including those of the United Nations, are still unable
to provide much-needed aid to the people of Nagorno
Karabakh, essentially abandoning them, in stark
contrast with the global pledge of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development to leave no one behind.
Ironically, access is being denied not just to
international humanitarian organizations but to
people living in Nagorno Karabakh. For three days
now, Azerbaijan, in gross violation of its international
obligations, has been blocking movement through
the Lachin corridor — the sole lifeline of Nagorno
Karabakh — which is now essentially cut off from
Armenia and the outside world. As we speak, the
people of Nagorno Karabakh have been deprived of the
right to free movement, mothers have been separated
from their children and terminally ill people cannot
get medical supplies and help. Even worse, in freezing
winter conditions, Azerbaijan has severed the gas
supply to Nagorno Karabakh. Nagorno Karabakh is
facing an imminent threat of a food, energy and overall
humanitarian crisis, which, if not addressed urgently, will
lead to a catastrophe. In these conditions, the leadership
of Azerbaijan is claiming that it is ready to provide
rights and security guarantees for Armenians and that
no international mechanism or presence is required. But
what is happening right now shows how they actually
view those guarantees. Along with Azerbaijan’s refusal
to hold a dialogue with Stepanakert on the rights and
security of Armenians, Baku’s actions testify to the fact
that it is continuing to pursue a genocidal policy towards
the Armenians of Nagorno Karabakh.
At the beginning of my statement, I highlighted
the importance of fulfilling commitments. With regard
both to the Armenia-Azerbaijan normalization process
and the issue of Nagorno Karabakh, Azerbaijan has refused to meet its own commitments, commitments that
were reached in multilateral formats. The actions, warmongering rhetoric and maximalist approach of Azerbaijan’s leaders have seriously jeopardized the chances
of reaching peace and stability in the South Caucasus.
Based on our own experience, we can argue that
without effective multilateralism, our world will be
devoid of peace and security. We must therefore all strive

S/PV.9220

to devise better, more efficient ways of working in order
to be able to prevent conflicts, genocides and other mass
atrocities and focus on peaceful, sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the State
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Yamada (Japan): Mr. President, I would like
to begin by commending your initiative in leading our
discussion today on this timely and forward-looking
topic. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and President of the General Assembly
Csaba Kőrösi for their insightful contributions.
The credibility of the United Nations is in jeopardy
owing to the aggression of Russia, a permanent member
of the Security Council, against one of its neighbours.
The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations could
never have envisaged such a situation. But that is the
harsh reality, and the Council has not yet been able
to stop it. It is that sense of urgency that has brought
me here from Tokyo. We have to restore confidence in
the United Nations. We have to strengthen the entire
Organization. And reform of the Security Council is an
integral part of the whole picture.
Let me focus on Security Council reform. My
message is simple. Reform is possible and achievable.
First, we need to take action. I am sure that most
Member States believe that reform of the Council
is necessary and important, but when it comes to
actually starting negotiations, some say it is too early.
Considering that we have been debating this issue for
almost 30 years, I cannot help asking myself when we
will be ready. I believe the time is now ripe. What is
truly needed is not discussion for the sake of discussion,
but action aimed at reform. We can immediately launch
talks, with a text on the table, in the intergovernmental
negotiations, so that Member States can narrow the
differences in their positions. There can be no reform
without negotiations. We cannot have compromise
or convergence among the various positions without
negotiations. We can do it, so let us begin.
Secondly, the Member States have already
reformed the Security Council once and I believe we
can do it again. In 1963, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 1991 (XVIII), proposing an expansion of
the non-permanent membership of the Council. Even
though two permanent members voted against it and
two abstained, all five ultimately agreed to it in order to
respect the will of the General Assembly. What matters
in the Assembly is each individual Member State, who
collectively represent the will of the General Assembly.

22-7509527/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

The world has changed dramatically since the
founding of the United Nations. The membership has
quadrupled since 1945 and the issues facing the Security
Council have become more complex and diverse. We
need to correct the historical injustice that has meant
that there are no permanent seats for African countries,
even as African issues account for about half of the
Council’s regional agenda. We should not hesitate to
update the Charter to reflect the reality of today, not of
77 years ago. The calls for reform have grown stronger
this year. Some 70 Member States, far more than in
previous years, brought up Security Council reform
in their addresses in the general debate in September.
A majority of the permanent members now support
reform. I am aware that an increasing number of African
leaders are now calling for Security Council reform
in an ever more passionate tone. Next year will mark
the sixtieth anniversary of the previous reform. The
Summit of the Future will be held in 2024, and in 2025
we will see the eightieth anniversary of the founding
of the United Nations. Those milestones remind us that
the windows of opportunity are wide open.
While the General Assembly is working to reform
the Security Council, the Council can do more than
just wait. Council members can and should improve its
transparency and efficiency by improving its working
methods. Japan supports all the initiatives aimed at
limiting the use of the veto, including those of France
and Mexico, the United States and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group. Japan also
welcomed the adoption of General Assembly resolution
76/262, initiated by Liechtenstein, which requires
permanent members to face more accountability for
their exercise of the veto. Japan is willing to explore
further measures with Member States.
I would like to conclude by expressing Japan’s
determination to further contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security as a member of the
Security Council, starting next month.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Gerwel (Poland): Poland commends India for
convening this vital and timely meeting. I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
statement. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres, as well as President of the General
Assembly Csaba Kőrösi, for their insightful remarks.
28/31

14/12/2022

Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
In his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
published last year, the Secretary-General stated that
“humanity faces a stark and urgent choice: a breakdown
or a breakthrough.” I hope that today’s debate will move
us closer to a positive development as we try to answer
two crucial questions. How can we inject new life into
reformed multilateralism? And how can we ensure that
the Council reflects contemporary global realities so
that it can effectively safeguard international peace
and security? To provide an adequate answer, we must
reach back to the core values of the Charter of the
United Nations that have galvanized our actions for
more than 77 years — peace and security, development,
human rights and the rule of law. They are equally
important and interdependent, and we cannot achieve
one without achieving all of them.
Our international order has been built on those
values, and all members of the United Nations have
pledged to defend and respect them. We must not forsake
them as we strive for progress and global solutions. We
need to base our cooperation on the values of freedom,
democracy and justice, in line with the Charter and
driven by partnership and solidarity among nations.
That is the only way to address global fragilities, foster
dialogue, manage security threats and achieve our
common ambition of stability and prosperity for all.
We definitely need an efficient United Nations
system, especially these days. Poland fully supports
efforts to reform the United Nations with a more
representative, efficient and inclusive Security Council.
We are open to discussions aimed at ensuring that the
shape of the Council better reflects current geographic
realities. However, before we proceed on the path of that
ambitious reform, the members of the Council and the
whole international community need to fully recognize
that the current Security Council has been paralysed
with regard to one of its core obligations — securing
global peace — owing to the abuse of the right of the
veto by one of its permanent members with regard to its
own actions.
Just as the world was beginning a very complicated
recovery after the coronavirus disease pandemic, Russia
launched its unjustifiable, unprovoked and illegal
attack on Ukraine. With that act and many others that
have followed, Russia has breached universally agreed
and legally binding fundamental principles. It turned
to force in an attempt to change today’s multilateral
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9220

architecture and its rules. Russia’s war on Ukraine
constitutes the most serious challenge to international
security since the end of the Second World War, owing
to its global consequences and the challenges it presents
to multilateralism. We can see clearly how its impact is
spreading far beyond Ukraine and Europe, especially in
the areas of food and energy security. Earlier this year,
Poland welcomed the General Assembly’s veto initiative
resolution 76/262, which mandates the Assembly to meet
automatically whenever a veto is cast in the Security
Council. As the Kremlin is continually assaulting the
Charter of the United Nations and abusing its veto power,
we need transparency and accountability whenever such
a veto is used.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.

We are at a crossroads of history. As the world is
facing deepening twin crises in the areas of security
and the environment, the need for collective solutions is
particularly urgent. But our carefully crafted multilateral
system is under pressure these days. The continuing
geopolitical polarization may bring us back to a system
of competitive bilateral alliances and political gridlock.
Speaking to the General Assembly at its seventythird session, in September 2018, President Andrzej
Duda clearly defined the positive multilateralism that
Poland subscribes to. He said then that the world needs

Over the past two years, the world has seen
political, humanitarian, health, food and energy crises,
in addition to various challenges, all of which made
the situations more complex and worse. That strongly
requires us to reconsider priorities.

“the multilateralism of equal States and free
nations, not the multilateralism of usurpation and
hierarchy.… States that have an advantage in terms
of potential and power should not deprive others of
their equal right to independence and sovereignty.
Only when that equality is ensured can we fully use
the potential of States for the common good and
according to the rules of fair play.” (A/73/PV.9, p.22)
The principles of the United Nations are simple.
We all must respect the sovereign equality of all its
Members. We all must act in good faith. We all must
settle our disputes by peaceful means and refrain from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State. As long as we
observe those principles, the United Nations system will
work. It will be able to deliver on its commitments and
consequently peace, development, respect of human
rights and opportunities for all will be possible.
Our obligation is to make the United Nations better
prepared to meet the expectations of this and future
generations, and Poland remains resolute in its support
for every initiative that will make that commitment
a reality.

Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country’s delegation is pleased to express its
utmost appreciation to the delegation of the Republic
of India for its efforts in organizing today’s meeting
and preparing the concept note on the theme “New
orientation for reformed multilateralism” (S/2022/880,
annex). I also commend the presidency of your friendly
country, Mr. President, of the Council’s work for
this month. I hope that this debate will help enhance
multilateralism so that we are able to overcome
the complex and multifaceted challenges that the
international community is facing today.

Those unprecedented challenges have been a
difficult test for the global multilateral system. They
have proven to the whole world that the need for a
strong, reinvigorated multilateral system is more urgent
than ever. The crises have also proven the importance of
global partnership and solidarity and of upholding the
fundamental values and principles of multilateralism.
We must therefore re-evaluate multilateralism in order
to ensure that it keeps abreast of those changes.
At the latest Group of 20 meeting of ministers for
foreign affairs, Secretary-General António Guterres
stated that “the international system is facing the
danger of collapse” and that “multilateralism is not
an option, but rather a necessity.” That prompts us
to reflect on the measures that we must take in order
to enable the world to emerge from the current state
of confusion and to think ambitiously about a better
future through multilateralism. In that context, we look
forward to the Summit of the Future, to be held in 2024,
as an important opportunity to reach consensus on the
desired course of multilateralism.
Since the establishment of the United Nations more
than seven decades ago, our work has been accompanied
by a mixture of achievements and stumbling blocks. The
Organization has been criticized. Member States have
made proposals and remarks in order to improve the
United Nations and its working methods. Nevertheless,
we are convinced that the United Nations remains the
most accepted, credible and legitimate multilateral

22-7509529/31

S/PV.9220

Maintenance of international peace and security

mechanism in joint international action. The Charter
of the United Nations and its principles and purposes
remain a solid foundation for regulating and developing
relations among States.
Against that background, we must enhance all
the means to develop our joint action. Reforming
the United Nations must be one of our priorities. We
must put forward innovative, creative ideas in order
to generate the necessary momentum for the desired
reform process.
Reforming multilateralism is no longer a luxury that
we can do without. It is an urgent need and a historical
responsibility towards our peoples. The current global
challenges and crises cannot be addressed by a country
or a group of countries alone. They also cannot be tackled
without an effective international system based on joint
cooperation, respect for the rule of law and the goal of
achieving justice. Reforming the Security Council is a
main pillar of comprehensive United Nations reform.
The State of Kuwait affirms its sincere desire to
support genuine and comprehensive reform of the
Security Council, the organ tasked with maintaining
international peace and security under the Charter of
the United Nations. The Council must become more
capable and effective in facing challenges. It must be
more representative, transparent, impartial and credible.
Today we are facing interconnected challenges. In
its current form, the Security Council cannot address
those challenges. We need a Security Council that is
more flexible and capable of dealing with those crises.
In that context, we stress the importance of effectively
engaging with all Member States in intergovernmental
negotiations. They must be open to consulting with all
negotiation groups in a transparent and constructive
manner, as the intergovernmental negotiations are the
only forum concerned with that issue. We emphasize
that it is important to take into account the concerns of
all regional groups.
In conclusion, the delegation of the State of
Kuwait looks forward to today’s debate as a valuable
opportunity to renew the commitment of Member
States to the frameworks that govern our common
action, as enshrined in the Charter. We are committed
to promoting the role of the United Nations as the
cornerstone for multilateral action.
The President: I will now say a few words in my
national capacity.
30/31

14/12/2022

We are obviously focused today on the urgency of
reforming multilateralism. Naturally, we will each have
our own views, but at least there is ongoing convergence
that this cannot be delayed any further. The credibility
of the United Nations depends on its effective response
to the key challenges of our times — pandemics, climate
change and the conflicts of terrorism.
As we search for the best solutions, what our
discourse must never accept is the normalization
of such threats. The question of justifying what the
world regards as unacceptable should not even arise.
That certainly applies to State sponsorship of crossborder terrorism. Nor can hosting Osama bin Laden
and attacking a neighbouring Parliament serve as
credentials to sermonize before the Council.
I thank all Council members for their contributions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Rzayev (Azerbaijan): The United Nations is
a crucial pillar of multilateralism. The purposes and
principles of the Organization constitute the foundational
normative framework in international relations. Since
the establishment of the United Nations, a lot has been
accomplished to settle international disputes, develop
legal standards and obligations and restore hope in
those affected by war, violence and instability.
However, as the world is becoming more divided,
uncompromising and intolerant, peoples around
the planet continue to suffer from conflicts, forced
displacements, terrorism, violent extremism, inequality
and insecurity. Policies aimed at sowing dissent on
religious and racial grounds, building monoethnic
societies and advocating ethnic incompatibility and
supremacy fuel intolerance, destabilize societies and
undermine peaceful existence.
The lack of accountability for violations of
international law is among the conditions for the
protraction, expansion or resurgence of conflicts.
Strengthened global solidarity, multilateralism and
common efforts, with the United Nations at the core,
grounded in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, are the most effective ways to achieve
the goals of peace, inclusive sustainable development
and human rights for all. It is imperative that all States
abide by their international obligations, particularly
22-75095

14/12/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

those relating to respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference. The international
community must commit to providing support to
States affected by conflict and engaged in post-conflict
peacebuilding, reconstruction and rehabilitation.
The effective functioning of the multilateral
system necessitates the implementation of decisions
adopted by the principal organs of the United Nations.
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations is clear
about the obligations of States to accept and carry out
the decisions of the Security Council. The Council’s
lack of proper attention to the apparent disregard and
misinterpretation of its resolutions containing binding
demands is not a positive practice.
The case of Azerbaijan is clear in this regard. For
27 years, resolutions adopted by the Security Council
demanding an immediate, complete and unconditional
end to the occupation of the sovereign territories of
Azerbaijan (resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874
(1993) and 884 (1993)) remained unimplemented. They
were simply ignored, with complete impunity, while,
for almost three decades, hundreds of thousands of
people were uprooted and prevented from returning to
their homes and properties.
The occupying forces of the neighbouring Republic
of Armenia continued to resort to multiple armed
provocations throughout the period of occupation. As a
result of a large-scale armed provocation in September
2020, the Republic of Azerbaijan was obliged to
launch a counter-offensive operation fully in line with
Article 51 of the United Nations Charter and the four

S/PV.9220

aforementioned resolutions adopted in 1993. As a
result, the territories of Azerbaijan were liberated from
the long-term unlawful foreign military occupation.
The Republic of Azerbaijan launched a large-scale
campaign aimed at rehabilitation, restoration and
reconstruction of the conflict-affected territories.
We extend the hand of post-conflict normalization to
Armenia, and we call upon the Armenian side to abide
by its international obligations, put an end to its illegal
activities, cease territorial claims, completely withdraw
its armed forces and illegal armed formations from the
territory of Azerbaijan, redress the harm caused to
Azerbaijan and its people, and concentrate on direct
negotiations with a view to finding diplomatic solutions
pertaining to inter-State relations as soon as possible.
We believe that our region has experienced enough
devastation and suffering. We believe that we must
use this unique window of opportunity to finally
join in turning the tragic page of history and build a
common positive future together, for the sake of the
next generations.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on the list for this meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

22-7509531/31
