Geaeral Aa!Mlmbly-Twenty-&fth Set•i-

and self-determination of peoples, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter, and to render assistance to the
United Nations in carrying out the responsibilities entrusted
to it by the Charter regarding the implementation of the
principle, in order:
(a) To promote friendly relations and co-operation among
States; and
(b) To brin1 a speedy end to colonialism, having due
reaard to the freely expressed will of the peoples concerned;
and bearing in mind that subjection of peoples to alien
1ubju1ation, domination and exploitation constitutes a violation of the principle, as well as a denial of fundamental
human riahts. and i1 contrary to the Charter.
Every State baa the duty to promote throuah joint and
aeparate action universal respect for and observance of
human riahts and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
the Charter.
Tbe establishment of a aovereip and independent State,
the free association or intearation with an independent State
or the emeraence into any other political status freely
determined by a people constitute modes of implementing
the ri1ht of self-determination by that people.
Every State bas the duty to refrain from any forcible
action wbicb deprives peoples referred to above in the
elaboration of the present principle of their riaht to selfdetermination and freedom and independence. In their
actions a1ainst, and resistance to, such forcible action in
pursuit of the exercise of their riaht to self-determination,
aucb peoples are entitled to seek and to receive support in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
Tbe territory of a colony or other Non-Self-Governina
Territory bu, under the Charter, a status separate and
distinct from the territory of the State administering it; and
aucb aeparate and distinct status under the Charter shall
exist until the people of the colony or Non-Self-Governin1
Territory have exercised their riaht of self-determination in
accordance with the Charter, and particularly its purposes
and principles.
Notbin1 in the fore1oing paraarapbs shall be construed
u authorizing or encouraain1 any action which would dismember or impair, totally or in part, the territorial intearity or political unity of sovereip and independent States
conducting them.aelves in compliance with the principle of
equal ri1hts and self-determination of peoples as described
above and thus possessed of a government representin1 the
whole people belongin1 to the territory without distinction
11 to race, creed or colour.
Every State shall refrain from any action aimed at the
partial or total disruption of the national unity and territorial intearity of any other State or country.
The principle of sovereign equality of States
All States enjoy sovereip equality. They have equal
riahts and duties and are equal members of the international community, notwithstanding differences of an economic, social, political or other nature.
In particular, sovereign equality includes the following
elements:
(a) States are juridically equal;
(b) Each State enjoys the riahts inherent in full sovereipty;
(c) Each State has the duty to respect the personality of
other States;
(d) The territorial intearity and political independence of
the State are inviolable;
(e) Each State has the right freely to choose and develop
its political, social, economic and cultural systems;
(f) Each State has the duty to comply fully and in 1ood
faith with its international obliptions and to live in peace
with other States.

The principle that States shall fulfil In ,ood faith th•
obligations assumed by them in accordance with the
Charter
Every State has the duty to fulfil in ,ood faith the
obligations assumed by it in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
Every State has the duty to fulfil in aood faith its obli1ations under the generally recoanized principles and rulee
of international law.
Every State bas the duty to fulfil in ,ood faith its obliptions under international a,reements valid under the pnerally reco1nized principles and rules of intemational law.
Where obliaations arising under international a,reementa
are in conflict with the obliaations of Members of the
United Nations under the Charter of the United Nationa,
the obligations under the Charter shall prevail.
OENl!BAL PART

2. Declares that:
In their interpretation and application the above principles
are interrelated and each principle should be construed in the
context of the other principles.
Nothing in tbia Declaration shall be construed as prejudicing
in any manner the provisions of the Charter or the rilbts
and duties of Member States under the Charter or the riahts
of peoples under the Charter, taking into account the elaboration of these riahts in this Declaration.
3. Declares further that:
The principles of. the Charter which are embodied in this
Declaration constitute basic principles of international law,
and consequently appeals to all States to be ,uided by these
principles in their international conduct and to develop their
mutual relations on the basis of the strict observance of these
principles.

2634 (XXV).

Report of the International Law
CommiHion

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-second
session,2
Emphasizing the need for the further codification
and progressive development of international law in
order to make it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in Articles
1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations and to
give increased importance to its role in relations among
nations,
Noting with satisfaction that at its twenty-second
session the International Law Commission completed
itsjrovisional draft articles on relations between States
an international organizations, continued the consideration of matters concerning the codification and
progressive development of the international law n,lating to sucxiession of States in respect of treaties and
State responsibility and included in its programme of
work the question of treaties concluded between States
and international organizations or between two or more
international organizations, as recommended by the
General Assembly in resolution 2S01 (XXIV) of 12
November 1969,
Noting fµrther that the International Law Commission has proposed to hold a fourteen-week session in
1971 in order to enable it to complete the 1CCOnd
reading of the draft articles on relations between States
2 /bid., Supplement No.

10 (A/8010/Rev.1).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

and international organizations and the first reading of
draft articles on succession of States in respect of treaties before the end of the term of office of its· present
members,
Noting with appreciation that the United Nations
Office at Geneva organized, during the twenty-second
session of the International Law Commission, a sixth
session of the Seminar on International Law,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its twenty-second session;
2. Expresses its profound gratitude to the International Law Commission, on the occasion of the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, for its outstanding contribution to the achievements of the Organization during this period, particularly through the preparation of drafts which have
served as the basis for the adoption of important
codification conventions, and expresses its appreciation
to the Commission for the valuable work it accomplished during its twenty-second session;
3. Approves the programme and organization of
work of the session planned by the International Law
Com.mission for 1971, as well as its intention to bring
up to date its long-term programme of work;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue its work on relations between States
and international organizations, taking into account the
views expressed at the twenty-third, twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth sessions of the General Assembly and the
comments which may be submitted by Governments,
with the object of presenting in 1971 a final draft on
the topic;
(b) Continue its work on succession of States,
taking into account the views and considerations
referred to in General Assembly resolutions 1765
(XVII) of 20 November 1962 and 1902 (XVIII) of
18 November 1963, with a view to completing in 1971
the first reading of draft articles on succession of States
in respect of treaties and making progress in the consideration of succession of States in respect of matters
other than treaties;
(c) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the views and considerations referred to
in General Assembly resolutions 1765 (XVII) of 20
November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November
1963 and 2400 (XXIII) of 11 December 1968;
(d) Continue its study of the most-favoured-nation
clause;
(e) Continue its consideration of the question of
treaties concluded between States and international
organizations or between two or more international organizations;
5. Endorses the decision of the International Law
Commission to request the Secretary-General to pr~
pare new editions, brought up to date, of the publication entitled The Work of the International Law Commission3 and of the document entitled "Summary of the
practice of the Secretary-General as depositary of multilateral agreements";•
6. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with
future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of an increasing number of nationals of developing countries, and supports
a United Nations publication, Sales No.: 67.V.4.
•ST/LEG/7.

125

the suggestion contained in the Commission's report
concerning the use of Spanish as a working language
of the Seminar on International Law;11
7. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the twentyfifth session of the General Assembly.
1903rd plenary meeting,
12 November 1970.
2635 (XXV). Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its third session, 6
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 establishing the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law and defining the object
and terms of reference of the Commission,
Recalling its resolution 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November 1969 with respect to the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the
work of its second session, in which the General Assembly recommended that the Commission should keep
its programme of work under constant review, bearing
in mind the important contribution that the progressive
harmonization and unification of international trade
law can make to economic co-operation among all peoples and, thereby, to their well-being,
Noting the forthcoming publication of the Register
of Texts7 and of the first volume of the Yearbook of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law, 8
Noting that the Trade and Development Board, at
its tenth session, expressed its appreciation of the report
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law, 9
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on its third session and of the progress made in
its work;
2. Notes with appreciation that the desire, expressed
in General Assembly resolution 2502 (XXIV), that
there be the widest possible participation by the members of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law in the preparatory work to be done by
working groups has been fulfilled, and that this participation has substantially advanced the work of the
Commission;
3. Endorses the desire expressed by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law to obtain,
where necessary, the services of consultants or organizations with special expertise in technical matters
dealt with by the Commission, it being understood that
recourse to such services is made only in special circumstances;
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/8010/Rev.1), para. 109.
6 fbid., Supplement No. 17 (A/8017).
7 United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.V.3.
s United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.V.1, vol. I.
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8015/Rev.1 and Rev.1/
Corr.I), part two, para. 232.
