S/PV.7971

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7971

st meeting
Thursday, 15 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Moustafa
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Alemu
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Delattre
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Cardi
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Kawamura
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Temenov
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Iliichev
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Seck
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Skau
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mr. Yelchenko
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . .  Mr. Wilson
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mrs. Haley
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Mrs. Carrión

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on options for authorization and support for
African Union peace support operations (S/2017/454)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17103 (E)
*1717103*

African Union

S/PV.7971

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

to strengthen the United Nations-African Union
partnership, our organizations are deeply engaged in the
development of innovative, forward-leaning and lasting
collaborative systems. We must move away from ad hoc
arrangements. The report before the Council presents
proposals for institutionalized approaches to joint
planning and mandating, financing and supporting
African Union peace support operations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on options for
authorization and support for African Union
peace support operations (S/2017/454)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de
Cabinet of the Secretary-General; Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union; and Mr. Donald Kaberuka, African Union High
Representative for the Peace Fund.
Mr. Chergui is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/454, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on options for authorization and
support for African Union peace support operations.
I now give the floor to Ms. Viotti.
Ms. Viotti: I am pleased to introduce the report
of the Secretary-General on options for authorization
and support to African Union peace support operations
(S/2017/454). The report is submitted pursuant to
resolution 2320 (2016) of 18 November 2016, in which
the Security Council also requested the SecretaryGeneral to continue working closely with the African
Union (AU) to refine options for further cooperation on
relevant AU proposals, including joint planning and the
process for mandating AU peace support operations,
subject to authorization by the Council, as well as on
United Nations financing and support.
The international community must be positioned
to adequately respond creatively to dynamic security
contexts around the world, and regional organizations
are central to this effort. Building on sustained efforts
2/18

15/06/2017

The report, along with the accompanying update
from the African Union, is the result of six months of
coordination and cooperation between the Secretariat
and the AU Commission. Since the African Union
Mission in Burundi in 2003, the United Nations has
provided many types of support to African Union
operations. These include planning, logistical support
and a variety of financing mechanisms. Some types of
support have been more effective than others.
The earlier joint United Nations-African Union
review of mechanisms to finance and support African
Union peace support operations examined over a decade
of cooperation in support for African Union operations.
The present report builds on this effort and proposes
more predictable approaches to supporting African
Union operations in future. Our aim is not to replicate
earlier arrangements but to develop new approaches that
reflect lessons learned and to develop the capacities of
the African Union and the roles of other partners.
Predictable approaches are required, as the United
Nations-African Union partnership is, has been and
will be the preferred modality of pursuing peace and
security in Africa. To this end, the Secretary-General
and African Union Chairperson recently convened the
first United Nations-African Union Annual Conference
at United Nations Headquarters. During that meeting,
they signed the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, further underscoring the commitment
to working closely together based on mutual respect,
recognition of complementarity, interdependence
and solidarity.
The report also highlights the importance of
compliance and oversight, particularly in the areas of
human rights and conduct and discipline. These are
critical concerns in all peace operations, including
those mandated or authorized by the African Union.
We are encouraged that the African Union is rigorously
working to address these issues, including by further
developing its compliance mechanisms. The United
17-17103

15/06/2017

African Union

Nations will continue to provide any technical
assistance to the African Union’s implementation of
relevant compliance frameworks.
The African Union is an invaluable partner to the
United Nations and we are enormously grateful for
Africa’s contributions to building a better future for
all. As the Secretary-General has often said, the world
can greatly benefit from African wisdom, African ideas
and African solutions. As noted in the update provided
by the African Union, AU operations undertake a wide
variety of tasks in a wide variety of circumstances.
These include deploying troops rapidly to tackle
dynamic security challenges, addressing asymmetric
threats and ensuing robust peace enforcement.
Different situations will require different planning,
financing and support arrangements, but these can
be underpinned by jointly agreed principles and
decision-making processes. Effective cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
deploying and supporting peace support operations
requires not only engagement between the Secretariat
and the Commission, but also between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council in mandating and reporting.
A common approach among Member States is also
required to address the perennial issue of securing
predictable and sustainable financial support for
African Union operations. Where United Nations
assessed contributions are authorized, the General
Assembly will also play a critical oversight role. The
concepts, process, conditions and options presented in
the report should be considered as a framework that can
be flexibly adapted for new operations. Some additional
work is required before this framework can be fully
utilized, including the development of joint planning
and budgeting methodologies. Some of the bureaucratic
processes of the two Organizations may also need to
be reconciled.
I can assure Council members that the SecretaryGeneral is fully committed to Africa and the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
His report shows that there are no technical challenges
that our organizations cannot overcome together. We
count on the Council’s support to help translate words
into action. Together, we can create more efficient
and effective solutions to better respond to the needs
of the African people and advance international peace
and security.

S/PV.7971

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Viotti
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: Allow me from the outset to express
the appreciation of the African Union Commission
to the members of the Council for inviting me and
Mr. Kaberuka to address the Council with the aim of
discussing options for further cooperation and support
to African Union peace support operations pursuant to
resolution 2320 (2016).
Enhancing the financing of the Africa Union,
including its peace support operations, is a central
priority for African Union member States. It should be
recalled that at the 15 January Addis Ababa Summit,
the African Union Assembly of Heads of State and
Government decided that member States would fund
25 per cent of the peace support operations budget.
During the July 2016 Kigali Summit, the African Union
Assembly decided to institute a universal levy of 0.2 per
cent on eligible imports to finance the African Union.
The 0.2 per cent levy will endow the Peace Fund with a
total of $400 million by 2020.
I wish to underline that, with respect to peace
support operations, the fundamental problem that
the African Union Assembly’s financial decision
intended to address is the lack of predictable and
sustainable financing for African Union-mandated
or authorized peace support operations. The African
Union has demonstrated its political will in deploying
peace support operations in the most challenging
environments. Thirteen missions have been deployed
since the establishment of the African Union. In all
these cases, the financing arrangements were ad hoc
and highly unpredictable. Tremendous sacrifices have
been made and, in many cases, the ultimate price has
been paid by our troops.
Donations in kind made by all member States
have also played an important role in the deployment
of peace support operations and have often not always
been reflected in the overall accounting of contributions
to have been made. In taking these financial decisions,
the Assembly sought to address three key issues: first,
the lack of a dedicated African Union operational
peace and security budget; secondly, overreliance on
external, ad hoc and unpredictable sources of funding;
and thirdly, the absence of a credible African Union
instrument that could provide the right accountability

17-171033/18

S/PV.7971

African Union

framework for managing African Union member State
and external financing.
Resolution 2320 (2016) was a major milestone
in enhancing United Nations cooperation with and
support to African Union peace support operations.
It expressed the United Nations willingness to
consider African Union proposals for funding its
peace support operations, consistent with applicable
international obligations, accountability, transparency
and compliance frameworks for African Union peace
support operations.
I would like to make four key observations on
the progress being made on the Peace Fund for the
Council’s consideration.
First, the African Union Peace and Security
Council, at its 689th meeting, held on 13 May, endorsed
the report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the Peace Fund. The report contained
proposals on the scope of African Union operations, the
implementation of an enhanced governance structure
and accountability framework, and the status of
implementation of relevant provisions of resolution
2320 (2016). This endorsement by the Peace and
Security Council was a milestone and an expression
of the political commitment of African Union member
States to the realization and effectiveness of the Peace
Fund. The Security Council may wish to consider this
report and communiqué of the Peace and Security
Council, which has now been officially transmitted to
the Secretary-General, especially in current and future
discussions of options for possible predictable and
sustainable United Nations support to African Union
peace support operations.
Secondly, questions have been repeatedly raised
on the envisaged scope of operations that will require
possible United Nations assess contributions. This
question has been partly addressed by the Peace and
Security Council in its decision to adopt a case-by-case
approach based on the scope of the operations in meeting
the new demands of the evolving nature of security
challenges in Africa. At the same time, the African
Union Commission has developed a common-costs
document that clearly articulates the viable operational
requirements that could form the basis of burdensharing between the African Union and the United
Nations in future Africa Union support operations.
That document is consistent with the African Union’s
strategic priority of financing the African Standby
4/18

15/06/2017

Force and its rapid-deployment capability in three
phases, namely, predeployment, deployment and postdeployment. The Commission will remain seized of the
matter and will continue to inform the Security Council
on the areas of support that can be addressed within the
resources in the Peace Fund.
Thirdly, the most central issue confronting the
Africa Union at this stage is the need to mobilize
resources from AU member States. I am happy to report
that, currently, almost 30 per cent of African Union
member States have made contributions to the Fund.
Some member States expressed their willingness to
make their statutory contributions during the recently
held meeting of the Peace and Security Council. In
addition, the Chairperson of the African Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, recently extended and
expanded the mandate of Mr. Donald Kaberuka as
the African Union High Representative for the Peace
Fund and for the financing of the Union. We are
certain that those significant steps will sustain the
political momentum, which will lead to the accelerated
operationalization of the Peace Fund.
Fourthly, let me state, in the clearest terms possible,
the unflinching resolve of the African Commission to
strictly observe and promote transparency and good
governance, not only in the daily management of the
Peace Fund but on all resources devoted to African
Union-led peace support operations. The Chairperson
of the Commission will appoint the members of the
board of trustees of the Peace Fund in the coming days.
Finally, the African Union remains confident that
this discussion on the Peace Fund and the possibility
of predictable funding, including through United
Nations assessed contributions, is consolidating the
strategic partnership that has emerged between the
African Union and the United Nations. It should be
recalled that, on 19 April, during the annual African
Union-United Nations conference in New York,
Secretary-General Guterres and the African Union
Commission Chairperson signed a Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. That was an important step
towards ensuring more institutionalized cooperation
between both organizations in addressing the security
challenges that Africa continues to face. The African
Union remains committed to that partnership. The
success achieved in our joint efforts to enhance support
to African peace support operations will no doubt be a
litmus test.
17-17103

15/06/2017

African Union

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kaberuka.
Mr. Kaberuka: It is an honour and a privilege
for me to be here for this important debate. I would
like to thank the Bolivian presidency and the entire
membership of the Security Council for inviting me
and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace
and Security to make a contribution to the update by
the African Union to the Security Council on resolution
2320 (2016), with a special focus on the African Union’s
Peace Fund.
Over the years, and as the nature of international
peace and security threats has evolved, various
high-level reports and recommendations have made
three key points consistently: first, that the crises
the world faces today are often so complex that no
one single organization is able to provide the needed
response; secondly, that regional organizations bring
a comparative advantage to the table; and, thirdly,
that there is a need for financing mechanisms that are
predictable rather than voluntary or ad hoc. A wellfunded African Peace and Security Architecture is not
simply an African priority, it is a global public good.
A significant amount of work has been undertaken
since the adoption of resolution 2320 (2016), on
18 November 2016, as members heard from the
Commissioner. I would particularly like to commend
the work undertaken by the United Nations Secretariat
and by the Commission to follow up on the relevant
provisions of the resolution, in particular the consultative
process carried out between March and April. I am
pleased to note that the process was conducted in the
spirit of true partnership and collaboration. I look
forward to seeing more processes of that nature between
our two organizations.
One of the key issues on which the Council asked
to be updated under in resolution 2320 (2016) was
progress on the operationalization of the AU Peace
Fund, including the overall benchmarks and timelines.
Over the past few months, the detailed governance
arrangements for the Peace Fund were developed. They
were presented to the AU Peace and Security Council
on 30 May, and I am pleased to confirm that the Council
fully endorsed the proposals. Let me briefly recap the
proposed governance arrangements.

S/PV.7971

As High Representative for the Peace Fund, I was
requested to put forward ideas on how the Peace Fund
could be financed, structured and governed for the peace
and security challenges the continent faces, in a much
more predictable way and while avoiding overreliance
on multiple unpredictable funding channels. The
July 2016 session of the AU Assembly adopted the
proposal that the Peace Fund be structured around
three windows: mediation and preventive diplomacy,
institutional capacity and peace support operations. In
addition, a crisis reserve facility — a revolving trust
fund provided for under article 21, paragraph 4, of the
Peace and Security Council Protocol on Peace and
Security — would be established within the Peace Fund
to enable rapid responses to unforeseen crises, from
any unutilized balances.
The AU policy organs, in particular the Peace and
Security Council, have the political authority to guide
the activities of the Peace Fund. The Chairperson of the
Commission, supported by an executive management
committee, will oversee the Fund’s day-to-day
operations. A board of trustees will be put in place
to ensure strategic coherence, enhanced governance
and the financial and administrative oversight of the
Fund. External partners to the Fund will be invited to
nominate two representatives to the board of trustees.
An independent evaluation group will provide periodic
evaluation on the use and impact of the Fund. A dedicated
Peace Fund secretariat will be established within the
Commission to manage day-to-day operations and
will report to the executive management committee.
Finally, an independent Fund manager will be recruited
to ensure the highest standards of accountability and
compliance with fiduciary rules and procedures in the
management of the Fund.
I believe that structure reflects international best
practice in terms of fund governance arrangements
and will reassure both African member countries
and partners to the fund. Of course, it has been
adapted to reflect the fact that the African Union is an
intergovernmental organization, and not a corporate
body. It is for that reason that the Fund will finance only
activities that emanate from a decision by a competent
AU organ, in this case the Assembly of Heads of State,
the Peace and Security Council or the Chairperson, in
line with the powers set out in the Protocol.
With respect to the timelines of their
implementation, the Chairperson of the Commission
aims to expedite the operationalization of the Peace

17-171035/18

S/PV.7971

African Union

Fund governance arrangements in 2017. The adoption
of the Peace Fund instruments and the the governance
structures that I have referred to will be implemented
before the end of the year. With those new Governance
arrangements, the AU Peace Fund will provide a more
effective instrument through which the AU and its
partners in the international community will be able
to work together to promote the cause of peace and
stability in Africa and the world.
I am pleased to say that, as of May — as the
Commissioner for Peace and Security has already
told the Council — 14 AU member States had made
their contribution to the Peace Fund, even before the
establishment of the new governance arrangements.
Those contributions represent just over 12 per cent
of the of the target set for 2017. As part of my new
expanded mandate, which is focused on the Peace
Fund as well as the overall financing of the African
Union, I will be focusing most of my time assisting the
Chairperson in implementing the various mechanisms
and ensuring that AU member States respect their
financial commitments to the African Union. I am
confident that the 2017 Peace Fund target can be met.
While AU member States are primarily responsible
for financing the Peace Fund, partnerships will
continue to play a vital role in supporting the peace and
security activities on the African continent. Therefore,
deepening cooperation with partners, both traditional
and emerging, is imperative.
The current international peace and security
architecture is under significant pressure, given the
complexity of the challenges that the world faces today.
Therefore, forging an effective partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union is of the greatest
strategic importance for our collective security. In that
respect, the financing partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations is critical in that it offers
a pathway to more predictable funding of AU peace
support operations. That enhanced form of partnership
must necessarily be based on the two organizations’
respective authorities, competencies and capacities.
It must also observe the principles of burden-sharing,
consultative decision-making, comparative advantage,
division of labour and mutual accountability.
There should be no illusions with respect to the
political complexity of such an undertaking. However,
to the extent that there is accord regarding the urgency
of improving the international peace and security
6/18

15/06/2017

architecture in order to address today’s security
challenges, arriving at a shared solution for new
financing arrangement and authorized peace support
will be a great achievement for both the African Union
and the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kaberuka for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this briefing on
behalf of the Secretary-General regarding options for
authorizing and supporting the African Union (AU)
Commission’s peace support operations. We also thank
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
his report on resolution 2320 (2016). We express our
appreciation to Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her briefing
on the various options proposed in line with resolution
2320 (2016).
We are also pleased to have with us Mr. Smaïl
Chergui Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union, via video teleconference, as
well as Mr. Donald Kaberuka, African Union High
Representative for the Peace Fund. We are grateful for
their efforts on the issue and for their briefings on steps
taken by the African side.
I am delivering my statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council, namely,
Egypt, Ethiopia and Senegal.
We are meeting against the backdrop of some
important developments over the past six months
that have had great significance for the partnership
between the AU and the United Nations. We have
new leadership in both organizations and there is a
renewed commitment to elevate the AU-United Nations
cooperation and partnership to new heights. The visits
by the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, to
the African Union’s headquarters in Addis Ababa in
January and by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, to the United
Nations Headquarters in New York in April serve as
a reaffirmation of the resolve by the new leaderships
to further strengthen the cooperation and partnership
between the two organizations as a matter of priority.
The joint United Nations-African Union framework
for enhancing partnership signed by the leaderships
17-17103

15/06/2017

African Union

of the two organizations on 19 April is indeed a clear
testament to the renewed commitment to work together
to, inter alia, address common challenges to peace
and security in the African continent across the whole
spectrum of the conflict cycle.
On numerous occasions, the Security Council
has reiterated its commitment to cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, as well as to arrangements in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. There is indeed growing
recognition that a stronger global-regional partnership
is needed in order to effectively respond to the peace
and security challenges and threats and improve our
collective security.
On that basis, the Council has expressed its
determnination to take effective steps to further
enhance the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union.
Of course, we all recall the concrete recommendations
made by the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, which presented its report on 16 June 2015
(see S/2015/446). It included the recommendations
regarding the strategic partnership with the African
Union, which were later incorporated in the SecretaryGeneral’s implementation report (S/2015/682). The
Panel’s report of the did not put the spotlight on the
AU without reason. The reason was explained nowhere
more cogently than in the Secretary-General’s report on
options for authorization and support for African Union
peace support operations:
“Considering the limitations of the United Nations
peacekeeping doctrine with regard to peace
enforcement and counter-terrorism, the African
Union peace support operations are a tool for the
United Nations to better discharge its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security in certain situations.” (S/2017/454, para.
61).
The adoption of resolution 2320 (2016) represents
a tangible testament to the Council’s commitment to
strengthen the cooperation and partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. In that context,
the Council acknowledged the need for more support in
order to strengthen AU peace operations and enhance
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing African Union peace operations authorized

S/PV.7971

by the Security Council. In that regard, we appreciate
the work undertaken by the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the African Union Commission over the
past six months to follow up on the implementation of
resolution 2320 (2016), in particular the consultative
process undertaken between March and April.
Accordingly, we welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral on options for authorization and support
for African Union peace support operations. We
also welcome the report to the Chairperson of the
Commission, which provides important details on the
proposed scope of operations, progress made, future
benchmarks and timelines for implementation of the
AU Peace Fund, as well as frameworks that support
accountability, transparency and compliance as the
basis for operationalizing the financing arrangement.
We believe that the four financing options identified
in the reports are sound and realistic regarding how
to help the Security Council consider taking its first
concrete steps on the financing of AU peace support
operations. Furthermore, ensuring compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights standards
is very important for the credibility, legitimacy and,
ultimately, the effectiveness of AU peace support
operations. In that regard, the progress that the
African Union has made on finalizing its human
rights conduct and discipline compliance framework
is encouraging, and we look forward to its adoption
in September. The support of the United Nations for
effective implementation of the AU’s compliance and
accountability framework is crucial, and we commend
the Secretary-General for his willingness to assist the
AU in that regard.
Lastly, the Security Council has already expressed
its intention to take practical steps to establish the
principle that AU-mandated peace support operations
authorized by the Council should be financed through
United Nations assessed contributions, with decisions
on the financing of specific missions to be taken on a
case-by-case basis. Now that the groundwork has been
done in line with resolution 2320 (2016), we would like to
ask the Security Council to take practical steps towards
adopting a substantive resolution that establishes
that principle. We will work with Council members
to achieve that objective with a view to realizing the
full potential of the United Nations-AU partnership to
swiftly and effectively respond to the complex threats
and challenges to peace and security today.

17-171037/18

S/PV.7971

African Union

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Bolivia for convening today’s meeting,
and would like to thank Mr. Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union (AU);
Mr. Kaberuka, African Union High Representative for
the Peace Fund; and Ms. Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, for their briefings.
As the continent with the world’s greatest
development potential, Africa is an important force in
our efforts to achieve world peace and promote shared
development. In the past few years, we have seen the
countries of Africa commit to cooperation, self-reliance,
unity and coordination and to actively promoting the
resolution of African issues in African ways. They have
strengthened and developed their collective security
mechanisms and achieved outstanding results in dealing
with the conflicts in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, thereby
making important contributions to the maintenance
of peace and security in Africa and the world at large.
China heartily commends those efforts.
Some parts of Africa are still facing severe
political, security and humanitarian challenges.
Terrorist organizations such as Boko Haram, the Lord’s
Resistance Army, Al-Shabaab and others are still a
threat to security. Transnational organized crime in
the Sahel and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea are still
rampant. The international community must continue
to enhance its attention and support through continued
assistance aimed at improving Africa’s peace, security
and development capacities.
In view of the evolving state of peace and security
in Africa, the United Nations and the African Union
have been actively exploring the ways and areas in
which they can deepen their cooperation. Last year,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2320 (2016),
designed to enhance that cooperation. In April, the two
organizations signed the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security. A few days ago, the SecretaryGeneral submitted a report to the Security Council
(S/2017/454), as did the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, supporting autonomous African
Union peace operations. China would like to commend
the Council for focusing on finding solutions to African
issues and supporting capacity-building for peace
and security in Africa. We hope it will continue that
momentum and focus its future cooperation efforts on
the following areas.
8/18

15/06/2017

First, the Council should fully respect the role of
African countries in settling their own problems and
ensure that it is a dominant one. The African Union and
Africa’s other regional and subregional organizations
have unique advantages and a wealth of experience
in resolving hotspot issues on the continent. Looking
at the success achieved by the Security Council and
the African Union in addressing many such issues,
we believe that African countries have the ability
and wisdom they need to handle their problems
appropriately. The Council should fully respect
African proposals and ideas, as well as the sovereignty
and views of countries hosting peace operations, and
enhance its cooperation and coordination with the AU
and subregional organizations with a view to creating
political synergies.
Secondly, the Council should work to continually
improve the cooperation mechanisms between the AU
and the United Nations. While our Organization has
been increasing the closeness of its cooperation with
the African Union in responding to issues in problem
areas in Africa, both sides must further improve
that cooperation and coordination by making the
mechanisms more effective and emphasizing key areas
such as conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict reconstruction. They should work to gradually
improve joint planning, decision-making, assessment
and reporting, and to jointly implement early-warning
procedures for crises, strategic assessments, the
creation of mandates, deployments and other efforts.
The goal will be to ensure that strategic coordination
between the United Nations and the AU and other
regional organizations can be implemented in each
particular area at various stages and levels, so as make
cooperation more efficient.
Thirdly, the Council should take concrete measures
to help the African Union improve its capacity-building.
The AU’s autonomous peace operations have become
a very important route by which the international
community can respond to conflicts and crises in
Africa. They represent a significant complement to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and play
a major role in maintaining peace and stability on
the continent. Owing to its difficulties in obtaining
financial resources, equipment and technology, the
African Union has been struggling with the challenge
of sustaining effective autonomous operations.
China therefore welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for supporting those operations.
17-17103

15/06/2017

African Union

We believe that the United Nations should listen to
the needs and wishes of the AU by helping it speed up
its development of its standby and rapid-reaction forces,
counter regional terrorism and establish sustainable,
stable and predictable financing mechanisms for its
peace operations. We hope that the Security Council
and the Secretariat will listen seriously to African
countries’ views and concerns and will regard African
priorities as their own, working with all possible speed
to provide the necessary financing, equipment and
resources for African peace operations in support of
the efforts of the countries and regional organizations
concerned to maintain peace and security.
China has always worked actively to implement
cooperative efforts with African countries in the area of
peace and security. President Xi Jinping has outlined five
pillars and 10 cooperation plans aimed at building the
Sino-African relationship that cover peace and security
issues. We have committed to providing military aid
amounting to a total of $100 million by 2020 in support
of the AU’s standby and rapid-reaction forces. The
China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust
Fund is now operational and will have a lifespan of 10
years. It will help the United Nations focus on peace
and development projects in Africa.
Currently, China has 2,600 peacekeepers deployed
to seven missions, including Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. China has
dispatched escort vessels to the waters off the Somali
coast and the Gulf of Aden in an effort to help regional
countries fight piracy. We are ready to work together
with the rest of the international community to fully
promote cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union so as to achieve peace, stability and
development on the African continent.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want
to begin by conveying our thoughts and prayers to
the people of China, as well as to those affected by
the school tragedy that we have just heard about this
morning. I know that the facts are still incomplete, but
from what we have heard so far, it is heartbreaking. The
United States stands with the students and the families
in prayer.
I want to thank our briefers, as well as Senegal,
Ethiopia and Egypt, for their contributions to this
meeting. We truly value their leadership in the
promotion of cooperation between the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations.

S/PV.7971

The African Union is an indispensable partner to
both America and the United Nations in promoting
peace and security in Africa. It has a unique capacity
to anticipate crises, mediate conflicts and deploy troops
and police on short notice. It does so, moreover, in some
of the most challenging environments in the world.
We applaud the increasing leadership the AU has
displayed in contributing to peace operations and
battling terrorist and insurgent groups. In Somalia,
the AU quickly deployed to provide security for a
fledgling Government in 2007. A decade later, thanks
to the bravery and courage of the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia AMISOM
troop- and police-contributing countries, Somalia is on
a gradual path toward stability and peace. In Darfur,
the AU partnered with the United Nations to stabilize a
complex conflict.
Across the continent, the AU is partnering with
subregional organizations and countries to respond to
emerging and complex threats — from tense electoral
transitions in West Africa to Boko Haram in the Lake
Chad basin. We value our cooperation with our African
partners. It is in the interest of all of us to work for peace
and prosperity in Africa. The question is not whether
the AU Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council will continue to improve our cooperation, but
rather how we can best work together to promote peace
and security.
Progress has been achieved thanks to the work
of both organizations, but there is much more work
to be done. In order to ensure that the Security
Council’s response to the AU initiative is effective,
we need better cooperation in planning operations.
The Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council must share assessments of the political,
security, humanitarian and human rights dimensions of
missions from the very outset. Working together early
helps us ensure that the strategic concept — including
operations, force generation, and mission cost — has
the buy-in of all parties.
We support the AU’s efforts to increase financial
self-reliance and to build the African Union Peace
Fund. We look forward to working with AU member
States to identify non-trade mechanisms for greater
self-financing. But any resolution with that goal in
mind must hold member States accountable to their
international obligations and commitments.

17-171039/18

S/PV.7971

African Union

We welcome the AU’s efforts to put in place
effective mechanisms to respect human rights in all
of its missions. Ensuring respect for human rights
and accountability for those who violate those rights
is essential, not just for African Union-United Nations
cooperation, but to preserve the trust between troops
and the communities they are supposed to protect. That
will require the creation of rigorous procedures for the
screening and selection of troops and police, followed
by the training and monitoring of personnel. Violations
and abuses must be reported and independently
investigated. Perpetrators must be held accountable. On
that, there will be no compromise.
We are encouraged by the prospect of more
effective, self-sufficient, and African-led peace
operations. We understand, however, that additional
progress will take time. Therefore, before considering
moving forward on any framework resolution with
regard to financial support through the United Nations,
we will look for implementation and concrete results
from the AU’s own benchmarks and timelines. It may
therefore be premature for the Council to take action on
any substantive resolution on this issue in 2017.
The men and women who plan and conduct peace
operations are given a great responsibility. People in
the most vulnerable of situations rely on them for their
safety — often for their lives. It is essential that we get
this right. It is worth taking the time to make sure that
we get it right.
Again, we thank the Secretary-General and
the AU Commission Chairperson, as well as their
organizations, for their commitment to advancing the
AU-United Nations partnership and, through that, the
peace and security of Africa and the world.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Chef de
Cabinet Viotti and Ambassador Chergui for their
briefings. The document signed by the SecretaryGeneral and the African Union Chairperson on 19 April
is appropriately entitled the Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We welcome the
strong signal of cooperation and coordination that the
Framework brings, and we support further efforts to
strengthen the partnership on both sides. Each challenge
to peace and security that we face today has a unique
combination of underlying factors.
In Africa, we have many good examples of
international, regional and subregional organizations
coming together in varied ways to tackle them. In
10/18

15/06/2017

some instances, the United Nations is best placed
to lead a response, as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — where the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has played a critical role in protecting
civilians. In others, the African Union has taken the
lead — critically, in Somalia, where for 10 years the
African Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) has played a vital role in degrading the
threat posed by Al-Shabaab. The bravery and sacrifice
of AMISOM troops has created a security space
conducive to political progress.
On other issues, the subregion has stepped up
to find solutions, as we saw with the Economic
Community of West African States in The Gambia
and as we look to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to lead in South Sudan. In some cases, the
solutions will evolve, as we saw in Mali and the Central
African Republic, where initial responses by regional
and subregional organizations then transitioned in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In Somalia,
the United Nations provides vital logistical support
to an African Union operation. That flexibility in our
partnership is essential to ensuring the best response
to crises.
In each case and as the Council set forth in
resolution 2320 (2016), we should consider the
comparative advantage of each institution to ensure
the most appropriate and effective response is deployed
to resolve conflict and achieve stability. In order to
assess which solution is best for each situation, we
must enhance our partnership. That means more
joint analysis, more joint planning and more joint
assessments to form a common understanding of crises
and determine the optimal solution.
The recent work of both the United Nations and the
African Union marks a new period in that partnership,
and it is imperative that we find more and better ways
of working together. The African Union’s commitment
to financing 25 per cent of the African Union peace
support operations budget is a welcome development
and Mr. Kaberuka and his team have made significant
strides in developing a roadmap to achieve that goal
by 2020. This work is a positive step towards greater
African ownership of peace and security, and a deeper
partnership with the United Nations.
We must continue to explore ways to make our
joint efforts more systematic and we look forward to
17-17103

15/06/2017

African Union

discussing that issue with the African Union Peace and
Security Council during our visit to Addis Ababa in
September. We agree with the African Union report,
that in response to some of the most serious threats to
peace and security, the deployment of African Union
peace support operations will be a key requirement
and will once again demonstrate the African Union’s
comparative advantage to deploy where the United
Nations cannot.
We should continue to look at how the United
Nations can best support those missions in order to
combine our strengths to bring about lasting solutions
and peace on the African continent. That includes the
further consideration of options to provide reliable
and sustainable funding for operations but must also
focus on how we conduct those operations. In parallel,
therefore, we should examine joint standards for
reporting, accountability and protection to ensure the
highest standards and most robust oversight of missions
to make them as effective as possible. Those issues will
require further debate and further joint work, we look
forward to engaging with all members of the Security
Council to strengthen and develop our partnership.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by extending France’s deepest sympathy
to China following the incident that occurred in the east
of the country earlier today.
I thank Ethiopia, Senegal and Egypt for convening
today’s important debate. I also thank Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet to the SecretaryGeneral, and Mr. Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, for their very
insightful briefings.
I would also like to warmly congratulate SecretaryGeneral Guterres, Mr. Donald Kaberuka and their
teams who worked on the report (S/2017/454) submitted
pursuant to resolution 2320 (2016).
Resolution 2320 (2016) launched a process to
achieve two complementary goals: first, to deepen the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union on matters of peace and security;
and secondly, to increase funding for African Union
peace operations when they are mandated by the
Security Council. The Secretary-General identifies
the specific modalities that would ensure an ongoing
and improved partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union. We welcome and encourage
the resolute commitment on the part of the Secretary-

S/PV.7971

General to strengthen relations with the African Union,
which he clearly demonstrated when he participated in
the Summit of Heads of State held in January.
Mr. Kaberuka and his team submitted an excellent
analysis of the status of African peace operations and
put forward a programme of work to improve their
existing framework and the way they are planned,
conducted and financed. That analysis has already been
deemed to be successful because it has brought together
all of the member States of the African Union to work
on project that would improve the continent’s future.
France welcomes the momentum created by
resolution 2320 (2016). The efforts underpinning that
momentum must continue. Current developments
illustrate how such efforts respond to the situation
on the ground and meet a need. It is true that our
African partners make increasing and more effective
contributions to efforts to ensure peace and security in
Africa. African peace operations offer an undeniable
comparative advantage to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There is an increasing number of situations
in which the partnership is already operational or will
be required. We now have a historic opportunity to
build a stronger, closer and more coherent partnership
framework between the United Nations and the African
Union, which can be activated and adapted to each
situation as required.
I will keep my remarks brief because we will
have a more in-depth discussion during the interactive
dialogue to be held after this meeting. The message we
would like to convey here today is that France welcomes
the efforts under way and the momentum created. We
therefore intend to play an active role in the Security
Council and with the African Union and its member
States in order to establish a new and innovative
cooperation mechanism for peace and security.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too extend our condolences to our Chinese
colleagues in the light of the incident that occurred at
a preschool in the east of the country. We extend our
sympathy to the families of the victims and wish the
injured a speedy recovery.
We thank the briefers for their comprehensive
statements. We agree with the approach of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres. It is important to develop
and strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and African subregional
organizations. The potential for closer cooperation

17-1710311/18

S/PV.7971

African Union

15/06/2017

exists and the challenges faced by both Africa and the
international community dictate the need to pool efforts
and harness the organizations’ comparative advantages.

and disbursement of funds and to provide for United
Nations staff participation in all planning stages and
for the effective implementation of the goals set forth.

We welcome the efforts of our African partners
in settling crises in Africa. We note that the African
Union and other subregional organizations have
stepped up their efforts and initiatives considerably in
that sphere, including through the establishment of a
continent-wide peace and security architecture. We are
confident that in order to effectively overcome crises
in Africa, we need an approach that brings together,
above all, the leadership of Africans themselves to
determine the paths to settling disputes, and effective
international support for such efforts. We support the
African solutions to African issues approach.

Furthermore, we note the importance of further study
of the Secretary-General’s ideas, with representatives
of the African Union Commission. In that context, we
must have a clear picture of the degree to which African
partners are ready to strengthen cooperation, including
financially and for peacekeeping and security. It is clear
that enhanced cooperation between our organizations
will inevitably entail greater regional ownership, which
they must be fully willing to undertake.

We would like to draw attention to the fact that
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union must be rooted in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations and include key provisions such
as the alignment of regional players’ initiatives for the
maintenance of peace and security with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, while prioritizing peaceful
dispute settlement, Security Council authorization
for any coercive measures and reporting before the
Council. We trust that the Secretary-General’s proposed
algorithms will fully take those issues into account.
Furthermore, it is important for a unique crisis
solution to be tailored in each instance in a manner that
reflects the specific situations of local communities.
We believe that in most instances, regional actors are
more familiar with the situations in areas within their
purview. Yet, given the main responsibility of the
Security Council — the maintenance of international
peace and security — we do not believe that the Council
can fully opt out of addressing such issues. They cannot
be left solely to the discretion of African organizations,
especially if we seek to apply all requisite measures.
It is important to enhance predictability, reliability
and flexibility in financing African operations and joint
missions. As a matter of principle, we do not object to
considering the possible expansion of United Nations
participation in such missions. We stand ready to
engage in further constructive dialogue in that regard.
However, we believe that regardless of the options
chosen, it is critical to retain the current procedure
followed by the United Nations in considering and
approving relevant budget requet requests to ensure
transparency and accountability in the allocation
12/18

Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we join with others in extending condolences to
our Chinese colleagues.
We welcome today’s briefing on an issue that is
key to the work of the Security Council. We also thank
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Mr. Chergui and
Mr. Kaberuka for their briefings.
Uruguay notes the development, over the past 15
years, of the partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations in the area of peacekeeping
operations and of the vital role played by the African
Union in responding to the challenges posed by armed
conflicts on the continent. In that regard, my delegation
would like to share some views on three specific issues,
namely, the process of planning and establishing joint
mandates for African Union peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council; the financing of
peace support operations; and the capacity-building of
African Union staff deployed in those operations.
Close cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the planning and establishment of
joint peace support mandates is essential for ensuring
the efficiency and effectiveness of those operations.
It is therefore especially important to continue with
efforts to improve the joint work of both organizations
throughout the life cycle of the missions, that is, from
the initial assessment of the crisis and the joint strategic
evaluation, to the launch of the mission, the joint
assessments of mandate compliance and accountability.
The joint review carried out by the United Nations
and the African Union revealed that the determination
of the African Union to act and respond to difficult
situations by deploying peace support operations has
been hampered by a lack of capacity in key areas,
including the lack of capacity in financing and support,
17-17103

15/06/2017

African Union

which are not always predictable and sustainable.
Uruguay believes that the different financing models
presented in the report (S/2017/454) offer viable
alternatives to the use of voluntary contributions.
As a country that has actively participated in
United Nations peacekeeping operations for many
years, Uruguay attaches particular importance to
the responsibility of troop- and police-contributing
countries in their actions on the ground and in
implementing the mandates. In that context, we stress
that any United Nations force authorized by the Security
Council, including an African Union peace support
operation, must comply with the same standards as
those required of United Nations peacekeeping staff in
terms of capacity, performance, conduct and discipline,
and accountability.
The joint review carried out by both organizations
has made it abundantly clear that the African Union
must continue to boost its ability to plan, finance,
sustain and oversee its own missions if it is to be in
a position comply with their mandates, to meet the
expectations of its membership and partners, and to
strengthen its partnership with the United Nations.
By the same token, Uruguay recognizes the
efforts made by the African Union to finalize its
human rights and conduct and discipline standards
compliance frameworks in order to ensure that its
peace support operations are carried out in accordance
with international human rights law and humanitarian
law standards and to thereby ensure oversight
and accountability.
In conclusion, we also underscore that the African
Union’s development of those frameworks will bode well
for the success of operations, will further strengthen its
partnership with the United Nations and enhance the
invaluable contribution that the African Union makes
to peace and security on the continent.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very timely and opportune briefing.
I also want to thank Mr. Chergui, Mr. Kaberuka and
Chef de Cabinet, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, for
their briefings.
The joint United Nations-African Union framework
signed on 19 April, the report of the Secretary-General
on the joint United Nations-African Union review of
mechanisms to finance and support African Union
peace operations authorized by the Council (see

S/PV.7971

S/2016/809) and the report of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on the same theme should
mark the beginning of a new strengthened partnership
between the two organizations. Italy fully supports the
mechanism described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral for a joint planning and mandating of African
Union (AU) peace operations, which preserves the
prerogatives of the Security Council but at the same
time provides for African ownership and paves the way
for African solutions to African problems.
With regard to financing, the different options
to provide financial support envisaged in the report
(S/2017/454) of the Secretary-General can be chosen
on a case by case basis. Already in 2008, the report
(see S/2008/2013) prepared by the panel of experts
chaired by former Prime Minister Romano Prodi called
for predictable and sustainable financial support to
United Nations-approved African Union peacekeeping
missions. We are thereofre fully in favour of exploring
the use of assessed contributions, provided, of course,
that the appropriate set of requirements in terms of troop
quality, training, equipment and high accountability
standards are met.
In that respect, we welcome the commitment
taken by the African Union Heads of State and
Government, at the Kigali Summit in July 2016, to
contribute 25 per cent of the costs of African Union
peace support operations, as reaffirmed in the report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
It is a commitment that will increase significantly the
contribution of African States to peace operations.
Enhanced strategic cooperation with the African Union
is therefore one of the ways leading to smart and costeffective peace operations and a fundamental element,
in our view, of the reform of the peace and security
architecture envisaged by Secretary-General Guterres.
As others have said, African Union peace operations
have comparative advantages in terms of flexibility,
rapid deployment in challenging environments and
the capacity to perform robust mandate tasks, such as
peace enforcement and counter-terrorism, that United
Nations peacekeeping operations cannot perform. We
already have some examples of fields of action where
African Union-United Nations cooperation has been
positively tested, such as in Somalia with the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia and in
Darfur with the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

17-1710313/18

S/PV.7971

African Union

I would like also to recall the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, whose revitalization
we deem essential as a preventive tool for the entire
region, and the recent creation of the Group of Five for
the Sahel force, a mission that can have a crucial impact
on security in the region in cooperation with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and with the European Union missions
active in the area — the European Union Training
Mission in Mali, the European Union Capacity Building
Mission (EUCAP) Sahel Mali, EUCAP Sahel Niger. I
would also like to recall the strong European support
for this force.
Concerning adherence to United Nations rules
and standards, we agree that it is paramount to
secure high standards of accountability and conduct
and discipline for the United Nations-mandated
peace operations undertaken by African Union. We
welcome the engagement stated in the AU Commission
Chairperson’s report to strengthen African Union
human rights due diligence capabilities, including
preventing and combating sexual exploitation and abuse
in African Union-led peace operations. In that respect,
we think training is key, in particular predeployment
and mandate-oriented training. Allow me to recall that
Italy has a strong record in the training of national,
military and police personnel for peace operations.
Respect for human rights, the protection of civilians
and a gender perspective are embedded in our national
military training curriculums.
We stand ready to strengthen our engagement in
the capacity-building of the police and military units
of Member States willing to contribute to African
Union missions and to help the United Nations devise
new training instruments and capacities in support of
specific African needs.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me also begin by extending
our deepest condolences to our Chinese friends for their
tragedy at the nursery this morning. Our thoughts are
with those affected.
I would also like to begin by extending my thanks
to the briefers this morning — Ambassador Chergui,
Mr. Kaberuka and Chef de Cabinet Viotti — for their
very thoughtful and insightful briefings. I should also
like to thank my colleagues from Senegal, Egypt and
Ethiopia for having called for this timely meeting.
Sweden is a long-standing supporter of an enhanced
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
14/18

15/06/2017

regional and subregional organizations in Africa. The
reasons for this commitment are many. Regional actors
have a better understanding of the issues at stake on the
ground; they are often more invested, and they carry
credibility at local levels. The African Union (AU) and
its regional partners can at times undertake operations
in working environments in which the United Nations
cannot and can often deploy quickly.
We therefore very much welcome the current
momentum and energy around the United NationsAfrican Union partnership agenda. The first-ever
United Nations-AU summit just a few weeks ago and
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
which was signed on that occasion represent very
positive developments.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
pursuant to resolution 2320 (2016) (S/2017/454). We
welcome the thorough work that underpins this report,
and I want to pay particular tribute to the joint nature of
the efforts that have characterized its drafting.
We now have concrete proposals and options for
closer cooperation with the AU, including the process
for mandating AU peace-support operations. This
will no doubt help us move forward towards ensuring
more predictable collaboration and accountability. We
also thank the African Union for providing us with
an update on the progress on its side, including the
communiqué from the AU Peace and Security Council
meeting of 30 May. In particular, we welcome updates
on what has been done to strengthen work within the
realm of human rights and conduct and discipline, as
well as plans for addressing the remaining gaps.
We commend once again the AU summit’s bold
decision on financing the African Union in an effort
to secure financing for peace in Africa, in line with
the recommendations made by President Kagame in his
report on AU reform.
We very much recognize the need for flexible,
predictable and sustainable funding of AU peace
operations, and we welcome the proposals pertaining
to financing contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. We look forward to continued discussions in
the Council on the various options and models, including
access to assessed United Nations contributions. Our
planned visit to Addis Ababa in September for the
annual consultations with the AU Peace and Security
Council would be an excellent opportunity to discuss
17-17103

15/06/2017

African Union

this matter further. We believe that the Peace Fund will
be a robust mechanism for cooperation and partnership.
We will consider channelling Swedish financial support
to the Peace Fund once it has been operationalized.
Moving forward on this agenda will require
substantial and sustained political investment from
the Security Council. While we are encouraged by the
commitment by the Secretary-General as well as by the
increased structure for cooperation at the Secretariat
level, it must now be matched by political engagement
from us as members of the Council. Let us utilize and
build upon the momentum we have.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to join others in expressing our deepest condolences
to our Chinese colleagues and friends on the tragedy
that took place in the kindergarten. Our thoughts and
prayers are with those affected.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this briefing. I would also like to welcome
the briefers and to thank the Secretary-General for
his personal dedication to strengthening the United
Nations-African Union (AU) partnership.
It is evident that over the past decade, especially
in recent years, the role of the relevant regional
arrangements in promoting peace and security has only
expanded. The engagement of the Economic Community
of West African States in the Gambian post-electoral
crisis is the most recent case in point. The decision of
the interested countries on the establishment of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) force represents
yet another practical regional action.
The United Nations should continue working on
building and enhancing its strategic partnership with
regional and subregional organizations on the African
continent, working in concert with them and using the
competitive advantages of each actor in peacekeeping
and conflict management. In this light we are encouraged
by the recent increased efforts of the Secretary-General
aimed at strengthening the cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU, particularly the signing
the joint United Nations-AU framework for enhancing
partnership in peace and security. Ukraine looks
forward to translating this document into reality.
Let me highlight several issues of the current United
Nations-AU cooperation that are worth considering in
the light of the relevant report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/454).

S/PV.7971

First, and we have to be honest with ourselves, the
United Nations has yet to succeed in taking timely and
effective preventive measures in response to situations
of tension that could possibly erupt into full-scale
conflicts or where the civilian population is endangered
and urgently requires protection. In this regard, we
commend the efforts of the African Union, which
should continue to act as a first responder to crises,
with the authorization of the Security Council.
Under such circumstances, it is important to
continue to make efforts to eliminate the shortcomings
of the AU peace support operations, in particular the
capability gaps in connection with uniformed personnel
and equipment. We believe that ensuring deployment,
readiness and increased performance requires collective
and coordinated actions by both the United Nations and
the African Union.
Secondly, it is crucial to ensure sustainable and
predictable financing of the AU operations authorized
by the Council. In this respect, the proposals presented
in the Secretary-General’s report give the Council
and the General Assembly a range a viable options
for consideration. Given the complexity of the
peacekeeping endeavour, we are convinced that there
can be no single approach that will fit all situations and
missions. We therefore support preserving a maximum
degree of flexibility in considering this issue for every
single mission.
Thirdly, it is well known that taking military
measures to counter terrorism is the primary
responsibility of national Governments and the relevant
regional arrangements. The United Nations should
therefore continue to provide the necessary advice and
expertise in support of the relevant regional endeavours,
including the aforementioned G-5 Sahel force. It is also
important to ensure proper coordination among United
Nations missions and such initiatives in order to avoid
any overlap.
Last but not least, in keeping with the people-centered
approach to United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities, we believe that the protection
of civilians is a decisive factor for the success of the AU
operations endorsed by the Council. It is clear also that
there can be no peace without human rights. Thus this
component should become an indispensable element of
all AU operations authorized by the Security Council,
with proper adherence to the United Nations human
rights due-diligence policy.

17-1710315/18

S/PV.7971

African Union

Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): First, on behalf of
the delegation of Kazakhstan, may I offer our sincerest
condolences to our Chinese colleagues in connection
with the tragedy in Jiangsu province and extend our
sympathy to the families of the victims.
Kazakhstan expresses its appreciation to the
Bolivian presidency for having convened this
meeting as well as to our briefers, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Chergui; the African Union High Representative for the
Peace Fund, Mr. Kaberuka; and the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Viotti, for their insights
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU).
My delegation would like to make the following
observations and recommendations.
Kazakhstan, as an observer of the African Union,
is deeply committed to consolidating a comprehensive
United Nations-AU partnership on issues of peace
and security in Africa. The first United Nations-AU
annual conference, on 19 April, with the participation
of Secretary-General Guterres and AU Commission
Chair Mahamat, has been a milestone in enhancing the
United Nations-AU strategic partnership.
Despite the significant progress made, more could
be achieved in terms of United Nations-AU cooperation
through well-formulated common strategic objectives
and a clear division of responsibilities premised on
shared assessments. These would mutually reinforce
and complement the actions of the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council.
Lessons learned and best practices should be
shared regularly through more frequent Secretariat-tosecretariat exchanges so as to prevent redundancies in
and duplication of their tasks.
The aspirations for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Secretary-General’s new agenda for
peace, as well as Africa’s Agenda 2063 and the African
Union (AU) project Silencing the Guns by 2020, which
aims to achieve a conflict-free continent by that date,
are significant. They can be achieved through greater
military, diplomatic and development partnerships,
as well as North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation. That is critical for actions by the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union and
for their respective resolutions.
16/18

15/06/2017

Early warning signals, timely United Nations-AU
preventive diplomacy, mediation to defuse potential
crisis situations, and rapid response teams will achieve
much. That falls within Kazakhstan’s purview and its
proposal for a conflict-free world by the United Nations
centenary, in 2045.
We share the view that regional actors, which
are assuming greater ownership of development in
their respective regions, have a deeper understanding
of the dynamics and root causes of conflict, and
contribute immeasurably to global peace, security
and development.
Without sufficient financial and capacity-building
support to African Union, the ability to deliver will not
match the expected aspirations and determinations.
The new phase of the United Nations-AU partnership
should consider enhanced support for AU peace
support operations, in accordance with the resolution
2320 (2016).
Hybrid missions of the United Nations and the
AU, or local regional forces have proven to be more
effective due to the familiarity of African soldiers with
their own terrain, local conditions and tactics of armed
groups. Good examples include the capacity of the
Multinational Joint Task Force to combat Boko Haram,
and the African Union Mission in Somalia, which is
fighting Al-Shabaab in that country. Funding AU forces
is therefore critical.
We also see fine examples of how, with the best
support of the African Union, several groups of
neighbouring countries play important roles. That
includes the Group of Five Sahel — Burkina Faso,
Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger— member States
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and countries
of the Economic Community of West African States,
which averted the presidential crisis in The Gambia.
Kazakhstan welcomes the decision of African
Union to extend the mandate of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army for another 12 months, until 22 May
2018, to strengthen coordination mechanisms for crossborder operations.
Finally, Kazakhstan will do its utmost to strengthen
United Nations-AU cooperation to respond effectively
to emerging threats in the African region and beyond.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would also like to join
previous speakers and express our condolences to the
17-17103

15/06/2017

African Union

S/PV.7971

people of China with respect to the tragic incident in the
kindergarten in Jiangsu, in the eastern part of China.

during the informal interactive dialogue following
this meeting.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) on peace and security, which
is particularly timely after the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2320 (2016), last November. I also thank
Ms. Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Chergui, AU Commissioner for Peace and Security,
and Mr. Kaberuka, AU High Representative for the
Peace Fund, for their effective briefings.

Japan believes that the United Nations-AU
partnership is about empowering African States
and their peoples to play an active role in their own
security. Japan, both as a Council member and as a
major contributor to the United Nations peacekeeping
budget, is very pleased to join discussions on continued
collaboration that employs the comparative advantages
of both organizations.

Japan takes note of the reports from both the
Secretary-General (S/2017/454) and the AU. They
provide a useful basis for exploring our expanded
partnership, as well as the particular tools that AU
peace support operations offer for the maintenance of
peace and security.
A major point that emerges from both reports is
the AU’s comparative advantage in deploying as a first
responder and in challenging environments. Further
discussion is needed both at the Council and within
the AU on the most effective role for peace support
operations, particularly on the division of labour. Green
and Blue Helmets have different roles, and it may not be
efficient to focus on enabling peace support operations
to replicate multidimensional United Nations tasks.
The Secretary-General’s report outlines a new
model of joint financing of a jointly developed budget,
as well as a joint assessment and planning process. We
also see similar proposals in the AU report. We believe
that greater clarity is needed on those models from the
AU, with support from the United Nations Secretariat
as necessary, particularly with regard to joint budgeting
and accountability. We underline the Chef de Cabinet’s
point on the crucial role of the General Assembly on
financial matters.
We should avoid peace support operations
discussions becoming overly centred on their financial
aspects. Financing alone cannot solve challenges facing
peace support operations, given the limited personnel
to carry out tasks, including at the AU Peace and
Security Department.
In order to deepen our understanding of the current
situation, we would like to hear more about ongoing
efforts and political commitment on the implementation
of the Kigali decision regarding the AU Peace Fund

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
At the outset, Bolivia joins in the expressions of
condolences with the respect to the tragic incident that
took place in China. Our solidarity and thoughts are
with the families of the victims. We wish a speedy
recovery to the injured.
Bolivia would like to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, Mr. Chergui, and the African Union
High Representative for the Peace Fund, Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, for their briefings. Our gratitude also goes
to the delegations of Egypt, Ethiopia and Senegal for
having taken the initiative to convene this meeting.
Bolivia pays tribute to the work of the President
of the African Union Commission and the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for the outcome of the
first annual African Union-United Nations conference,
which took place in April. We encourage its commitment
to strengthen dialogue and improve cooperation and
coordination mechanisms through common objectives.
The African Union has responded in a timely way to
the new threats to peace and security in Africa. Clear
examples of this fact are the 2007 deployment of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, as well as the backing provided to
the Lake Chad Basin Commission as they set up the
Multinational Joint Task Force to fight Boko Haram.
Some of the achievements that I referred to have
allowed the United Nations the African Union to forge
a strategic partnership that, over the past 15 years, has
incorporated innovative and fresh ways of working,
particularly when it comes to peace operations. Peace
operations deployed by the United Nations in Africa are

17-1710317/18

S/PV.7971

African Union

15/06/2017

a key instrument in the ongoing quest for the embedding
of peace and security on a permanent basis in those
countries that currently face serious political and social
crises. They are also a useful tool when dealing with
threats such as humanitarian crises and terrorism.

urge donor countries and the international community
in general to continue to contribute actively and to
fulfil the commitments they have undertaken in the
framework of cooperation and under resolution 2320
(2016).

Bolivia would like to underscore the rising level of
strategic partnership between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
Both organs are committed to developing a structured
and balanced relationship while also strengthening
partnership through mutual support and consistent
technical support, with respect to political issues as
well as peacekeeping operations. We hope that the
meeting scheduled for September will be successful.

Bolivia believes that the success of peacekeeping
operations depends on close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, and on the role
that has been conferred, inter alia, on women in such
processes. We stress the need for both organizations
to ensure that women and the gender perspective are
fully integrated into all activities related to peace
and security.

The Council stressed that joint consultative analysis
and planning with the United Nations are crucial in
formulating joint recommendations on the reach of
mission resources. Resolution 2320 (2016) was adopted
to that end, by which the Security Council expressed
its willingness to consider options in response to the
African Union’s own proposal to finance 25 per cent of
the cost of such operations by 2020. Such a mobilization
of resources would make a significant contribution to
the African Union peace and security programme. We

18/18

Finally, Bolivia believes it important to give the
African Union a more proactive role in taking its own
decisions on issues of concern to it, in full respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of all its members. It is also essential to respect the
principle of African solutions for African problems if
we are to succeed in our common endeavours.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

17-17103
