A /69/PV.76

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

76th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 23 December 2014, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Emiliou
(Cyprus), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Agenda item 125
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/69/560)

The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/69/L.47. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt it?
Draft decision A/69/L.47 was adopted (decision
69/415).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 125.
Agenda item 126
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

Letter from the President of the Security Council
(A/69/679)

Letters from the Secretary-General (A/69/559
and A/69/631)

Draft decision (A/69/L.47)

Letter from the President of the Security Council
(A/69/678)

The Acting President: In connection with agenda
item 125, the Assembly has before it document
A/69/560, in which the Secretary-General transmits a
letter dated 1 October 2014 from Judge Vagn Joensen,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda; document A/69/679, in which the President of
the Security Council draws the attention of the President
of the General Assembly to the text of Security Council
resolution 2194 (2014) of 18 December 2014; and,
finally, a draft decision issued as document A/69/L.47.

Draft decision (A/69/L.48)
The Acting President: In connection with agenda
item 126, the Assembly has before it documents
A/69/559 and A/69/631, in which the Secretary-General
transmits letters dated 1 October and 25 November 2014,
respectively, from Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
document A/69/678, in which the President of the
Security Council draws the attention of the President of
the General Assembly to the text of Council resolution

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-71546 (E)

*1471546*

A/69/PV.76

2193 (2014) of 18 December 2014; and a draft decision,
issued as document A/69/L.48.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/69/L.48. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt it?
Draft decision A/69/L.48 was adopted (decision
69/416).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 126.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/69/L.49)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 69 and
its sub-items (a) to (c) at its 69th and 70th plenary
meetings, on 11 and 12 December 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia to introduce
draft resolution A/69/L.49, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”.
Mrs. Sabja (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke
in Spanish): I have the honour to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
in order to introduce the draft resolution contained
in document A/69/L.49, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”.
At the outset, I would like to express the Group of 77
and China’s thanks to Mr. Omar Rabi, of the Permanent
Mission of Morocco, who successfully coordinated
the negotiations on the draft resolution. I am pleased
to announce that Germany, Japan and Slovenia have
become sponsors of the draft resolution.
In introducing today’s draft resolution, the Group of
77 and China reaffirms the importance of international
cooperation in support of the efforts of affected States
to deal with natural disasters at every stage, particularly
those relating to preparedness, response and the early
2/3

23/12/2014

stages of recovery. It also recognizes that affected
States have the primary responsibility for the initiation,
organization, coordination and implementation
of humanitarian assistance within their territory,
and highlights the importance of the humanitarian
principles laid out in resolution 46/182.
The draft resolution also recognizes the clear
relationship between emergency response, rehabilitation
and development, and reaffirms that in order to ensure
a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and
development, emergency assistance must be provided
in ways that will be supportive of short- and mediumterm recovery leading to long-term development, and
that certain emergency measures should be seen as a
step towards sustainable development.
Given the fact that the Hyogo Framework for Action
will end in 2015, the draft resolution calls on Member
States, the United Nations system and other relevant
humanitarian and development actors to accelerate
the Framework’s full implementation, in particular
those commitments related to assistance for developing
countries that are prone to natural disasters, and in
that regard it encourages States, the United Nations
system and all stakeholders to continue to engage in
consultations on the successor to the Framework,
culminating at the Third World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction, to be held in Japan from 14 to 18 March
2015.
Draft resolution A/69/L.49 is a result of the
consensus reached through five informal consultation
sessions held over the past few days; it includes most of
the proposals made during the consultations. The Group
of 77 and China has made a concerted effort to take
into account the concerns of other groups and Member
States. This year’s text of the draft resolution contains
new elements based on the recommendations made in
the Secretary-General’s report (A/69/303), noting the
determination of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, as expressed in its decision 2/CP.18, to adopt a
protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome
with legal force under the Convention applicable to all
parties at its twenty-first session, to be held in Paris
from 30 November to 11 December 2015, and for it to
come into effect and be implemented from 2020.
The text of the draft resolution also emphasizes
the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian
assistance, and reaffirms, in situations in which
military capacity and assets are used as a last resort to
14-71546

23/12/2014

support the implementation of humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters, the need for their use
to be undertaken with the consent of the affected State
and in conformity with international law, including
international humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian
principles.
The text also notes with concern that persons
with disabilities, older persons, women and children
are disproportionately affected in natural disasters. It
also encourages innovative practices that draw on the
knowledge of people affected by natural disasters to
develop locally sustainable solutions and to produce
lifesaving items locally, with minimal logistical and
infrastructure implications.
The draft resolutions also urges Member States,
the United Nations and humanitarian and development
organizations to prioritize risk management and shift
towards an anticipatory approach to humanitarian crises
in order to prevent and reduce human suffering and
economic losses. It also encourages the United Nations
and humanitarian and development organizations to
work towards a common understanding of underlying
risks, clarify roles and responsibilities according to their
respective mandates and establish joint objectives and
programmes to strengthen coordination and coherence
among short-, medium- and long-term activities.
In closing, I would like to express the gratitude of
the Group of 77 and China for the spirit of cooperation
and collaboration exhibited by all of our members in
the course of the informal consultations that allowed us
to reach agreement on the important topics addressed
in this draft resolution. The Group would also like to
thank all of the Member States that are sponsoring this
important draft resolution. We hope that that it will
once again be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.49,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/69/L.49. the following countries have

A/69/PV.76

become sponsors: Finland, Italy, Mexico, the Russian
Federation and Turkey.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.49?
Draft resolution A/69/L.49 was adopted (resolution
69/243).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 69.
I shall now suspend the meeting in view of the fact
that the Fifth Committee has not yet completed its work.
The plenary will resume following the adjournment of
the Fifth Committee.
The meeting was suspended at 4.25 p.m.
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Vice-President, took the Chair.

(Pakistan),

The meeting was resumed at 6.20 p.m.
The Acting President: Members will recall that at
the 65th plenary meeting on 8 December, the General
Assembly agreed to postpone the date of recess of the
sixty-ninth session to Wednesday 24 December.
In the light of the work still to be completed in
the Fifth Committee, I would like to propose to the
Assembly that the date of recess of the current session
now be further postponed to Wednesday 31 December.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to further
postpone the date of recess of the sixty-ninth session to
Wednesday 13 December?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should also like to consult
members regarding an extension of the work of the
Fifth Committee. Members will recall that at the 65th
plenary meeting on 8 December, the General Assembly
agreed to extend the work of the Fifth Committee
until Tuesday 23 December. However, I have been
informed by the Chair of the Fifth Committee that
the Committee requests an extension of its work to
Wednesday 31 December, so as to facilitate the reaching
of consensus on the pending draft resolutions before
it. May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Fifth Committee until
Wednesday 31 December?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

14-715463/3
