UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

2109th

MEETING:

NEW

12 JANuARIJ.~!%#BR~RY

MAR2 3 1982

YORK

I-A-.-.
.
CL I tV;m
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2109) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of
Foreign Affairs of Democratic Kampuchea to the President of the Security
Council (S/13003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
1

WPV.2109

Symbols”of &Ttil”rkd I’$a!io~s documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document. :“p:,” 4’ :-’ .;;‘,...<
‘A,
.> .a>i I :
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OJic~allRec&s of the Security Council The date of the document
indidates ih6 st$$ement -in %&h ir abpears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

b

2109thMEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 12 J+mry
President:

Mr. Donald 0. MILLS

(Jamaica).

1979, at 3 p.m.

Koh (Singapore), Mr. Sahloul (Sudan) and Mr. Guna-Kasem
(ThaiIan@ took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

3. .The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/13022, which contains the text of a
draft resolution sponsored by China.
4. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, the delegation
of Kuwait would like at the outset to extend to you its
warmest congratulations upon your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of January. It is a
difticult month, but you have so far conducted the Council’s business with noble skill and efficiency. You and I have
worked together in various organs of the United Nations for
many years-in the Group of 77, the Committee of the
Whole and the-Group of Non-Aligned Countries-and I
have come to appreciate your dedication and devotion very
much. We pledge our utmost co-operation under your
guidance.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2109)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy
Prime Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs of
Democratic Kampuchea to the President of the
Security Council (S/13003)
l?ze meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. I should like also to welcome the new members of the
Council-your
country, Jamaica, and Bangladesh, Norway, Portugal and Zambia. My delegation is certain that we
shall benefit significantly, nay enormously, from their
contribution and wisdom. Our sense of loss at the absence
of the outgoing members of the Council is adequately made
up for by the presence of the new members.

IlIe agenda was adopted.
Telegram dated 3 January 1979 from the Deputy Prime
Miier
in charge of Foreign Affairs of Democratic Kampuchea to the President of the Secmity Council (S/13003)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2108th meeting, I invite the delegation of
Democratic Kampuchea to be seated at the Council table. I
invite the representatives of Cuba and Viet Nam to take the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. My Government supported the request for convening
the Council to consider the situation in Cambodia, as we
believe that it is the right of every Member State to seek
action from the Council whenever it feels that it is in need of
such action. Furthermore, my Government also believes
that the Council should meet when conditions in any region
warrant such meetings. It would have been an abdication of
responsibility on the part of the Council had it not met to
consider the situation in Cambodia. It would have given
additional ammunition to those self-appointed critics who
have no other advice to offer the United Nations except
what amounts to ridicule of the effectiveness of the Organization and undermining of its work.

At the invitation of the President, the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea took a place at the Council table; Mr. Roa
Kouri (Cuba) and Mr. Ha Van Luu (Viet Nam) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, the Sudan and Thailand in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives I have
just mentioned to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

7. Now that the Council is seized of the situation in Cambodia, the question is, what can it do? The fact that the
Council is meeting is important in the sensethat it allows the
parties concerned to ventilate their grievances, to present
their views and to seek collective advice. This in itself is a
step in the right direction. Yesterday’s debate was important, as it revealed information which we had not had before
because of the confusion in the region.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zachmann (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. Ha& (Hungary), Mr. Anwar
Sani (Indonesia), Tan Sri Zaiton Ibrahim (Malaysia), Mr.
1

integrity, political independence and non-aligned character
of Cambodia is essential for the achievement of longawaited stability in the region. My delegation is willing to
assist in any efforts along these lines.

8. It is not the intention of my delegation to defend any
side, but it is obvious from the statements made that the
situation is fraught with danger that threatens the stability
of that region. The situation in the area brings home to us
the necessity of resorting to the Council before the fire rages
out of control. In the present situation, it is obvious that the
Council is being called upon to act at the moment of despair. In desperate circumstances the scope for action by the
Council becomes limited, and consequently the United
Nations receives the blame through no fault of its own.

14. Mr. &CARD (Norway): Mr. President, I should like
to extend to you our sincere congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, and on Jamaica’s election to the Council. We are
convinced that our very close cooperation in other organs
of the United Nations will continue and be further strengthened as a result of our joint participation in the work of the
Council. My congratulations also go to the other new
members of the Council.

9. What can we do in these circumstances? My delegation
believes that there are principles embodied in the Charter
which should be emphatically reaffirmed.
10. First, my Government is against interference by any
State in the domestic affairs of any other State. This is the
quintessence of the Charter, and it is the basis of international law. No country should be allowed to interfere in
the domestic affairs of others, neighbours or far-away, allies
or potential adversaries. If such interference is not checked,
it is bound to create tension with incalculable consequences.

15. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
previous speakers for their kind words of welcome to my
country upon our election to this highly important body of
the United Nations. I can assure all members of my delegation’s full and close cooperation during the next two years.
16. It must be deplored that the troubled region of IndoChina has once more been subjected to war and human
suffering. This region is in particular need of reconstruction
and reconciliation between countries and peoples. This fact
has been recognized by the whole international community,
including Norway, which has felt committed to assist in this
enormous and pressing task of reconstruction. The Norwegian Government has therefore witnessed the recent
developments in Indo-China with increasing concern.

11. Secondly, my delegation believes that it is important
to reaflirm the obligation of Member States in accordance
with the Charter to resolve disputes by peaceful means. It is
not acceptable that Member States should resort to force
when they feel that, through the use of superior force, they
can wring concessions and obtain territorial gains. The
territorial integrity of States, as well as their sovereignty and
political independence, must be reafftrmed. It is true that we
do not live in an ideal world and that States maintain their
independence by means of armed deterrence, but it is also
true that the Charter and the Security Council have a moral
and political force which we cannot overlook simply
because some of us are armed to the teeth and find protection in this fact. My delegation believes that the foreigninspired Lon No1 Government installed in Cambodia in
1970 collapsed because of the incisive effect of the isolation
which the non-aligned countries were able to impose on it,
notwithstanding the superior military force of its backers.

17. The situation that we are facing in Kampuchea today
is an example of armed conflict and foreign intervention as
well as interference in the internal affairs of another country
in violation of fundamental principles of the Charter. The
present conflict also has repercussions which may influence
peace and stability beyond the region itself.
18. The Norwegian Government and public opinion in
Norway have expressed strong objections to the serious
violations of human rights committed by the Pal Pot 3
Government. However, the domestic policies of that
Government cannot-we repeat, cannot-justify the actions
of Viet Nam over the last days and weeks. The Norwegian ,
Government firmly rejects the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any ‘,
State and wishes to emphasize the obligation of Member
States under the Charter to resolve disputes by peaceful
means.

12. Thirdly, in the situation in Kampuchea, it is essential
to call upon all foreign elements involved scrupulously to
observe an immediate cease-fire and to withdraw forthwith
to the areas they were in before the eruption of armed
clashes. It is not in line with the reality of the situation to
assume that tranquillity is prevalent inside Cambodia.
There are elements fighting each other. There is foreign
interference from identified and unidentified elements in the
situation in Cambodia and, as long as those foreign elements have a hand in the Cambodian problem, the situation
will remain explosive.

19. It is imperative that peace, security and stability
should be restored to the region in accordance with the
principles of the United Nations. This requires an immediate end to hostilities, the withdrawal of all foreign forces
and strict observance of the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of another country.

13. The immediate concern of the Council should be the
creation of an atmosphere conducive to stability in the
region. This cannot be brought about by the unnecessary
exchange of polemics and acrimony. We have not come
here to participate in a competition, to score points. The
stability of the region is irreconcilable with power politics.
That luckless and hapless region, which has not witnessed
stability for the last three decades, deserves a more serious
approach than the one accorded to it so far. My delegation
believes that preservation of the sovereignty, territorial

20. Mr. I-IULINSKq (Czechoslovakia) (inrerprerutionfic~
R&m): In the course of the unofIicial consultations among
members of the Council, Czechoslovakia already warned of
the danger of involving the United Nations in an attempt to
intemationalize the internal conflict being experienced by one
of its Member States, in order to impose upon that State,
through .the intermediary of the Council, a solution to its
2

problem and to serve the purposes of the Chinese hegemon&s. The events that are taking place in Kampuchea are a ’
purely internal affair of that country.

express our genuine support for the just struggle of the
Khmer people and to wish for it the speedy fulfilment of its
cherished dream of living in a tranquil and happy country
and proceeding with the reconstruction of its economy and
the establishment of friendly relations with all countries of
South-Past Asia and the entire world. In a telegram from
the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia and President of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic, Mr. Gustav H&k, and the Prime Minister of the
Government of the Republic, Mr. Lubomir Strougal,
addressed to the President of the People’s Revolutionary
Council of the United Front for the National Salvation of
Kampuchea, Mr. Heng Samrin, it is stated:

21. The Khmer people did not acquiesce in the antipeople policies of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime and rose up
under the leadership of their genuine representative, the
United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea.
The declarations made by the United Front on 2 and 26
December 1978 have been published as document S/13006.
We have been informed that the people of Kampuchea have
now proceeded to a final offensive against the barbaric
r&me, which practised a policy of mass annihilation of the
population thus threatening the very existence and the
future of the entire Khmer people.

“The Czechoslovak people was glad to hear of the
creation of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea. Together with you and all progressive forces in
the world we rejoice in the victory which was scored by
the Kampuchean people for liberty, progress, democracy
and international solidarity and also at the fact that the
Kampuchean people have now become the true masters
of Kampuchea.

22. The documents and the information which are available to members of the Council adequately reflect the tragic
plight of Kampuchea in recent years. But those documents
and that information also make it clear that this is an
internal crisis whose solution is not within the purview of
the Council. It is the Khmer people alone who can solve this
crisis and who are in fact solving it. The telegram from the
President of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea which was addressed to the President of the Security
Council [S/13023, annex I. once again confirmed that fact.
The Pol Pot regime was overthrown on 7 January and the
People’s Revolutionary Council started to exercise effective
control over the entire territory of the country. Conseuently, as the telegram emphasizes,

“On behalf of the Czechoslovak people and Govemment, we would warmly congratulate the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, the only legal repreentative of Kampuchea, and the entire people of your
country on this important event of historic signifcance.
“We are convinced that the restoration of democratic
rights and the liberty of the Kampuchean people in an
independent and democratic country will make a positive contribution to the further deepening of friendship,
co-operation and good-neighbourly relations between
the countries of Indo-China and other countries in
South-East Asia and will help to consolidate peace and
stability in that part of the world.

“any meeting of the Security Council for the purpose
of hearing the representative of the Pol Pot clique or, in
other words, of the non-existent government constitutes
flagrant intervention in the internal affairs of the Kampuchean people and a violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations*‘.
The Czechoslovak delegation shares that view.

“It is our belief that the traditional links of friendship
between our countries will be further strengthened for
the well-being of our peoples and in the interests of
progress and peace throughout the world.

23.. At the same time, the Czechoslovak delegation would
like to express its conviction that the Security Council
should protect itself from any slanderous fabrications by
the representatives of the People’s Republic of China
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The people of
Kampuchea have been able to distinguish their genuine
friends and allies from those who, from outside, strengthen
that r&me which is at variance with the interests of its own
people. The Khmer people must surely be put on its guard
also by the fact that the same foreign militaristic circles that
have involved it in a bloody conflict, that for many years
bombed Kampuchean cities and villages and brought death
and tragedy into the streets of Phnom Penh, are now showing concern about the independence of the Khmer State. Is
it not an eloquent fact that those who so often have shown
alleged concern for human rights are now in agreement with
those who became accomplices in the crimes of the regime
of Pal Pot against the people of Kampuchea? No, the
Khmer people will never forget the countless graves; it will
not forget the lessons of history, nor will it be able to forget
those who attempted to stem its national liberation
movement.
^
24. I should like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
delegation of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, to

“We ask you, therefore, to accept our wishes for
further successesin your struggle to realize the age-old
dreams of the Kampuchean people as expressed in the
programme of the United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea.”
25. At the end of my statement I cannot refrain, albeit
briefly, from responding to the vicious attacks of the representative of the People’s Republic of China. His statement is
part and parcel of the anti-Vietnamese campaign and the
provocations of the Government of the People’s Republic
of China against socialist Viet Nam.
26. As can be seen from the statement of the suokesman
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Socialisi Republic
of Viet Nam dated 7 January 1979 [S/13009, rmnex], the
blatant campaign of Peking against the heroic people of
Viet Nam and against its external security is becoming more
and more dangerous in nature. The concentrations of Chinese troops near the Vietnamese frontier, border provocations, territorial claims on Viet Nam, slanderous stereotyped
3

exercises in persecuting persons of Chinese origin-“hua
ts’ao”- and the direct threats to the effect that “‘there is a
limit to Chinese patience”-all
these facts speak for
themselves.

valuable work. Before leaving, he once again conducted the
proceedings of the Council with his customary mastery.
32. I should like at the beginning of this new year to
express my best wishes for peace and prosperity to one and
all.

27. It was at the behest of Peking that the former Phnom
Penh leadership started to stir up conflicts on the Viet
Nam-Kampuchea frontier. For approximately three years,
China and its tens of thousands of “advisers” have done
everything to remodel Kampuchea along Maoist lines and
turn it into a spring-board for provocations against neighbourini States, primarily socialist Viet Nam. Behind the
executioners of Kampuchea, now overthrown by their own
people, stood the leaders of the People’s Republic of China
with their nationalistic, chauvinistic and expansionist policy
in Asia. Since they carried out one of their usual adventures
in Cambodia and were defeated, they are now trying to
confuse public opinion by imposing this debate on the
Security Council and making references to the Vietnamese
people. However, some eminent Chinese have grasped the
deleterious effects of that policy for China itself. In the
middle of the 19% the former President of the People’s
Republic of China, Liu Chao Tchi, warned:

33. The Security Council has before it a question of particular importance and undeniable gravity. Its various aspects
and its implications over the short and long term inight first
seem forbiddingly complex, and truly it ,is a very complex
situation. However, in France’s opinion, a consideration of
the situation yields a rather simple and clear response, and
that is why my statement will be brief.
34. At the very beginning of the conflict between Viet
Nam and Cambodia, towards the end of 1977, France made
known that it deplored the hostilities between two peoples
with which it had enjoyed long-standing ties of friendship.
We considered that only a peaceful settlement of their
differences would make it possible for their peoples to
tackle their essential tasks and turn their attention to their
economic and social well-being. Now, a year later, it is with
sadness that we note the outcome of the situation which,
from the very beginning, we thought was fraught ‘tith
major perils, both for Vief Nam and Cambodia as well as
for the whole of South-East Asia.
2

“If one follows the bourgeois-national% concept of
the nation . . ., opposes the Soviet Union instead of
uniting with it, opposes the people’s democracies instead
of uniting with them, opposes the communists, the proletariat and the people’s democratic forces in all countries instead of uniting with them, opposes the national
liberation movements . . ‘ instead of uniting with all the
oppressed nations . . ., then one will of course unite with
.the imperialists . . ., will of course line up with the
.imperialists . . ., will of course fail to achieve national
liberation, will never accomplish anything in the cause of
socialism, will of course make one’s own nation prey to
the deception and aggression of the imperialists, with the
result that that nation will lose its independence and
become a colony of the imperialists.“’

35. On a number of occasions and specifically in the
United Nations we have condemned the excessesof the
ruling team at Phnom Penh and their frantic efforts to force
Cambodia into the mould they had created. The Council of
Ministers of the French Republic, meeting on 10 January,
has evoked once more the suffering endured by the Camb&
dian people and expressed the sympathy of the French
people in that regard.
36. For all that, bearing in mind those excessesand that
suffering and having heard the statement by Prince Sihanouk, whose patriotism has been recognized by everyone,
we cannot condone occupation of a sovereign country by a
foreign Power. The notion that because a rbgime is detestable foreign intervention is justified and forcible overthro\F!
is legitimate is extremely dangerous. That could ultimately
jeopardize the very maintenance of, international law and
order and make the continued existence of various r&imes
dependent on the judgement of their neighbours. It is
important for the Council to affirm, without any ambiguity,
that it cannot condone the occupation of a sovereign couni
try by a foreign Power.

28. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretutionfiom bred):
First of all I should like to bid you, Mr. President, a very
warm welcome to the Council. Jamaica and France have
long enjoyed very good relations. Although new here, you
have been very well known to all of us for a long time. By
chance you have been called upon immediately to assume
the presidency of the Council, and I welcome that fact. I am
aware of your great experience in United Nations affairs
and, therefore, am confident that you will conduct our
Mpioceedings expertly.
29, My welcome goes also to Bangladesh, Norway, Portugal and Zambia, countries which are all friends of France,
and I welcome their presence here in the Council.

37. Our friendship with all the peoples of the area and our
concern for their future prompt us to conclude that it is
indispensable for Kampuchea to keep its territorial integrity
under a genuinely independent, democratic and peaceful
rtgime; and we hope that the Council will take a clear stand
on that point. It is not only the well-being of the Cambodian
people-which has already been so sorely tried--that is at
issue; the stability of South-East Asia is at stake. There can
be no genuine peace and cooperation iimong the nine
States in the area if the fate of one of them arouscs suspicion
and fear and if we stray from the promising course of action
opened by the talks which h&e be&m between the Prime
Minister of Viet Nam and the leaders of the Association of

30. To those who have left us-Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany, India, Mauritius and Venezuela-I
wish to say how much we have valued their co-operation
over the past two years that were full of important events.
31. I cannot conclude without paying a tribute to my
friend and colleague Baron Riidiger von Wechmar for his
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

4

South-East Asian Nations. Above and beyond the problem
before them, it is this concern which France invites the
members of the Council to bear in mind when they determine their position on this matter.

however subtle their form, the right to control the national
destiny without pressure or intimidation, freedom to retain
independence of judgement, and the fostering of coexistence amongst all nations, irrespective of ideologies or socioeconomic systems. The end objective is the creation of that
necessary environment of peace in which people can harness all available resources to combat the scourges of poverty, hunger, disease and illiteracy, so that economic
freedom may be secured without sacrificing political freedom and economic growth and without jeopardizing social
justice. In the final analysis, Bangladesh believes that it is
the collective task of our world community to use its combined national power to create and not to destroy, to enter
into dialogue rather than into confrontation, to build peace
and to abjure war, and to advance human welfare instead of
aggravating human suffering.

38. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, your dtbut in this august body has been a baptism by fire, not only
as a new member but also in your capacity as President of
the Council. You have our fullest sympathy and our wholehearted support. In the brief time that you have served as
President, you have already aflirmed your leadership abilities, diplomatic skills and a wealth of proven qualities
which, I am confident, will enable the Council effectively
and successfully to fulfil its tasks in the course of this month.
Bangladesh is particularly proud to serve under the leadership of a representative of Jamaica, a country with which we
have the friendliest relations and the closest identity of
interests as fellow members of the non-aligned group and
the Commonwealth and as developing States.

43. It is in this spirit that I now turn to the item on our
agenda. The Government of Bangladesh supported the
inscription of the item regarding the consideration of the
situation in Kampuchea, in keeping with our stand of principle that every Member State which claims that it faces a
situation likely to endanger peace and security has the
inherent right to be given a hearing and that the Council, in
keeping with its mandate under the Charter, has a clear
responsibility to examine the question. We also believe that
discussion in the Council provides that necessary safetyvalve that would encourage defusion rather than exacerbation of tension.

39. I wish to thank you and the other members for the
warm welcome accorded to me and to the members of my
delegation. We sincerely reciprocate the sentiments and
hopes that have been expressed. I consider it a great honour
and privilege to work in close association with the estab
liihed members of the Council whose experience and advice
will be of immense benefit to us. I welcome also the opportunity of working in close concert with the newly elected
members, who, we believe, will add enormously to the
effectiveness of this body in its deliberations.

44. Bangladesh has viewed with the utmost dismay the
disturbing events that have unfolded in Viet Nam and in
Kampuchea. We have listened with the closest attention to
the statements that have been made in the Council by
parties directly concerned, and our sense of concern and
grief over these developments has been compounded, ashas
also our appreciation of the fact that the situation is indeed
fraught with danger to international peace and security.

40. Bangladesh is immensely proud of this opportunity to
serve in the Council. We are equally conscious of the heavy
responsibility that has befallen us. We are firmly resolved to
contribute to our utmost and to spare no efforts, in a spirit
of constructive co-operation, in the furtherance of our
work. It is our belief that it is only in an atmosphere of
harmony, flexibility and mutual restraint that our efforts
can be most productive and that our active concern should
be tempered by moderation and decorum in language.

45. This is so because Bangladesh has the closest of relationships and an identity that binds it with the peoples of
both Kampuchea and Viet Nam. We are Asian neighbours,
bound by numerous ties of history, culture, geography, and
by the common hopes, fears, aspirations and expectations
of our peoples. Not the least of these bonds is our shared
experience of numerous economic adversities that we must
strive to overcome. We are all developing countries faced
with the urgent task of national reconstruction and rehabilitation that has remained a legacy of our struggle for
nationai liberation and genuine independence. We are all
politically affiliated as fellow members of the non-aligned
movement seeking an independent path to national selfexpression and a constructive role in the world comity of
nations For the people of Bangladesh, this senseof identity
and friendship is heightened not only by our close geographical proximity but also by a universal regard for the
courage and determination displayed by the peoples of
Kampuchea and Viet Nam in their fight to free themselves
from foreign bondage and intervention. The leaders of
those countries in their protracted fight for liberation have
long been revered persons for the people of Bangladesh and
an example to which we have pointed with pride.

41. Bangladesh sought membership of the Council because of our confirmed belief not only that the United
Nations serves,in particular, the interests of smaller nations
such as our own, but also that the latter have a duty and
responsibility to contribute actively to the promotion and
furtherance of its objectives: the resolution of conflicts by
peaceful means; the achievement of a disarmed world, free
from domination and interference; the elimination of colonialism and racial discrimination in all its manifestations;
the acceleration of social and economic well-being in a new
international economic order; the promotion of elemental
human rights and respect for the rule of law.
42. President Ziaur Rahman has repeatedly affirmed that
adherence to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations is not merely an article enshrined in our
Constitution, but a fundamental article of faith of the
Government and people of Bangladesh; a crucial comerstone of our policy is strict adherence to the principles of
non-alignment. A cardinal imperative is to ensure that sovereignty and genuine freedom of action will not be compromised by external interference from any source whatsoever. We have also placed particular emphasis on principles
underscoring freedom from subjugation and exploitation,

46. Unfortunately, however, the travail of conflict and
war seems to continue to haunt this area, which only a short
5

~

from interfering in each other’s internal affairs, so as to
create the necessary conditions for the restoration of the
peace, security and stability of the countries of the ‘region
and the integrity of all frontiers; fifthly, it must encpurage
the resumption of negotiations between the parties for the
peaceful settlement of any existing disputes between them,
on the basis of sovereign equality, mutual understanding
and respect; sixthly, it must request that, as early as possible,
the Secretary-General should submit a report to the Council on the implementation of the resolution; finally, it must
decide to remain seized of the question.

time ago we had occasion to hail as a region free of strife.
Indeed, in the past couple of years there appeared to be a
feeling that the whole region of South and South-East Asia
was entering a new era of relative calm in which its people
could revert to the more urgent task of economic reconstruction and national development. Recent events have
once again renewed fears of a new potential for continuing
conflict and the embroilment of outside Powers, with
serious
consequences for the whole of Asia.
47. In touching on the recent events afflicting this region,
it is not our intention or inclination to point an accusing
finger at one or the other party. That a conflict exists has
been evidenced by numerous media reports and the statements of various parties directly concerned in the region
and of leaders around the globe. That the situation is complex, confusing and extremely fluid is now an accepted fact.
That blood has been shed and fighting continues is also an
incontrovertible fact. That the situation can further escalate, involving additional countries in the region and,
indeed, potentially a great Power entanglement, remains an
ever present danger. The role of the Security Council in
containing and dampening tension is therefore all the more
urgent.

51. In submitting these suggestions, it is our earnest hope
that the unfortunate situation brought before the Council
will find a very speedy resolution. Bangladesh remains committed in any and every way to furthering all efforts directed
towards this end.
52. Mr. ROLdN ANAYA (Bolivia) (imrpretutionfrom
Spanish): Sir, I should like to bid you a sincere and cordial
welcome in your capacity both as President and as representative of an esteemed country of the Latin America group,
as well as an enlightened diplomat and a person of great
experience and pleasant character. Bolivia has many reasons to feel bound to Jamaica, and my country will cooperate with you in a most forthright and determined
manner.

48. Bangladesh is solely motivated by a concern to assist
in the task of mobilizing all efforts and all countries committed to peace to defuse the tension, to restore peace and
tranquillity in the region and to promote reconciliation and
the settlement of the problems within and between the two
countries involved.

53. On behalf of Bolivia, I wish also to voice our great
pleasure at the election of the new members of the Council.
We bid welcome to the representatives of Bangladesh, Norway, Portugal and Zambia, who will wisely and dispassionately be assisting us in the difficult work of the Council in
1979, a year which already is fraught with problems.

49. In approaching this task, I wish to reiterate that Bangladesh’s primary concern is to play a positive and constructive role that can contribute to, rather than detract from, a
peaceful solution. In so doing, Bangladesh is governed by its
strict adherence to and respect for the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the non-aligned movement, including the cardinal principle that States shall
refrain, in their international relations, from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State and the principle that States shall
settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such
a manner that international peace and security and justice
are not endangered.

54. At the same time, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to our colleagues who have left the Council
but who demonstrated wisdom and talent during the period
of their mandates. I would also voice my admiration and
friendship for the representative of the Federal Republic of
Germany, who did effective work as President for the
month of December.
55. MY delegation feels that the convening of this meeting
of the Counciiis appropriate because a question of principle
is involved: Cambodia-or Kampuchea-a Member State
of the United Nations, has requested that the Council
should meet to examine a conflict which its Government
has described as interference by another State with its security and its right to self-determination. Subsequently, further
events have occurred which reveal that the tension, far from
abating, has become more acute, to the point where a
situation not merely critical but also confused has been
created, inasmuch as there are two governments which
claim the right of representation: the Pol Pot regime, which
apparently continues in existence somewhere in the country, and the People’s Revolutionary Council, which has set
itself up in the capital.

50. Bangladesh is prepared to join other members of the
Council in supporting measures aimed at restoring peace
and stability in the region. To this end, we believe that in any
solution it may adopt on the issue before us, the Council
must include the following basic elements: first, thecouncil
must take cognizance of the deteriorating situation; secondly, it must reaffirm the principle that States must fully
respect the sovereignty of other States and the right of
peoples to determine their own destiny, free from external
intervention, coercion or constraint, especially involving
the threat or use of force, overt or covert, and refrain from
any attempt at the partial or total disruption of the national
unity and territorial integrity of any State or country;
thirdly, it must call for the scrupulous observance of an
immediate cease-fire, an end to all hostilities and the withdrawal of all foreign elements involved in the situation to
the areas they were in prior to the outbreak of hostilities;
fourthly, it must call upon the parties concerned to refrain

56. In the circumstances, it is difficult to determine which
one is in power and has the acceptance of the people of
Kampuchea, who alone will ultimately determine its legitimacy. Until this is clear, whether one side or the other is
recognized will depend on how the various countries are
6

moved politically. As we were told by spokesmen of the
People’s Revolutionary Council, as of yesterday less than 15
countries had accorded it their recognition. This means that
the international community has been observing the development of events warily and does not wish to act with
undue haste in so delicate and serious a matter as this. A
government must not be imposed on the nationals of a
country against their wishes.

61. Bolivia, as a country devoted to non-alignment,
‘wishes to make a friendly appeal to the States of Kampuchea and Viet Nam, which are far from powerful and which
for that reason may become increasingly dependent. In
order to avoid this kind of confrontation, which makes the
poor countries of the world even poorer and more dependent and less masters of their own destiny, I appeal to them
to shun fratricidal warfare and ambitions for conquest and
to join hands and establish an alliance whose objective
would be not economic or ideological control, which
divides, but co-operation in order to overcome poverty and
to enjoy freedom.

57. Bolivia, as I need hardly mention because it is so well.
known to everyone, believes that its greatest contribution to
the Security Council will always be based on the fundamental tenets of humanism as set forth in the principles of the
Charter. As a genuinely non-aligned country, my country is
extremely understanding of the situation in Kampuchea, a
heroic country that has fought for many long years for
freedom, yet once again is involved in a war which has all
the serious features of those conflicts that exceed the
defence capabilities of weak nations and make them the
victims of the hegemonic ambitions of more powerful countries. Bolivia, like many other dependent nations in the
world, is familiar with the frightening implications of this
kind of misfortune, and we feel for the people of Kampuchea in its suffering.

62. We make that appeal to Kampuchea and Viet Nam
because they are countries similar to those which, like Bolivia, have suffered from the evils of underdevelopment and
will continue to be victims of dependence, unless they learn
to live in peace and relinquish desires not in the interests of
their nations.
-63. Therefore, we support the initiative of the President of
the Association of South-East Asian Nations and we believe
that the Secretary-General should visit Kampuchea and
Viet Nam and, with their leaders, consider how best to reach
agreement to bring about the withdrawal of all the forces
that have invaded Kampuchea, as a measure prior to any
peace agreement and in order to permit free elections under
United Nations control.

58. That, then, is the reason for our position. That is why
we have joined the members of the Council who felt that it
was useful to hear the representative of the Government of
Kampuchea. But I think that it should also be made perfectly clear that our hearing of his testimony should not by
any means be taken as support for or solidarity with the acts
of the r6gime of Pol Pot, an individual who tried to impose
on Kampuchea a palaeolithic system of government whose
harshness and cruelty in no way accorded with respect for
human dignity.

64. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
65. Mr. ZACHMANN
(German Democratic Republic):
Mr. President, permit me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the responsible office of President of the
Security Council and express my belief that, under your
presidency, the Council will take decisions on matters
within its competence that will serve the interests of international peace and security. Your wealth of experience and
your great diplomatic skills are the best guarantee of that.
Your personal and untiring efforts towards a solution of the
problems facing the United Nations are also highly respected
by my delegation. We are all the more pleased by your
assumption of thii office, since the German Democratic
Republic maintains manifold and friendly relations with
your country. I should also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the new members of the Council.

59. Our position is also based upon full respect for the,
principle of non-intervention proclaimed by the Charter.
For that reason, we cannot help but feel concerned, and we
view with apprehension the fact that, in that embattled area
of the world, where we had thought that after so many
sacrifices peace and justice would come, coercion continues
to be employed to defeat a people and deprive it of its
inalienable right to freedom and to elect its leaders. It is
distressing to see that the long years of war and the ardent
yearning for freedom demonstrated to the entire world by,
the peopie of Viet Nam have not led to guarantees for peace
in that area or made It possible for the sister nations of
Indochina to stanch their wounds and work together for
the well-being of their peoples.

66. My delegation profoundly regrets that the Security
Council is considering a matter which is exclusively of
concern to the people of Kampuchea. This only opens the
door to interference in the internal affairs of the People’s
Republic of Kampuchea, interference which contradicts the
declared purposes of the United Nations and represents a
violation of the Charter. The delegation of the German
Democratic Republic is, like other delegations, participating in the debate of the Council in order to raise the voice of
truth and to speak out against those forces which try to
misuse the United Nations for their own selfish aims and to
use the rostrum of the world Organization to slander socialist States.

60. For those reasons, we believe that the Security Council must fulfil its functions and discharge its responsibility
under the Charter. Until the true situation in Kampuchea
becomes clear, the Council must continue-as the President
has so wisely and firmly done-to gather whatever information it can, and, when that course of action has been completed, a formula promoting reconciliation and peace must
be agreed upon. But that must not mean capitulation to
interventionism or acceptance of faits accomplis. No, a
decision must be adopted that will once again render
unequivocally effective the essential principles of peaceful
coexistence, the right to peace, territorial integrity, and
self-determination and freedom for the people of Kampuchea in accordance with the Charter.

67. In the German Democratic Republic the just struggle
of the people of Kampuchea is being followed with great
7

sympathy. Under the leadership of the United Front for the
National Salvation of Kampuchea, the Khmer people have
swept away the tyrannical regime of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
clique, which wasforced on it from the outside, a dictatorial
and militaristic regime unrivalled in its hostilities against its
own people. In this context, I want only to refer to the
official documents of the Commission on Human Rights of
the United Nations regarding the situation in Kampuchea
under the Pol Pot regime. The country had been turned into
a big prison and they did not even shrink from mass murder
of their own people. Is it not unbounded cynicism to compare the heroic struggle of a people against its tormentors
with the war crimes committed by fascism?
68. Now power is in the hands of the people of Kampuchea. The progressive forces of the world sincerely welcome
its victory. Of special importance are the first and consistent
steps of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea
towards the restoration of the most elementary human
rights in that country. All discriminatory measures of the
former regime have been annulled. The objectives contained in the progressive programme of the United Front
for the National Salvation of Kampuchea aimed at peace,
freedom, independence, national dignity and social progress are welcomed by the people and supported energetically. They should also be welcomed and supported by all
those who earlier spared no words to complain about the
massive violations of human rights by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
r&me. This is indeed a touchstone of one’s seriousness
about the struggle against massive violations of human
rights.
69. Through the victory of the Khmer people, the policy
of great-Power chauvinism, hegemony and brutal suppression of a small people has suffered a defeat. The cause of
peace, of the right of the peoples to national independence
and self-determination and of humanity has prevailed. This
is the true reason why international reaction is spreading
many lies, why the liberation struggle of the Khmer people
is defamed, and why socialist countries are slandered. Is it
not the height of unscrupulousness when a permanent
member of the Security Council makes shameless use of a
person who until recently was himself a prisoner of the Pol
Pot regime, in order to pursue its hegemonic aims?
70. The people of Viet Nam which has for decades waged
a sacriticial struggle for its freedom and independence
against imperialist colonialists and aggressors and which is
at present engaged in a struggle to overcome the consequences of a barbaric war needs peace as a flower needs
light. It is striving for good-neighbourly relations with the
other peoples in the region, relations which are a decisive
prerequisite for the peaceful construction of a free and
sovereign Viet Nam.
71. The activities of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in
the field of foreign policy vividly demonstrate that the
Vietnamese Government does everything it can to achieve
these objectives. For this reason, Viet Nam has already,
months ago, rightIy rejected the border provocations of the
Pal Pot regime and has done everything necessary to
achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict by way of
negotiations, Eventually, in view of the policy of those who
were behind the aggressive acts of that regime, it was

obliged to take measures to guarantee its self-defence, in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter.
72. The nolicv of the Socialist Renublic of Viet Nam is
aimed at eliminating sources of con&t in the region and at
guaranteeing stable peace and security. This apparently
does not please those forces whose schemes suffered an
ignominious defeat in Kampuchea. Neither by slandering
the just struggle of the Khmer people against the barbaric
regime nor by spreading lies about the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam can international reaction make it any less true
that a new stage has been initiated in the political life of the
people of Kampuchea by the elimination of the terrorist
regime in Kampuchea and the victory of the people under
the leadership of the United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea, a stage of friendly relations and cooperation between Kampuchea and Viet Nam as well as the
other States of South-East Asia. This opens up new perspectives for the maintenance ofpeace and security in the region.
73. The German Democratic Republic vigorously objects
to any attempt to accuse the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
of a policy of interference in the internal affairs of another
State. If in connexion with the people’s insurgence in Kampuchea there can be any talk at all of outside interference in
internal affairs, it comes only from those forces which have
long tried to stir up tensions in South-East Asia and which,
as is known, are themselves preparing aggression against
peaceful Viet Nam. In the statement of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam of 7
January 1979 [S/Z3OOa reference is made to the intensified
border provocations and massive troop concentrations of
China. These are facts which speak for themselves.
74. The German Democratic Republic welcomes the
objectives of the People’s Revolutionary Council which
envisage the construction of a peaceful, democratic, neutral
and non-aligned Kampuchea and has, consequently, recognized the Council. The people of the German Democratic
Republic feels itself fraternally allied with the struggle of the
people of Kampuchea and is prepared to establish comprehensive relations and deveiop all-round co-operation.
75. The People’s Revolutionary Council has taken over
power in the country and is the sovereign ruler over its
domestic and foreign affairs. That Council, headed by its
President Heng Samrin, is the only authentic representative,
the legitimate representative of the people of Kampuchea.
Neither any representative of the regime ousted by the
people nor any private person has the least right to represent ’
the people of Kampuchea. ,The People’s Revolutionary
Council alone is authorized to represent the interests of the
people of Kampuchea. The German Democratic Republic
urges strongly that, in accordance with Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, a
representative of the legitimate Government of the People’s
Republic of Kampuchea should be given the opportunity to
speak before the Council.
76. We are convinced that ail manceuvres to hah orozress
are doomed to failure, and that the just cause of the p&ple
of Kampuchea will triumph.

: >:.

77. Mr. President, I should like to thank you for granting
me the opportunity to explain the position of my
Government.

history. It is obvious that in this case we are faced with a
problem which is an internal affair of the Kampucheans
themselves. It is not a question of relations between Kampuchea and Viet Nam, but an instance of revolutionary movement inside Kampuchea, led by Kampucheans and carried
out against the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime.

78. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Hungary. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

84. The Front and the later-established People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea have liberated their country
and its capital, Phnom Penh, with the support of the people.
The former r&ime, having lost all popular support and
having discredited itself in the eyesof the inhabitants of the
country, rapidly collapsed and ceased to exist.

79. Mr. HALASZ (Hungary): Mr. President, I wish first
of all to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. We hope that our
contribution to this debate can help all of us better to
understand the situation prevailing in Kampuchea.

85. The Hungarian People’s Republic has recognized the
United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea as
the only legitimate representative of Kampuchea and
wishes to state on this occasion that, in its opinion, all
debate on the Kampuchean issue in the Security Council
should take place in the presence of the representative of the
Front.

80. I should also like to seize this occasion to tell you, Mr.
President, how pleased we are to see in the Chair of the
Security Council the representative of a friendly country
with which Hungary maintains excellent relations in all
walks of life. I would express to you our conviction that the
links which so happily exist between Jamaica and my country will further develop in the future, to the benefit of our
two peoples.

86. During the debate we heard Prince Sihanouk whom
we consider to be an individual who has no right to represent Kampuchea. We know Prince Sihanouk from earlier
times for his contribution to hi country’s independence and
development. However, when listening to his statement
yesterday [2Z08th meeting], we could not help feeling that he
had been misled as a result of the isolation and ignorance in
which he was kept during the past years by the same regime
which he now tries to defend in this forum, the regime which
has met with universal reprehension and condemnation.
The true dimension and impact of the arbitrary and inhumane actions of that regime are probably not yet known to
him or to the outside world. We are actually sorry that the
Prince plays-or is compelled to play-that role. In the
light of his political career, we cannot believe that his assessment of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime and of the conditions
prevailing in his own country is authentic, genuine and
sincere. That is not his voice, but that of the defunct r&ime
and of its protectors.

8 1. Since the Security Council is now discussing the question of Kampuchea, I should like to take this opportunity to
state my country’s position on this issue. It was with deep
satisfaction that the Hungarian Government and public
opinion learned of the victories of the Indochinese peoples
in their historic fight to restore genuine national independence and freedom. It was in that spirit that we hailed the
victory of the armed resistance of the Kampuchean people
,four years ago.
82. Unfortunately, the development of events in Democratic Kampuchea as time went by caught us more and
more by surprise and caused us sorrow. We had to come to
the conclusion that the leadership of that country wasconducting the land and its people down perilous paths of
conflict with its neighbours and of human suffering and
material waste inside the country. We were forced to realize
that those who were in power at Phnom Penh had little to
do with the national interests of the people and that they
had completely failed to rebuild long-suffering Kampuchea,
to restore its normal economic, social and cultural life, and
to lay the foundations for the prosperity of its ancient
people.

87. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
88. Mr. SAHLOUL (Sudan): On behalf of my Government, I wish to express to you, Mr. President, and through
you to the other members of the Council my gratitude for
allowing me to participate, without the right to vote, in the
deliberations of this august body.

83. In those circumstances-which lasted for several years
and were dangerously aggravated by a senselessborder war
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, a country which
aspired to peace more than anything else in order to reconstruct its war-tom economy-it came as no surprise that the
latent confusion and anger of the inhabitants of the country
as a result of the ruthless oppression and unprecedented
obscurantism of the leaders of Kampuchea had led to resistance to the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime and to the formation
of the United Front for the National Salvation of Kampuchea. The Front whose aim is to take Kampuchea along the
road of genuine independence, economic and social pro
gress, democracy and non-alignment, to promote goodneighbourly relations and co-operation, and, hence, further
stability in the region of South-East Asia, unites the broad
masses of Kampuchean patriots who wish as soon as possible to turn over the dark pages of their contemporary

89. We are prompted to intervene in this discussion by our
deep concern over the events that have taken place in the
past few days and by the manner in which the Security
Council has been pressured to ignore a situation which, in
our view, constitutes a threat to international peace and
security and which involves the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a country, a Membeiof the United Nations and
a member of the non-aligned group, to which we belong.
90. Democratic Kampuchea is a Member of the United
Nations and, until a few days ago, its Government enjoyed
the recognition of the full membership of the world Organi9

ration; as such, it is within its full rights to ask for the
Council’s intervention on its behalf and its adoption of any
measures it deems necessary to put an end to any activities
which threaten that country’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and which also threaten the peace of other countries in the region, the stability and peace of Asia and the
world. Recognition by five or six Governments-perhaps a
few more by now-of any alternative authority which is
trying to constitute itself in Kampuchea cannot be considered enough justification for trying to prod the Council into
not intervening in a situation which could develop into a
threat to international peace and security or into ignoring
the plea of a Member State which finds itselfsubjected to an
invasion.

96. Prince NORODOM SIHANOUK (Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretationfrom French): Since yesterday afternoon I have been the object of a formidable attack by the
Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Cuba, East Germany,
Hungary and so forth-in a word, by the Soviet bloc.
97. I have been trying since yesterday to restrain myself
from responding to their unjustified attacks. I have tried not
to reply to their insults, especially the insults of Cuba. I even
ventured barely a few hours ago to announce to the intemational press that I would not exercise my right of reply. I had
hoped that that would give the Council all the time it needed
to pursue its work, but, having heard the somewhat sarcastic “tribute” paid to me by the head of the Hungarian
delegation and having heard him say that I wasacting a part
here in this respected gathering, I believe that the time has
come for me to speak out.

91. The affairs of Kampuchea can only be settledby the
people of Kampuchea. The United Nations or its Member
States cannot pass value judgements on the performance
and policies of Member Governments. If we choose to
ignore that basic principle then we run the risk of condoning
intervention in the internal affairs of Member States.

98. First, allow me to tell the Council’ an old story.
Between 1970 and 1975, we in Cambodia were engaged in
an armed struggle with United States imperialism, which,
with the complicity of General Lon No1 and his clique at
Phnom Penh, had committed aggression against us. They
had sent out against us many aircraft, tanks and United
States and South Vietnamese infantrymen. China immediately made its services available to us and offered help in
every way. It even said that it was prepared to send us
volunteers to try to drive the Americans out of our
country-using guns if necessary. We took advantage of all
the assistance offered to us by the Chinese, except the offer
of volunteers, since our entire people, with the exception of
the Lon No1 traitors, was prepared to fight, if necessary, to
the last man against the American invaders. On 17 April
1975, five years and one month after 18 March 1970, we
finally got rid of the Americans and of Lon No1 and all the
traitors and thus recovered our freedom, our territorial
integrity, our national sovereignty, our national independence, our national dignity and our national honour.

92. We, as members of the Group of Non-Aligned States,
consider strict adherence to that principle to be the main
and indeed only guarantee for small Powers having to face
up to the exigencies of the rapidly changing gee-political
map of the world. The genuine members of the NonAligned Group cannot be swayed in their firm adherence to
the principles and objectives of the non-aligned movement
by constant changes in the policies of the major Powers
vis-a-vis the small Powers in the course of their rivalries to
control the international waterways or the potential locations of sources of energy, or by other factors and considerations which nowadays seem to influence the strategies of
major Powers.
93. We feel that the eloquent plea by Prince Sihanouk,
one of the founders of the non-aligned movement, on behalf
of the people and the internationally recognised Govemment of Kampuchea should be given the serious consideration it deserves by the members of the Council. What is
involved is both grave and vital and, if we allow the present
drift towards lawlessnessin international affairs to continue
unchecked, then perhaps other representatives of small
Powers whose misfortune or geographical location places
them within the orbit of an evolving strategy of one major
Power or the other may find themselves occupying the very
chair which is occupied today by the representative of the
legitimate Government of Kampuchea.

99. It was not just China that was helping us. There was
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea; there was an
overwhelming majority of Arab and African countries
which were doing their utmost to help us. They did whatever they could to come to our assistance. There was Cuba,
too, and Chile-Allende’s Chile. So that is what the situation was like then-all those noble countries were helping
us, and our victory was indeed theirs as well. Please forgive
me if I have overlooked any countries. There were surely
others which helped us. I may not have mentioned them,
but I should like to pay a tribute to them as well. But the’
Soviet Union and all its satellites in Eastern Europe, with
the exception of Romania-what did they do? Apropos of
Romania, I remember that in Europe there were exactly
three countries that helped us: Romania, Yugoslavia and
Albania, and I thank them once again and wish to pay them
a most earnest tribute. But the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and all the satellites of the Soviet Union in Eastern
Europe-what did they do for us? They did something. In
Prague, Czechoslovakia, all Cambodian diplomats who
said that they were going to fight against the Americans and
Lon No1 were expelled from the Cambodian Embassy,
while the remaining Cambodian diplomats and the traitorous Ambassador were well looked after because they were
for Lon No1 and the American aggressors. The entire Soviet

94. My Government considers it a matter of the utmost
importance for the Security Council to adopt whatever
measures it deems necessary to alleviate the suffering of the
people of Kampuchea, redress the deteriorating situation in
the region, uphold the principles of the Charter and of the
non-aligned movement, including the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of Member States, and
use all its power and authority to maintain the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all countries, especially the small
ones.
95. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Democratic Kampuchea who has asked to be allowed to
speak in exercise of the right of reply,
10

bloc took the side of American imperialism and Lon No1
and of the Central Intelligence Agency. All the Warsaw
Pact nations, with the exception of Romania, catered to the
Fascist Lon Nol-that traitor to his people and nationand his clique, helping him to impede our victory and the
liberation of our country.

country’ and my people. When they stop hurting my country
and my people, then I will no longer be hostile to them, as I
shall ceaseto be hostile to Viet Nam, the Soviet Union and
Czechoslovakia, for example, the day they refrain from
intervention in the internal affairs of my country and stop
speaking on behalf of the Cambodian traitors and shamelessly defending them. They lower themselves by so doing; it
is unworthy of them as great civilized countries to defend
the cause of the dirty traitors at Phnom Penh, and it does
them no credit.

100. That was the role played by the Soviet bloc between
1970 and 1975. And today the Soviets and their cohorts are
still taking turns occupying that seat, right over there, trying
to prevent the Security Council and the United Nations
from coming to the assistance of the small Cambodian
people-the weak Cambodian people-which has been the
victim of the savage aggression of the great and powerful
Viet Nam, supported, as everybody knows, by the Soviet
Union. Without the Soviet Union Viet Nam could not have
done a thing to us, because Viet Nam was almost literally
starving to death, unable to produce enough rice for its
people, whereas in the time of French colonialism it had
been wealthy and prosperous. But ever since Vietnamese
communism has held sway, that country has been in a state
of bankruptcy: financial, economic and social-total bankruptcy. It is thanks to the Soviet Union that Viet Nam today
has managed to conquer nearly the whole of my country.

104. I turn now to the question of my alleged collaboration or co-operation with the Pol Pot regime. As President
Jimmy Carter has correctly said, the Pol Pot regime is “the
worst violator of human rights in the world”. Yes, it is true.
But, in this connexion, I would quote a few passages from
the statement just made by the representative of France.
France spoke out in the following manner:
“On a number of occasions and specifically in the
United Nations we have condemned the excessesof the
ruling team at Phnom Penh and their frantic efforts to
force Cambodia into the mould they had created. The
Council of Ministers of the French Republic, meeting on
10 January, has evoked once more the suffering endured
by the Cambodian people and expressedthe sympathy of
the French people in that regard.

101. As a patriot, as former King of Cambodia, as a man
who loves his people more than his own life, I cannot sit idly
by as my country loses its own personality; I cannot condone the prospect of my country becoming Vietnamized. I
cannot bear the thought of seeing my country under the
boot of the Soviets, of the Czechoslovaks, of the Hungarians, of the Cubans, of the East Germans. During the
Second World War, did France allow itself to become
Hitler-he? It even condemned the former hero of Verdun,
Marshal Pitain; France sentenced him to death for collaboration with the German occupier. And what about Heng
Samrin, Hun Sen and Samay? They are no P&tams-far
from it: they are unknown in our country. Nobody in our
country has ever heard of these puppets of Moscow and
Hanoi.

“For all that, bearing in mind those excessesand that
suffering and having heard the statement by Prince Sihanouk, whose patriotism has been recognized by everyone, we cannot condone occupation of a sovereign
country”-1 repeat “a sovereign country*‘--“by a foreign power”-1 repeat “a foreign power”. “The notion
that because a r&ime is detestable foreign intervention is
justified and forcible overthrow is legitimate is extremely
dangerous. That could ultimately jeopardize the very
maintenance of international law and order and make
the continued existence of various r&imes dependent on
the judgement of their neighbours. It is important for the
Council to affirm, without any ambiguity, that it cannot
condone the occupation of a sovereign country by a
foreign Power.” [See above, parer. 35 and 36.1

102. Would you accept that kind of person? If you would,
Von Ribbentrop and Keitel should not have been hanged;
Rudolf Hess should not have been condemned to life imprisonment, either. What is the point of maintaining the
vast Spandau Prison, at such great expense to the four
occupying Powers, including the Soviet Union, merely to
keep poor Rudolf Hess in captivity for his whole life, when
you would accept here, as representatives of a so-called
sovereign Cambodia, people worse than Rudolf Hess? If
you associate with them, what will become of you? You
would be stooping to their level and would lose your
stature.

105. That is the crux of the problem which the Security
Council must consider and resolve. I am like France. I came
here to request the Council to solve the Cambodian problem along the lines indicated by France and other delegations of friendly countries-Bangladesh, Kuwait, the Sudan,
among others.
106. I now return to the subject of violations of human
rights by Pol Pot. The representative of Cuba yesterday
cracked some sinister jokes at my expense. According to the
lackey of the Soviet Union, it would seem that I am unfeeling about the sufferings of my people, that I have accepted
to plead for the archcriminal Pol Pot and the archcriminal
Ieng Sat-yin order to be in a position to play a parthere, for
the sheer love of acting and for love of Peking duck and the
luxury and comfort that is being atforded me by the Peking
r&me. I am not as bad as all that. True, I have always been
a nobleman, an aristocrat who refuses to be turned into a
communist+ven
in China, even in Pol Pot’s domain. I
have never accepted being turned into a communist. During

103. I, for one, would never collaborate with collaborators, whether they collaborate with American imperialism,
Russian imperialism or Cuban imperialism; I would never
collaborate with such individuals. And although today I
have just embraced His Excellency Andrew Young, it is
because he represents an America which today respects our
territorial integrity, our sovereignty and national independence. As a Buddhist, I can say that we Buddhists have
nothing against a particular country merely because it calls
itself X, Y or Z, no. I am against countries that hurt my
11

his lifetime, Chairman Mao Tsetung every time he saw
me-between 1970 and 19754iked to tell me that I was an
adorable prince and, since he liked me, he wanted me to
convert to communism-or,
at the very least, Maoism. I
answered him: “Mr. Chairman, you do me great honour,
but I do not understand communism at all. At school I was
no good at mathematics, physics and chemistry; I wasgood
only at French, Latin and Greek. Well, communism for me
is just like mathematics and chemistry: I do not understand
the tirst’thing about it.”

children of my most recent wife. I have had other wives; I
was polygamous once upon a time; but now I am monogamous, Ieng Sary and Pol Pot granted me the privilege of
keeping with me my two youngest children, the children of
Princess Monique, whose beauty has captivated the entire
world. But I have suffered also.
110. That is why the insults addressed to me by the Soviet
bloc, beginning with Cuba, are unfair; for deep inside me
there is much suffering. I simply cannot enjoy life. But
yesterday the representative of Cuba said, “If you are truly a
patriot, since you are a Buddhist, you should set fire to
yourself, as the Vietnamese Buddhists did at Saigon, under
the Fascist dictatorship of Ngo Dinh Diem.” I think the
Council is aware of what happened. The Vietnamese Buddhists poured gasoline over themselves, all over their
bodies; they prayed; and then they set tire to themselves and
they died. To those who are unfamiliar with Buddhism I
would say that the Buddha-our Jesus Christ in a sense,the
man with clairvoyance, who understands life and who in his
infinite wisdom can bring us to wisdom first and then to a
better world where there is no suffering-forbids suicide. I
believe that in many other religions suicide is outlawed. I
can fight against the Russians and die at the hands of the
Russians if necessary, but I do not have the right to commit
suicide, for that would be to betray my religion. The Vietnamese Buddhists who committed suicide betrayed Buddhism. They did not really understand Buddhism. They
were ignorant Buddhists. True Buddhists do not commit
suicide.

107. But there are matters that are more serious than that.
As members of the Council know, I have suffered much, but
not because Mr. Pol Pot kept me under house arrest, not
because I could not communicate with my friends by mail
or other means-foreigners who paid visits to Mr. Pol Pot
and Mr. Ieng Sary were not allowed to see me in spite of
their repeated requests to the Government of Mr. Pol Pot.
And Mr. Pol Pot even went so far as to tell my friends that
Prince Sihanouk refused to seethem. Yesterday the Ambassador of Guinea came to tell me that when he visited Phnom
Penh several months ago he brought with him a book which
my dear and beloved friend President Ahmed SCkou Tour6
had dedicated to me. My Government in Phnom Penh
never allowed me to receive that book. Hence, President
SCkou Tour6 may perhaps have thought that I had become
an unfaithful friend. And even the Chinese people might
have thought that I was ungrateful, for, immediately after
the death of Chairman Mao Tsetung, mountains of telegrams and letters of condolence were received in China;
missing from among them were the condolences of Sihanouk. I had written a long letter of tribute to the memory of
Chairman Mao, a long letter in which were expressed my
deepest feelings for the Chairman, to whom I owed so much
and who had done so much for my country in order that it
might defeat the aggression and neocolonialism of the
United States. But my Government never allowed me to
express my condolences to the great Chinese people. So,
when I arrived in Peking, many Chinese asked me: “Prince,
why did you not send the merest expression of condolence
upon the death of our Father, Chairman Mao?”

111. I am a patriot like Fidel Castro, although Fidel
Castro has now sold out to the Russians, while I have not
sold out to the Chinese-certainly not. If I am a friend of the
Chinese, it is because they respect my independence. If I
were Fidel Castro I would not be proud. Cuba, which had
so much prestige after its victory over Bat&a, has become.
truly a small nation, a very small nation indeed. The mercenaries of Soviet imperialism in Africa have become the
mercenaries of Soviet imperialism in diplomatic and other
activities, in the United Nations in particular. Cuba is no.
longer anything at all.

108. And that caused me much distress. For three years
and some months, my Government made it appear that I
was an impolite, ungrateful individual with no understanding of international life. Does the Council believe that in
those circumstances I did not suffer7 Does it believe that I
came here to act a part, that I would be satisfied with Peking
duck, as has been claimed by that Cuban gentleman whose
name I am not even aware of?

112. At the Conference of Non-Aligned Countries at Al:
giers, when Castro took the rostrum, we were expecting a
major address filled with Cuban pride. Does the Council
know what Castro said from the rostrum of the Conference
of Non-Aligned Countries, a conference presided over masterfully by my dear departed friend President Bourn&l&e?
All he spoke about was the Soviet Union. After his speech, I
asked to be allowed to speak right away. The rules of
procedure did not allow me to speak. I spoke anyway. I
flouted the rules. I shouted out, “Mr. Castro, since you are
on such fine terms with the Soviet Union, tell them to stop
cooperating with United States imperialism and the treacherous Lon Nol, and tell it to recognize us, the Government
of anti-imperialist national resistance. Tell it to abandon
Lon No1 and come to us.” Castro did not like that at all. He
blushed red as a tomato. That evening there wasa reception
in honour of the delegations of the non-aligned countries
given by President Houari Boumtdiene and during that
memorable event President Muammar Al-Qadhafi of Libya
came to me and said: “Congratulations Sihanouk, you have
exposed Castro. Judging solely from his speech one might

109. But even sadder than that is the fact that the Pol Pot
Government, on our arrival at Phnom Penh, directly after
our common victory over United States imperialism and
Lon Nol, separated me from many of my children and
grandchildren. I lost two elder sons, two elder daughters,
and about 10 grandchildren. They were sent to cooperatives,
and we lost contact. I could not write to them and they
could not write to me. I did not know what had happened to
them. Never was I successfulin finding out exactly what had
happened to them. And then came the Vietnamese invasion, a crypto-Soviet invasion, so I have no idea what has
happened to my children and my grandchildren. I have only
two of my children here with me now, the youngest two, the
12

before the Security Council. He concludeshis words by
saying that his statementhasperhapsbeensomewhatviolent; but that is the way he is: violent here in the Security
Council, but not there in Kampucheaconfronting the assassinsof his people. He dares to compare himself to Fidel
Castro, who during his entire existencehas risked his own
life to defendthe fundamental interestsof the Cuban country and people. This Prince, who describeshimselfasa bon
vivant, an aristocrat, a grand seigneur,doesnot know the
name of the Ambassador of Cuba and that really fails to
impressus, nor do we care.

have thought that he was a Russian, a Soviet, and not a
Cuban”. His entire speech was Soviet talk, not Cuban talk.
He had abdicated Cuban dignity. He had betrayed the
independence and pride of the Cuban people. I know about
the Latin people. I am not on close terms with them, but I
have read much about them and their pride is a common
feature of their personalities and their sense of honour. But
Castro has lost everything, even his sense of honour, of
Cuban honour, and that is a very serious matter.
113. I shall conclude my statement. The Soviet Union has
not forgotten that incident at the Conference of NonAligned Countries. The Soviet Union has not forgotten
what I wrote in one of my books, My War with the C.ZA2
I denounced the Soviet Union and its co-operation with
United States imperialism, with the CIA and with Lon Nol.
Naturally, the Soviet bloc goes along with the Soviet Union
in its desire for revenge against Sihanouk. Neither have
Castro and his delegation forgotten what I said at the
Conference of Non-Aligned Countries. There is a certain
desire for vengeance which has reared its head here; that is
why they are attacking me personally. They hate me more
than they hate Pol Pot. Their attack on Pol Pot regarding
violations of human rights is nothing but a smoke-screen to
conceal their hostility towards Sihanouk. They fear me. I
have no atomic bombs but I have the courage to confront
them, to denounce them in words, in writing and in actions,
though I do not have the atomic bomb.

118. Ruben Martinez Villena, a Cuban poet of whom Mr.
Sihanouk is surely also unaware, said that revolutionaries
are born to servefrom below and in silence.That is the life
of revolutionaries. We are not gram& seigneursnor great
actors nor great cowards. I must say, of course,that Mr.
Sihanouk recognizesthat Cuba helped the peopleof Kampuchea in its war againstYankee imperialismand the Lon
No1 clique. That is absolutely true, as also we offered our
modest brotherly assistanceat the expense of our own
Cuban citizens to other fraternal countries in other continents. But Mr. Sihanouk, in his account of the countries
which helped in the liberation of Kampuchea, forgot one
very important country. I am referring to the Viet Nam of
Ho Chi Minh. It would seemthat during thosenocturnal
guitar concerts in Kampuchea he forgot that important
contribution, yet it was movingly recognizedby Ieng Sary
and the Central Committee of the Kampucheanparty at the
time when victory wasachieved. Thesemomentsof forgetfulnessare perhapsFreudian, asisalsoperhapsthe explanation of Mr. Sihanouk’s conduct.

114. What does this question of human rights really
amount to? Should the Soviet Union preach to others about
violations of human rights? Should Czechoslovakia lecture
people about violations of human rights? And what about
Castro? Of how many crimes was he guilty right after his
victory over Batista? It is said that Pol Pot killed many
followers of Lon No1 but did not Castro kill hundreds, nay,
tens of thousands of supporters of Bat&a? Of course, there
is Solzhenitsyn, there is Professor Sakharov, and there are
the dissidents in Prague etc., who represent the will and
desire of the Soviet people and the Czechoslovak people
that their countries should cease to violate human rights.
But the existing r&imes are in favour of violations of human
rights; they are not in favour of human rights. They should
be put in the same category as Pol Pot and Ieng Sary.

119. We do not hate the poor Prince Sihanouk; actually,
we feel sorry for him. His pathetic statementtoday, from a
purely human point of view, deservesmuch compassion,
becausehe hasexplained hispersonalmisfortunes,the personal, intimate sufferings,including the lossof his children,
inflicted upon him by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique. That is
very sad. For that, in a human sense,we can feel sorry for
Prince Sihanouk. We may wonder what he is doing here
representing Pol Pot and Ieng Sary. Can it be that the
credentialsgiven him by Mr. Ieng Sary, Vice-Prime Minister of Pol Pot, are really still valid, now that hehasconfessed
to the horrible crimes that clique’committed against the
people of Kampuchea and hasadmitted that he wasunder
housearrest, that he washeld incommunicado, and after he
has describedthe trials, tribulations and humiliations he
suffered?How can he still sit here in the Security Council,
saying “my Government”-the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary Government?One mustbe truly abjector totally devoid of shameto
be able to perform in this manner.

115. That is all I have to say. Perhaps it has been violent
but it is the brutal truth. I am accustomed to saying what I
think. I call a spade a spade, and that is perhaps why I have
earned the hostility of part of the world.
116. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Cuba has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

120. The attacks on the Cuban revolution do not surprise
me. If they had comefrom a fighter we might havediscussed
them. But they comefrom an aristocrat, from someonewho
exploits others, a gentlemanwho hasalways led a soft and
extravagant life, and, therefore,do not deserveconsideration.

117. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) (interpretation
from Spanirh): Obviously in the statement I made yesterday [Zlbsth
meettig] I describedthe captive Prince Sihanouk as he is.
Today he hasgiven us evidenceof his great theatrical ability. Only a few days ago there was a United Nations show
with the participation of, among others, the Bee Gees.
Today we have the great actor Sihanouk posingasa patriot
* Norodom

C&k

Sihanouk

and Wilfred

G. Curchett,

Cambodia’s Fightfor Survival, Middlesex,

121. I should like to remind Mr. Sihanouk that the Cuban
revolutionaries defend in every spherethe honour of the
Cuban revolution, an honour that we upheld during our
hundred years of struggle,first againstSpanishoccupation,
next against the pseudo-republicimposedby the Yankees,

My War wirh rhe
Penguin Books, Ltd.,

13

130. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): The language that has
been used in the Council for the last half an hour is
unworthy of and unbecoming to the image and prestige of
the Council. Therefore, I should not like to hear it repeated;
I think it is unnecessary and believe that my friend Prince
Sihanouk will heed my appeal-which is addressed to him’
sincerely and fervently-not to exercise his right of reply at
this juncture, in order to preserve the dignity of the Council.

and lastly against the acts of aggression of imperialism in
the last years and at all times. It is Bn honour that cannot be
called into question by someone who has not even the
courage to defend his own convictions. Because to be able
to say the things that Prince Sihanouk felt at liberty to say
here at the United Nations and in New York there is no need
for courage. Courage would be needed to face the gaolers in
his country, and that Mr. Sihanouk never did, otherwise he
certainly would not be here. He would have been yet
another of the more than 2 million corpses piled up along
the highways and roads and stacked in the villages of
Kampuchea.

131. The PRESIDENT: I believe that the representative
of Kuwait has expressed the view that should command the
Council’s attention. I myself, as President, would urge that
we accept the notion-which
I hope is acceptable to all
concerned-put forward by hi.
132. If there is no further comment on that matter I shall
then proceed.

122. Mr. Sihanouk tries to pretend that we are afraid of
him. HOW can we be afraid of someone who causes only
laughter and inspires ridicule? What moral authority can
Mr. Sihanouk have after all his open confessions? As we say
in law, “since the confession is made by the accused party
no proof is needed”.. To think that Cuban revolutionaries,
who have not been daunted by thermonuclear bombs,
would be afraid of the pipsqueak crooner Prince is too
much. His vanity is way out of bounds. He is a self-styled
“patriot”. But if he were truly such, he would have fought,
weapons in hand, for his people, as we Cuban revolutionaries have done in every time and every place. Mr. Sihanouk,
courage is needed to defend ideas, but you lack even a shred
of courage.

133. I have no more speakers for today. The Council must
therefore address itself to the question of when the next
meeting will be held to continue consideration of the item
on its agenda. In this matter I wish to hear suggestions from
members.
134. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Solely on that
point, since I must say that I do not wish at this moment to
decide whether my dignity has. been demeaned this
afternoon-personally, I do not feel it has been particularly
demeaned-it would seem to me that everything we heard
this afternoon would lead one to believe that perhaps the
Council should continue with its deliberations as speedily as
it can. I understand that some countries would be able to
speak tomorrow afternoon, but not tomorrow morning. As
far as the United Kingdom is concerned, we would, indeed,
wish a meeting of the Council to be held tomorrow, if that
met with general approval; but we are quite happy to meet
the views of other members of the Council and of other
Members of the United Nations that the Council should
meet tomorrow afternoon rather than tomorrow morning.

123. I shall withdraw from this table so as not to wastethe
Council’s time and mine over this fraudulent Prince.
124. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Democratic Kampuchea has asked to be allowed to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
125. I first call on the representative of the Soviet Union
on a point of order.
126. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationporn Russian): The Soviet delegation objects to allowing the gentleman who is hiding behind
the name-plate on which is written “Democratic Kampuchea” to speak again. His statement would be detrimental
to the dignity of the Security Council. If the members of the
Council wish to prolong this shameful spectacle, let it be on
their consciences. The Soviet delegation has no intention of
taking part in it.
127. The PRESIDENT:

135. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interprerarion from Chinese>: I fully agree with the representative of the United
Kingdom. In view of the fact that a considerable number of
Member States have already indicated their desire to speak
tomorrow and in view of the extreme urgency of the matter
now under consideration, we maintain that, according to
the practice of the Council, we should decide to continue the
formal meeting tomorrow to hear the statements of the
Member States concerned.

A point of order has been raised.

1.36. The PRESIDENT:
It would seem that there is a
strong desire on the part of some members to continue
tomorrow. In light of the comment made by the representative of the United Kingdom, I then propose that we should
meet tomorrow afternoon at 3 o’clock.

128. I should point out that, as far as the provisional rules
of procedure relate to this issue, those who are given the
opportunity of addressing the Council under rule 37 may
exercise the right of reply. However, we must take account
of the interests of the Council’s work.
129. Before proceeding in the matter of the point of order
I call on the representative of Kuwait.

The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

W.S.

1.50

79-70002-December

1981-2,250
