81

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fifth Committee
the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation,
has authorized the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to utilize the assets of
the Institute transferred by the League of Nations to
the United Nations,
Considering, however, that the Institute of Intellectual Co-operation has ceased to function, though its
assets have not been finally liquidated,
Con.ridering that, by the terms of a resolution adopted
at its second session at Mexico City, 21 the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization stressed the necessity for
the final liquidation of the assets of the Institute,
1. Deems it necessary that the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation should be finally
liquidated ;
2. Decides for this purpose that all the property of
the Institute which was covered by a decision of transfer to the United Nations in conformity with the resolution of the Assembly of the League of Nations of 17
April 1946, shall be included among the assets in the
liquidation of the Institute;
3. Recommends the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to accept responsibility for liquidating the property of fhe Institute;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to transfer full
and absolute ownership of all the assets of the Institute to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, on condition that the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization carries out the liquidation as aforesaid;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report to the General Assembly full particulars concerning the measures of liquidation taken.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

592 (VI). Autho,-ization of expenditure11 for the
financial year 1952
The General Assembly
1. Resolves that, in accordance with paragraph 3
of its resolution 583 (VI) adopted on 21 December
1951, expenditures totalling $US 5,524,970 for the
financial year 1952 are hereby authorized in the
amounts shbwn for the following sections :
A.

UNITED NATIONS
Dol/1Jrs(US)

The General Assembly, Commissions
and Committees ............... .
42,100
3.
The Economic and Social Council,
Commissions and Committees ... .
9,970
5.
Investigations and inquiries ....... . 2,350,300
S(a) United Nations Field Service ...... .
510,000
16.
Administrative and Financial
Services ....................... .
100,000
20.
United Nations Office at Geneva ... .
20,000
1.

Carried forward 3,032,370
11

See Records of the General Conference of the United

Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,

Second Session, Mexico, 1947, volume II, Resolutions chapter
IX, annex VII, resolution 14.
'

Brought forward 3,032,370
20(a) Office of the United Nations High
139,100
Commissioner for Refugees ..... .
23,500
25.
Official Records .................. .
31 (a) Headquarters construction costs ...• 1,000,000
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
Cost-of-living adjustment at Headquarters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . 1,330,000

C.

34.

TOTAL

5,524,970

2. Authorizes the Secretary-General:
( i) To finance the expenditures authorized by paragraph 1 above up to $5,500,000 by transfer from section
33 ( Investigations, inquiries and other activities) of
the 1952 budget and for the balance,· amounting to
$24,970, by transfer of credits from other sections of
the 1952 budget ;
(ii) To transfer credits from section 34 (Cost-ofliving adjustment at Headquarters) to the various sections concerned of the 1952 budget.
373,-d/lenary meeting,
February 1952.

593 (VI). Control and limitation of
documentation
The General Assembly,
Noting the steps taken and the progress so far
achieved in the organization of documentation and the
stabilization of publication programmes,
Noting also, however, the continued increase in the
volume of documentation requested by the various organs of the United Nations, and the ever-growing difficulty encountered by delegations in making the most
effective use thereof,
Appreciating that, in order to be effective, further action to limit documentation costs must apply alike to the
number of documents, to their individual bulk and to
the number of copies issued,
1. Invites the governments of Member States:
(a) To assist in reducing the number and individual bulk of documents to a minimum by:
(i) Bearing in mind the desirability of ensuring that
all draft resolutions which may call for studies
and reports and for their dissemination clearly
indicate the scope of such studies and reports ;
(ii) Restricting both the number and the volume of
the documents submitted for processing to what is
strictly required by resolutions and other statutory decisions of a United Nations organ, or is
clearly relevant to agenda items under discussion ;
( b) To assist in reducing the number of copies of
such documents as are issued by:
(i) Reviewing and reducing as far as possible their
requests for documents issued in first distribution, and submitting to the Secretary-General
their revised lists;
(ii) Avoiding as far as possible conference room requests for additional copie!;;

82

General AaaemM;-81:ith Seeaion

(iii) Reducing any other subsequent demands to a
minimum, in particular refraining froI!1 requ~ting the repetition or reissumg.of material readily
available in other United Nations documents;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To exercise a strict control of documentation
by refraining from publishing documents not called for
by an organ of the United Nations or not necessary
for the conduct of meetings or the proper exercise of
the functions of the Secretariat;
( b) To exercise discretion as to the disposition of
material received from delegations which does not fa]l
within tpe requirements of paragraph 1 (a) (ii) above;
( c) To restri et to an essential minim.um. the free
distribution of internally-processed pubhcattons and
the distribution of documents which are still in draft
form;
(d) To submit to all organs of the United Nations,
before the adoption of draft resolutions requiring documentation, an estimate of the cost and, if possible, an
estimate of the off-setting sales revenue ;
( e) To strengthen the internal control of documentation by enforcing strict editorial policies to eliminate unnecessary and repetitious matter;
(f) To make available to delegations the relevant
services of the Secretariat for consultations in the matter of the organization of their documents files, with
a view to avoiding as far as possible requests for redistribution.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
594 (VI). Operational programmes under the
reaponsibility of th-, United Nations financed
by voluntary contributions
The General Assembly,
Considering that the system of voluntary contributions established to finance the various operational programmes executed under the direct authority of the
United Nations cannot diminish the administrative responsibilities involved in such expenditures,
Considering, in consequence, that the administrative
costs of such programmes should be subject to the same
scrutiny as tl}at applied to similar expenses under the
regular budget of the United Nations,
Considering also that, under the system now in force
and the related administrative machinery, no means
exists of affording to the financing governments an opportunity to review such activities,
Considering further the fact that the majority of the
governments contributing to such voluntary operational

pr:ogrammes are represented in the General Assembly
of the United Nations,
Considering, finally, that past experience, .as w.ell as·

the magnitude of the programmes a~d the diversity of
the activities involved have shown it to be necessary
and convenient to apply. ful.ler admin~strativ~ controls
in the interest of co-ordmabon and with a view to secqring specific guidanc<: from the. governments of
Member States in the implementation of such programmes,
1. Resolves that the administrative part of the technical .assistance programme financ:d by vo~untary contributions and executed by the Umted Nations shall be
subject to the same scrutiny on the part of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions as that applied to expenses proposed under
the regular budget ;
. 2._ Requests the Advisor~ Committee on .Admi~isti"ative and Budgetary Que~tlons, as .part of its revie'Y
of the accounts of the special operational programmes
authorized by the General Assembly and financed from
extra-budgetary funds, to pay special attention to the
administrative practices and expenses of these prop-ammes and to submit comments thereon as part of
its reports to the General Assembly.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
595 (VI). Public information activities of the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation of the work of Sub-C?mmittee 8 of the Fifth Committee on public information,
Taking cognizance of the report 22 of the Sub-Committee,
1. Approves the basic principles and notes with
satisfaction paragraph 13 of the report of the SubCommittee;
2. Recommends that the Secretary-General shall be
guided in framing budget estimates for 1953 by the
basic principles and paragraph 13 of the report;
3. Decides that the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
and of the Secretary-General, if any, on the Sub-Committee's report shall be considered at the seventh regular session of the General Assembly.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
,. See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 41, document A/C.5/L.172.
