OFFICIAL

REC

FORTIETH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

11 JUNE

1985

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2585)
of the agenda

The situation

..,.,.........,,.,.......,..***..*..

. ..*..............*.*....*..........*..

1
**..*.,*

1

in Namibia:

(a)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);

(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
*,.**..**..*.
Namibia (S/17242) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.........

YPV.2585

1

and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of zhe
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2585th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 11 June 1985, at 4 p.m.
presj&nt:

Mr. Errol MAHABIR

(Trinidad and Tobago).

Present; The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2585)

1. Adoption

0; the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(6) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m,
Adoption of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Akyol, .4cting
President of the United Nations Councilfor Namibia, and
the other membersof the delegation took a place at the
Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President,Mr, Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at the previous meetings on this item [2583rd and 2584th
meetings],I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cameroon, Canada,
Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana,
Guyana, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Poland, ‘South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and
Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
Letter
dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Repre(4
sentative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. Kofa (Liberia) took
a place at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Zarf(Afghanistan),
Mr. Bessaieh(Algeria), Mr, de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr.
Wasiuddin(Bangladesh),Mr. Tshering(Bhutan), Mr. Eteki
Mboumoua (Cameroon), Mr. Lewis (Canada), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr.
Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic),
Mr. Lautenschlager(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr.
Asamoah(Ghana), Mr. Karran (Guyana), Mr. Alatas (Indonesia),Mr, Barnett (;lamaica),Mr. Kiilu (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan(Kuwait), Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Zain (Malaysia), Mr. Muiioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Alaoui
(Morocco), Mr. Icaza Gallard (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari
(Nigeria), Mr. ShahNawaz (Pakistan),Mr. Kam (Panama),
Mt. Nowak (Poland), Mr. von Schirnding (South Ajkica),
Mr. Wtjewardane(Sri Lanka), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. AlAtassi (Syrian Arab Republic),Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey), Mr.
Otunnu (Uganda), Mr. Mkapa (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Golob(Yugoslavia)andMr. Lusaka(Zambia) took
the places reservedjbr them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and Mongolia in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

against the innocence of the sons of southern Africa. It
has incarcerated thousands of them. It has also waged
vicious aggressive campaigns against the front-line States
with the aim of destabilization, the undermining of their
security and the imposition of colonialist hegemony on
them.
11. The most recent act was South Africa’s decision to
install a puppet regime in Namibia with a view to continuing its occupation and exploitation of its resources, All
of this has been in flagrant violation of the resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly and
designed to obstruct international efforts to attain a
peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia. These
vicious campaigns have been accompanied by an intensification of the struggle and opposition within and without Africa, Demonstrations,
marches and strikes have
included all segments of the people of South Africa, despite the policy of oppression and intimidation pursued by
the racist regime in Pretoria.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Brazio, Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr.
Vongsay (Lao People’s Democratic Republic) and Mr.
Nyamdoo (Mongolia) took the pluces reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated 11 June [S/17255]
from the represemative of Sudan, which reads as follows:

12. For these reasons, we pay tribute to the initiative of
the Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries on the
question of Namibia, held at New Delhi last April, and
its call for a meeting of the Security Council to consider
the grave situation there. We hope that the deliberations
of the Council will lead to international unanimity which
will result in the independence of Namibia as soon as
possible.

“I have the honour, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Group of Arab States, to request the Security
Council to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, to participate in connection with the Security Council’s consideration of the
item at present on its agenda, entitled ‘The situation in
Namibia’.”

13. The Sudan, while unreservedly condemning the
crimes committed by South Africa, emphasizes that the
only basis for a peaceful settlement of the problem of
Namibia lies in the implementation of resolution 435
(1978). At the same time, Sudan reaffirms its total rejection of linking the question of Namibia to extraneous
matters because such linkage would only hamper the
efforts to achieve the peaceful independence of Namibia
and would encourage the racist regime of Pretoria to
persist in its intransigence, arrogance and defiance of the
will of the Council and the international community in
general.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to accede to this request.
It was so decided.
7. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
8. Mr. BIRIDO (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, I should like to express our thanks to you
and to the members of the Council for giving my delegation the opportunity to participate in these historic meetings on the question of Namibia.

14. We asserted this position in the statement issued by
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Sudan concerning the declaration by the
racist regime of South Africa of the establishment of an
“interim government” of Namibia. This statement was
circulated to the Member States, wherein it was stated:

9. I should also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are confident that your wisdom and long experience will aid the Council in achieving the positive results
to which we all look forward. It also gives me pleasure to
congratulate your predecessors, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and representative of Thailand, for the excellent
conduct of the work of the Council last month.

“The Government and people of the Democratic
Republic of the Sudan strongly condemn and reject outright the establishment of such a government in Namibia and call upon all countries to reject that satanic
growth and to refrain from recognizing any client
regime established as a result of these malicious and
persistent attempts on the part of the racist Pretoria
regime to achieve its criminal goals in the Territory of
Namibia.

10. The Council is meeting today against an extremely
complicated background in southern Africa in general
and in Namibia in particular. This background is characterized by the continuation of South Africa’s occupation
of Namibia, the depletion of its wealth and the pursuit of
the ugliest form of the policy of apartheid, The racist
regime has perpetrated heinous crimes and massacres

“In this connection, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan would like to stress anew
2

the legal responsibility of the United ,Nations with
respect to the independence of Namibia and to reaffirm the basic duty of the Security Council to take
action to implement its resolutions, particularly resolution 435 (1978). The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Sudan reaffirms that the sole basis for a
peaceful solution to the Namibia problem is the unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). It furthermore
asserts that the
legitimate administrative authority for the Territory of
Namibia is the United Nations Council for Namibia
until such time as the Territory obtains its full and
unconditional independence.

States intensify their assistance and their political, material
and military support for SWAP0 so as to enable it to
continue its just war with all the means available to it,
including armed struggle, against the racist rCgime of Pretoria until independence is achieved for the people of Namibia, It is imperative as well to support the front-line
States, which are facing a war of attrition waged by the
Pretoria rtgime, because those States, on behalf of the
international community, are bearing the brunt of the liberation struggle in the southern part of the continent.
19. We stress the necessity bf halting the assistance South
Africa is receiving in view of the fact that technical, financial and military support received by the Pretoria Government from some Western Powers and Israel encourages it
to persist in its occupation of Namibia and the pursuit of
its abominable racist policy and to continue its aggression
against the front-line States. Hence these countries must
abide by United Nations resolutions calling for a boycott
of South Africa. This Council must assume its responsibilities in full and impose mandatory sanctions against South
Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter,
because the crimes perpetrated by South Africa constitute
a blatant threat to international peace and security and a
flagrant violation of the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations.

“The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Sudan, disturbed and concerned by the difficulties
encountered in seeking a peaceful solution to the Namibia problem because of the persistence of the racist
Pretoria rigime in obstinately raising matters which
have no relation to the problem and its attempts to
impose on the people of Namibia a client rCgime which
is subservient to it, calls upon the contact group of
Western States fully to bear its responsibilities, to
adopt a decisive policy towards the racist regime and to
compel it to abandon its malicious manoeuvres aimed
at hindering the Territory of Namibia from achieving
its independence.” [see S/17205, annex.]

20. On this occasion we commend the efforts of various
non-governmental organizations to promote the severing
of economic and other links with South Africa as part of
a co-ordinated campaign against the policy of apartheid
and the occupation of Namibia. In this connection we
observe that in its final document, the Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of NonAligned Countries commends the efforts of some
Governments to boycott South Africa, as follows:

15. The statement reiterated Sudan’s support for the
legitimacy of the armed struggle and all forms of struggle
waged by the people of Namibia under the leadership of
the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
the sole, legitimate representative of the people of Namibia.
16. Twenty-five years have elapsed since the birth of
SWAPO; 100 years have elapsed since the occupation of
Namibia by colonialist Powers. During the continuing
battles they have waged, the people of Namibia and
SWAP0 have lost thousands of martyrs, and the gaols of
South Africa have received thousands of honourable freedom fighters. The people of Namibia has demonstrated
its readiness to make sacrifices in the cause of the independence of its country.

“The Bureau expresses its appreciation to all those
Governments which have taken legislative and other
measures in compliance with relevant United Nations
resolutions, aimed at bringing about the isolation of
the racist rCgime. The Bureau calls upon the Governments of other Member States of the United Nations
to take appropriate legislative, administrative and
other measures, unilaterally and collectively, pending
the imposition of mandatory sanctions against South
Africa, in order to isolate it effectively in the political,
economic, military and cultural fields according to the
relevant United Nations resolutions.” [S/17184, annex,
chap. Il, para. 41.1

17. On this occasion we commend SWAPO’s struggle
and pay a tribute to the wisdom and steadfastness of its
leadership and the flexibility it has displayed during various battles. We strongly support the appeal made the
other day by the great freedom fighter Sam Nujoma that
1985 be made the year of Namibia’s independence. We
believe that that appeal assumes special significance in
view of the fact that the United Nations is this year observing the fortieth anniversary of its founding and the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Hence it is imperative to intensify international efforts
and to renew our commitment to the objectives of the
Charter and the resolutions of the United Nations.

21. The delegation of Sudan would like to express its
support and appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia [S/17242], and for his
invaluable efforts to implement them. We call upon him
to continue these efforts, especially in this critical period
for the people of Namibia.

18. The intransigence of South Africa and its insistence
on defying the international will and the resolutions of the
United Nations make it impekative also that Member

22. Finally we affirm that the question of Namibia is
inseparable from the question of Palestine. It is the same
battle against Zionist and racist occupation and hegemony
3
‘h

in southern Africa and in Palestine. The increasing cooperation between South Africa and Israel in all fields
increases the suffering of those peoples under the yoke of
racist rigimes and prevents freedom from coming to the
peoples of Palestine and Namibia. Hence we advocate support for the struggle of the Palestinian people under the
leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people. We also strongly condemn the policies pursued
and the crimes committed by Israel in Palestine and the
occupied Arab territories. We emphasize the necessity of
intensifying political, military and material support for
SWAP0 in its just struggle for freedom and independence.

years after the adoption of that resolution, would at long
last have provided the impetus for its implementation.
Now, two years later, it has once again become necessary
for the Council to meet. Like last time, the objective of
these meetings-certainly
the objective of those of us in
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries who requested
them-is to seek the implementation of resolution 435
(1978) and thus, through that process, the independence
of Namibia.
29. The .questions that must necessarily confront the
Council at this time are simply the following: How many
more times will it be necessary for the Council to meet
before Namibia achieves its independence? What really is
the problem preventing the implementation of resolution
435 (1978)? Is it really beyond the competence of the Council to take decisive action in favour of the implementation
of its own resolution on the independence of Namibia? Are
all the members of the Council genuinely interested in the
independence of Namibia on the basis of resolution 435
(1978)?

23. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, Mr. Lameck Goma. I welcome him, and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement,
24. Mr. GOMA (Zambia): Mr, President, I am grateful
to you and your colleagues on the Council for the opportunity given to my delegation to participate in these
important deliberations on the situation in Namibia.

30. In recent times, certain developments in southern
Africa have been variously interpreted by different
people, These developments, whatever their significance,
do not relate to Namibia. They should not be used by
anybody to confuse the situation vis-cj-vis the independence of Namibia.

25. I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Your country,
Trinidad and Tobago, and you personally are well known
for your commitment to Namibia’s independence and
have worked tirelessly to this end, particularly in the context of your membership of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples. Your deep knowledge of and
interest in the question of Namibia will, I,am confident,
be of great value to the Council as it once again takes up
the vexing question of Namibia’s long delayed independence.

31. Regarding Namibia itself, the impasse concerning the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) has persisted, and
there are no hopeful signs on the horizon for the independence of the Territory in the near future, South Africa has
persisted in its intransigence and duplicity. It has continued to insist on linking the independence of Namibia to
the extraneous and irrelevant issue of the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola. The United States Administration has not renounced that position either. The insistence on linkage by the United States and South Africa can
only be interpreted as an undeclared repudiation of resolution 435 (1978) and of the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia.

26. I should like to take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General for the active role he continues to
play in pursuing the cause of the independence of Namibia. He has consistently underscored the need urgently
to implement resolution 435 (1978), and has taken several
important initiatives to break the impasse created in this
regard by South Africa. I wish in particular to thank him
for his latest report on the matter [ibid.].

32. South Africa and the current United States Administration have sought deliberately to distort the purpose
and meaning of the struggle of the Namibian people for
freedom and independence. Through their preoccupation with the question of the presence of Cuban troops in
Angola, they have sought to inject East-West rivalries
into the question of Namibia’s independence. South
Africa in particular is also guilty of orchestrating a
vicious propaganda campaign against SWAPO, which it
seeks to depict as a terrorist organization which would
bring communism to South Africa’s doorstep if it were to
come to power in Namibia.

27. These meetings of the Council are taking place
almost two years since those held in 1983, meetings which
led to the adoption of resolutions 532 (1983) and 539
(1983). The background to the Council meetings then
was-as it is now-the strong concern of the international
community that, because of the non-implementation of
resolution 435 (1978), the Namibian people continued to
be denied their inalienable right to freedom and independence and to languish under illegal South African occupation. Like the present meetings, the Council meetings of
1983 were held at the behest of non-aligned countries,
among others.

33. Duplicity is, of course, a characteristic of the Pretoria regime which has always been present in its dealings
with the United Nations concerning Namibia’s independence. The so-called linkage between Namibia’s independence and the presence of Cuban troops in Angola was
invented with the one and only purpose of blocking the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and thus delay-

28. Resolution 435 (1978) was adopted by the Council in
1978. We had hoped that the meetings held in 1983, five
4

belied South Africa’s purported withdrawal of its troops
from Angola in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement.
It shgwed that South Africa had not given up its acts of
destabilization against Angola. Such acts by South Africa
leave Angola with no choice but to defend itself by all
means and to count on the support of its friends.

ing the independence of Namibia. The cheap propaganda
campaign about the perceived threat of communism in
southern Africa is intended for the same purpose. Indeed,
South Africa has repeatedly sought to impose a so-called
internal settlement in Namibia with no reason other than to
frustrate and circumvent United Nations efforts in favour of
the genuine independence of Namibia. All this South Africa
has done while at the same time professing commitment to
an internationally acceptable settlement of the question of
Namibia.

39. Regarding South Africa’s plan to establish a SOcalled interim government in Namibia, I wish to make it
abundantly clear that my Government strongly condemns
this latest invention of South Africa. South Africa is in
Namibia illegally, and its creations such as the so-called
interim government cannot but be illegal, null and void. If
anything, this decision is illustrative of the bad faith of
South Africa in relation to its obligations assumed in
respect of resolution 435 (1978). Zambia cannot and will
not recognize such an administration and calls upon the
entire international community to reject it.

34. South Africa is at it again, Last April it announced
its plans to establish in Namibia a so-called interim
government. That so-called interim government is scheduled to be installed on 17 June 1985. It is to comprise
persons who will have neither the authority nor the credibility to run the affairs of Namibia independently of
South Africa.
35. It seems that when South Africa talk! about its commitment to an internationally acceptable bL.tlement in Namibia it is talking about its own prescribed settlement,
which it would like the international community to accept.
South Africa is not talking about an internationally acceptable settlement based on the implementation of resolution
435 (1978) in letter and spirit. In short, South Africa is
intent on imposing a puppet rigime in Namibia and parading that rCgime for acceptance and recognition by the international community.

40. Seven years is too long a period of time to wait for
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The adoption of this resolution had raised hope in the international community that we were at long last close to
resolving the problem of Namibia; but such hope has
been diminishing by each passing year as the lapse of
time has clearly shown that South Africa, perhaps from
the very beginning of this exercise, meant to take the
international community for a ride. All the concessions
made by the front-line States and SWAP0 in the long
and arduous negotiationsfor the implementation of resolution 435 (1978)have beento no avail. South Africa has
continued to make demand after demand, thereby literally seizing the initiative and ensuring that the negotiations for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978)
were an endlessexercise.Indeed, South Africa islikely to
continue playing this game as long as it believes,rightly
or wrongly, that someimportant membersof the Council
are prepared to entertain and acquiescein its numerous
excusesfor delaying the independenceof Namibia. Certainly policies such as constructive engagementhave not
brought about anything constructive in the attitude or
position of South Africa. On the contrary, those who
advocate and practise this policy have beenembraced by
south Africa as alliesand, fortified by what it perceivesin
‘constructive engagementas tacit support for its policies
and practices,the Pretoria rCgimehasbecomemore impervious to demandsfor positive change.

36. Zambia’s position on the so-called linkage between
Namibia’s independence and the withdrawal of Cuban
troops has been made clear time and again, but we shall
not tire of repeating our position as long as South Africa
and the United States cling to that artificial problem,
which they have invented to obstruct Namibia’s independence. I wish therefore to reiterate that Zambia is categorically and unequivocally opposed to the so-called linkage
between Namibia’s independence and the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola. We see no rational justification for South Africa and the United States to continue
insisting on that linkage; they should not be impervious to
overwhelming-indeed,
universal-opposition
to the socalled linkage.
37. The question of Namibia’s independence and the
presence of Cuban troops in Angola are separate. Reason
demands that this fact be recognized and that the two be
dealt with separately. Namibia must proceed to independence whether or not the Cuban troops leave or remain in
Angola. The Namibian people are entitled to their independence and they should not be held hostage to an issue
with which they have nothing to do.

41. The time has come for all membersof the Council
and the international community asa whole to speakwith
one voice and act in unisonregardingthe independenceot
Namibia, Let us all demonstratein&wordand deedthat we
genuinely want and we are working for Namibia’s independence on the basis of resolution 435 (1978). This
means that none of us, not one single member of the
Council, should any longer entertain thl: irrational and
extraneousdemandsof South Africa which have hitherto
prevented the implementationof the United Nations plan
for the independenceof Namibia. South Africa should be
left in no doubt that it standsalone and isolatedin blocking the independenceof Namibia, It should feel the full
pressureof the international community.

38. My Government has been outraged that the question of the presence of Cuban troops in Angola ever arose
in the context of Namibia’s independence. Cuban presence in Angola is a matter between the Cuban and the
Angolan authorities. However, South Africa’s actions
continue to endanger the security of Angola. As the Council is aware, only last month South African troops on a
sabotage mission of the Gulf Oil installations in Cabinda
were captured by the Angolan authorities. This incident
5

mend, and register our appreciation to, those who had the
courage, wisdom and vision to spearhead the campaign
for sanctions against South Africa in the interest of justice, freedom, independence, human dignity, peace and
security in southern Africa. Such concrete and realistic
action can only bring honour and increased prestige to the
United States.

42. To demonstrate its seriousness and unity of purpose,
the Council should, at this meeting, establish the date for
the empIacement of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG)
in Namibia. As the Council
acknowledged in its resolution 539 (1983) when considering
the report of the Secretary-General [S/15943], all the outstanding issues relevant to resolution 435 (1978) have been
resolved. There simply is no valid reason to delay further the
implementation process of resolution 435 (1978) and thus
the independence uf Namibia.

48. Those who oppose the imposition of economic
sanctions against South Africa are hypocritical. They
argue that economic sanctions will hurt the black people
of Namibia, South Africa and the neighbouring countries, Conveniently, they gloss over the fact that the black
people are already suffering under apartheid and minority rule. Their suffering cannot, and will not, diminish as
long as apartheid and minority rule persist. In the interest
of finding a permanent solution to the problem of npartheid and minority rule, economic hardship is a price that
the black people would be prepared to pay, as against the
alternative of continuing enslavement, oppression and
destruction of human lives and property.

43. If South Africa should persist in its intransigence
and fail to respect the deadline established for the
emplacement of UNTAG in Namibia, it must be incumbent upon the Council to take measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations to ensure its
compliance.
44. Let there be no doubt that peace and security in
southern Africa will remain threatened for as long as the
Pretoria rCgime is allowed to persist in its illegal occupation of Namibia, to commit acts of destabilization against
independent States in the region and to maintain and
practise its system of apartheidand minority rule in South
Africa. These three represent the basic problems of southern Africa and are at the core of the ever-growing conflict
in the region. South Africa, which main’tains its stranglehoId on Namibia, indulges in acts of destabilization
against independent African countries and shamelessly
practises the obnoxious and evil system of apartheid and
minority rule, is, therefore, the source of conflict in southern Africa. South Africa as it exists today is unquestionably a threat to international peace and security.

49. In any case, the argument that the innocent suffer
when economic sanctions are imposed against countries
becomes all the more preposterous and indefensible
when one considers the fact that economic sanctions
have been imposed by the United States against countries
like Nicaragua, Cuba, Libya, Poland and the Soviet
Union. Similarly, sanctions have been imposed by the
United Kingdom against Argentina and the then Southern Rhodesia. South Africa itself has used, or threatened
the use of, economic sanctions against some of its neighbours in order to conclude so-called non-aggression
pacts with them. In all those cases, considerations that
sanctions would hurt the innocent, for whom they were not
intended, were brushed aside or did not even enter the
minds of the decision makers.

45. The Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
incumbent upon the Council to take effective measures to
eliminate the threat to international peace and security
that exists in southern Africa. Namibia’s independence
would represent a positive and significant step in the direction of creating favourable and realistic conditions for
peace and security in the region.

50. Clearly, we are being treated to double standards.
In reality, those who oppose sanctions against South
Africa do so because of their narrow and ill-conceived
economic interests, and ideological and strategic considerations. They are prepared to sacrifice principles on the
altar of expediency.

46. We in Zambia are glad that there is an increasing
appreciation of the problems of southern Africa among
important sections of public opinion in several Western
countries which the South African rCgime claims as its
friends and allies. Many people are refusing to allow their
countries to continue being portrayed as friends and allies
of apartheid South Africa. They are speaking out strongly
against the evil system of apartheid and are calling for
meaningful action by their Governments against apartheid.

51. It is not enough to profess commitment to the lofty
ideals of freedom, justice and human dignity. It is not
enough to practise democracy at home and profess commitment to democracy elsewhere, but do nothing to
bring it about. Freedom, justice, human dignity and
democracy do not exist in Namibia and South Africa.
Let all countries which subscribe to those ideals
genuinely work for their realization in Namibia and
South Africa.

47. I particularly wish to commend those people in the
United States who are engaged in a sustained campaign
against apartheid. The importance of their efforts cannot
be over-emphasized. Let them know that they have the
full gratitude of those of us in Africa in general and,
indeed, of the oppressed people concerned. The news of
the votes a few days ago in the United States House of
Representatives and Senate Foreign Relations Committee
in favour of economic sanctions against South Africa was
particularly heartening and encouraging to us. We com-

52. Namibia’s independence has been delayed for too
long. Let these be the meetings of the Council which will,
at long last, bring about the immediate independence of
Namibia,
53. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Chairman
of the Special Committee against Apartheid, Major-General
6

Joseph Garba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

58. In his report of 29 August 1983 [5/15943], the
Secretary-General found it necessary to reaffirm that discussions should not be reopened on matters in regard to
which agreement and understandings had already been
reached, and confirmed as such to the United Nations. In
this context he specifically urged the South African
Government to respond positively on the two remaining
outstanding issues-the eIectora1 system and UNTAG. In
further contacts with the Secretary-General, South Africa
took the position that the question of the electoral system
was not of great importance, but that “no settlement plan
can be implemented unless a firm agreement is reached on
Cuban withdrawal from Angola” [see S/ldlU6l.

54. Mr. GARBA (Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apnrtheid): Mr. President, I wish to thank you
and the other members of the Council for allowing me to
participate in this meeting on behalf of the Special Committee against Apartheid. May I also on behalf of the
Special Committee, of which your country is an active
and valued member, Sir, offer you our sincere congratulations on assuming the presidency for this month. It is
our fervent hope that under your skilful and wise guidance
the Council will be able to agree on taking prompt and
effective measures to deal with the challenge to the authority of the Council presented by South Africa’s actions in
Namibia and its other actions which have breached international peace and security.

59. 1 do not intend to say anything concerning the presence of the Cuban troops who are in Angola at the
request of the Government of that country: This, I
believe, is a matter that lies within the jurisdiction of
Angola as a sovereign State, and Angola has already
stated its position on it. The United Nations position on
the subject, as stated in Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, is unequivocal: the question of
Cuban troops is irrelevant and extraneous to that of the
independence of Namibia and must not be used to
obstruct the implementation of the United Nations plan
embodied in resolution 435 (1978)-a plan which was
and continues to be accepted by all the parties concerned,
including-ostensibly-South
Africa itself.

55. The position of the Security Council on Namibia is
clearly and unequivocally set out in resolution 435 (1978),
which it adopted, without a dissenting vote, nearly seven
years ago. That resolution called for South Africa’s withdrawal from Namibia, which it is illegally occupying, and
the transfer of power to the people of Namibia, through
free elections to be held under the supervision and control
of the United Nations.
56. It is important to recall the reason for the termination of South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. The decision of the General Assembly then was that South Africa
had failed to advance to the utmost the material and
moral well-being and social progress of the Namibian
people. That was what the General Assembly decided 19
years ago [resolution 2145 @Xl) of 27 October 1964.
Today we know more about the nature of the apartheid
State itself in its savage occupation of Namibia. Four
years of protracted and exhaustive consultations followed
the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), but led to no result.
011 31 May 1983 [resolution 532 (1983)] the Security Council, faced with South Africa’s dilatory tactics, took a unanimous decision, calling on South Africa, inter alia, to
make a firm commitment as to its readiness to comply
with the Council’s decision. Some months later [resolution
539 (1983)], the Council was obliged to meet again, and
this time, with only the United States abstaining, it
squarely condemned South Africa for obstructing the
implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia, and rejected South Africa’s attempt
to link the matter to irrelevant and extraneous
considerations.

60. As the Secretary-General’s
reports show, long
before there were any Cubans in Angola South Africa
had raised other obstacles to the implementation of the
plan for the independence of Namibia. The Cuban presence in Angola is itself the consequence of South Africa’s
campaign to destabilize the Angolan Government, damage the country’s economy and disrupt its society. Seven
years of negotiation on Namibia’s independence have
been a history of evasions and prevarication, intransigence and bad faith on the part of South Africa, a history
which ought to shake the confidence of the most credulous or benevolent of its friends in South Africa’s intentions. The developments we are now witnessing are the
penultimate phase in a process which South Africa has
pursued single-mindedly and unswervingly
from the
beginning and which is aimed at continuing and consolidating its occupation and exploitation of Namibia
behind the faqade of an “internal solution”.
61. Recent events have unfolded like a well-rehearsed
scenario. First, South Africa announced the withdrawal
of its troops from Angola. Mr. Botha declared that the
move would enhance the prospect for peace in the region
and open the way for the peaceful resdlution ofthe question of independence for Namibia. That declaration was
followed three days later by another to the effect that
South Africa intended to go ahead and set up an interim
government in Namibia; South African troops later
marched out ceremoniously. The South African President told Parliament that the move “places the burden of
ensuring that cross-border violence does not escalate
squarely on the shoulders of the Angolan Government”
[see S/17152, annex, appendix 21. But a few weeks later it
is Botha’s troops who steal back-unaccompanied
this

57. I should like at this stage to note the efforts made by
the Secretary-General during this period, in meetings with
all the concerned parties and in personal visits to southern
Africa, to bring about the implementation of the Council
decisions on Namibia and to resolve the specific disagreements which at that time stood in the way. The SecretaryGeneral has given a comprehensive account of those
efforts in his reports to the Council, and on reading them
it is not difficult to understand why his efforts came to
naught and where the responsibility lies for the failure of
his efforts, as of all other attempts to enable Namibia to
attain independence. peacefully.
7

timk by television cameras and regimental bands-and
are caught trying to blow up vital oil installations in the
enclave of Cabinda. Let it be noted that Cabinda is some
2,000 miles from South Africa’s frontiers and, indeed,
1,000 miles north of the Namibian borders. Writing
about this episode, the Daily Telegraph provides the liberal commentary that South Africa is plainly “prepared
to go to any lengths, break any promises, threaten any
alliances, in order to defend what she regards as her own
legitimate interests”. That commentary leaves undefined
the so-called legitimate interests of South Africa. Those
“legitimate interests” of South Africa are self-evident.
They underpin the raison d’etre of the South African State
and embody the views, values and conduct of that State.
These are the interests of racism, the destabilization of the
l?ont-line States and attempts to bantustanize them. Pretoria serves as the faithful lap-dog of the West and, in more
ways than one, embodies the original and historical traits
of the West, which today strenuously seeks to shed lingering attitudes to slavery, religious prejudice, class snobbery,
neo-Nazi attitudes and pure racism, Although apartheid
South Africa is bad enough in serving its own vile and
reprehensible interests, the evidence is also conclusive that
it acts as the West’s cat’s-paw.

to pursue its long-standing aim in Namibia, which is to
exclude the participatibn of SWAPO, the sole authentic
representative of the Namibian people, in any future
government of Namibia. That is undoubtedly the principal objective of South Africa’s latest scheme to impose a
unilateral settlement in Namibia, and it is not the first
such attempt. Mr. Botha himself referred, in passing, to
the failure of all previous attempts by South Africa to set
up a subservient administration in Namibia-the
creation
and breakup of the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance, the
collapse of the National Assembly and Council of Ministers set up after the rigged elections of 1978 and the stillborn Council of State. Now, the Multi-Party Conference
proposals put forward at the behest of Mr. Rotha are to
provide the justification for reinstituting, in his words,
“legislative and executive authorities for South West
Africa . . . which will be empowered to promulgate a bill of
rights and establish a constitutional court and a constitutional council”. Mr. Botha explained the rationale for this
move as follows: “The leaders of the Territory must themselves work out their own constitutional future; the South
African Government cannot consult the leaders of the Territory on an ad hoc basis; it needs to consult them in some
institutionalized form.”

62. One might ask what interests South Africa is defending in Namibia. The International Court of Justice has
declared that South Africa’s presence in that Territory is
illegal.’ The General Assembly terminated South Africa’s
Mandate over South West Africa 19 years ago. South
Africa cannot therefore claim to have any legitimate interests whatsoever in that Territory. The aim of its policy is
to prevent by all means the transfer of power to the sole,
legitimate and authentic representative of the Namibian
people, SWAPO. The interests it protects are the power,
privileges and brutality of the white minority, the powerful South African and foreign mining companies, banks
and financial institutions which between them own 95 per
cent of the entire marketable agricultural product-all
the
diamonds, copper, uranium and other mineral resourcesand control most of the trade and credit of Namibia.

65. But who are these leaders, and how are they to be
chosen? Not by the means laid down in the United Nations
plan, namely, free and fair elections. Mr. Botha holds that
“a national election at this time would complicate current
efforts to achieve an internationally acceptable independence for Namibia”. What he fears is that free and fair
elections held in the manner prescribed in the agreed
United Nations plan would result in a victory for SWAP0
and frustrate and undo all of South Africa’s tactics and
game plans to maintain its unlawful hold on the Territory.
This is also precisely the reason why the rCgime did not
dare to go ahead with elections, even under its own auspices, in 1982 and again in 1983. The Multi-Party Conference proposals that Mr. Botha so enthusiastically espouses
and commends represent yet another attempt by the apartheid rigime to bypass the United Nations plan, to pre-empt
the right of the Namibian people to self-determination and
independence and to bring about by means of a so-called
internal settlement an administration which would be of
South Africa’s making, one composed of individuals of
South Africa’s choosing and run for the benefit of apartheid South Africa.

63. The means South Africa employs to protect those
interests in Namibia are the same as those it uses to maintain minority rule in South Africa itself: apartheid and
racial segregation, discrimination against the black majority in education, wages, health, housing and so on, fragmentation and segregation of the population into racial,
ethnic and tribal groups, uprooting and resettling black
population groups to inhospitable and arid areas, and so
forth. All this is accomplished in Namibia by the same
method of State terrorism employed against the blacks in
South Africa itself-Draconian
security laws, repression
and brutality, mass arrests and detentions, bannings and
expulsions and full-scale military operations with the
most modern weapons against the peoples’ resistance.
South Africa has transformed Namibia into Hobbes’s
State, that State where “life is nasty, solitary, brutish and
short”.

66. In his response to a statement made on 3 May by the
then President on behalf of the Security Council
[S/17151], racist Foreign Minister Botha held out a double
threat, saying: if in the view of the South African rtgime
there is no prospect of agreement on the pre-condition
concerning the withdTawa1 of Cuban troops from
Angola-a
pre-condition which the Council has already
held to be irrelevant and extraneous-then
the question
must be reconsidered “how internationally acceptable
independence may best be attained in the light of the prevailing circumstances”. Then he added: “South Africa
reserves the right to withdraw unilaterally its administration and its presence from the Territory at any time that it
may so wish” [see S/17152, annex].

64. Mr. Rotha’s statement to the apartheid Parliament
on 18 April [ibid,J spelt out how South Africa intends now
8

67. The implication of those declarations cannot be
plainer, The South African regime, which is doing everything to hinder an agreement on the Cuban matter, will
now use that very matter to force a reconsideration of the
agreed United Nations plan. Meanwhile, it is proceeding to
put
together, with the help of puppets and front men, some
sort of institutions which will enable it to go through the
charade of withdrawing
its administration and presence
from Namibia.

direct dialogue and “constructive engagement” and, unless
South Africa is stopped now, could mark the end of the
road for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem.
The moral and political responsibility of Western Powers
is great in this regard. Their tolerance of South Africa’s
delays and evasions and their support of its pre-conditions
have emboldened the apartheid regime to flout Council
decisions.
72. No meaningful dialogue-in fact, no dialogue-with
Pretoria is possible. Previous efforts have clearly demonstrated that. Yesterday, as on previous occasions, the
Council was subjected to the odium, insults and innuendo
of racist South Africa. In his statement, the representative
of South Africa made a number of spurious points.

68, Of course no one has been duped by that
‘manoeuvre-not
even those Western Powers which have
been so ready to believe in the apartheid regime’s professions of reform and change. They have rejected as null
and void any attempt by South Africa to establish ;in
interim government in Namibia. They have all reiterated
that resolution 435 (1978) is and remains the only agreed
basis for internationally recognized independence for Namibia.

73. First, South Africa asserts that it is engaged in a
struggle against communism and would therefore use
any method to fight it, including the violation of the
territorial integrity of Angola. The problem is that, in
South Africa’s lexicon, independence and self-determination are synonymous with communism. In addition, talk
of the communist peril is a catch-all bait for its friends
and allies in the West.

69. I should like to ask a simple question, one which I
am sure agitates the minds of representatives from Africa
and, indeed, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Where does the West stand in all this? On what side of the
borderline does it pitch its camp? During these two days
the Council has listened to approximately 27 speakers; yet
no major Western country has yet spoken, This is a
debate that focuses on fundamental principles central-at
least rhetorically so-to Western civilization. These are
the principles couched in such highly refined and edifying
formulations as majority rule, one man one vote, advancing the cause of freedom, liberty, equality, freedom and
fraternity. In a major Council debate such as this, involving those essential principles declared by the West to be its
very own, no major Western country has yet spoken, But
I am sure they will speak later on: clarifications will be
made, reservations stated and objections raised. At the
most, there will be rhetorical declarations and platitudes,
followed by inaction, lack of political will and ultimately
a surrender to business interests and short-sighted strategic complicity with evil.

74. Secondly, the racist representative spoke of tragic
outcomes in countries outside the southern African region,
The question which has not been raised is: What outcome
in modern international relations is more tragic than the
situation in South Africa-a situation which remains even
at the best of times, indeed at all times, a serious affront to
and a major crime against humanity?
75. Thirdly, in his pathetic attempt at diversion and
distortion, the South African representative spoke of
democracy, change and reform in his country. Obviously,
democracy has a new definition in Pretoria: democracy
with 75 per cent of the indigenous majority excluded
from power; democracy with denationalization of millions of that indigenous majority; democracy with the
Group Areas Act and racism in the constitution and in
300 other pieces of legislation; democracy of a significant
genre with the illegal and bloody occupation of Namibia;
democracy that dispatches search-and-destroy missions
into a sovereign country far away from its borders.

70. The question now is what the Council and specifically those Western Powers intend to do about the present
situation in Namibia. South Africa is proceeding with its
plans and has announced its decision to install an interim
government in Namibia in the course of this week, In the
light of that and bearing in mind the whole history of
negotiations with South Africa on the subject, how is it
possible to pin any hopes-for
example, as the Government of the United Kingdom seems prepared to do-on
the South African Government’s willingness to continue
negotiations on Namibia’s independence? To continue a
dialogue in these circumstances and on terms set by South
Africa will only give South Africa what it seeks, that is,
the time to put into effect its designs.

76. South Africa regards as a major reform the abrogation of the Immorality Act, I think that this Council and,
indeed, the international community have no interest
whatsoever in whom the Boers sleep with at night. Tokenism such as this does not address the main question of
apartheid,
77. Let me state categorically that, if the West had not
demonstrated such a lack of commitment, Namibia
would have been free. If quiet diplomacy and constructive engagement had been jettisoned-because
they are
misguided and based on erroneous assumptionsapartheid would have collapsed.

71. After eight years of negotiation by the Western contact group and seven years after the Council adopted the
plan that it had negotiated and agreed upon with South
Africa, the Council is being confronted with a South AfriLRn fflit nccompli which violates the letter and the spirit of
that agreement, makes a mockery OF Western attempts at

78. While acknowledging the support of the international community in the past few years for the people of
9

South Africa in their just struggle, permit me to say that
the time has come for positive And affirmative action
along the following lines: first, all attempts and efforts at
negotiating Namibian independence outside the context
of the United Nations must be repudiated and frustrated;
secondly, a time-frame must be established for the independence of Namibia within the framework of resolution
435 (1978); thirdly, South Africa must be mandatorily
and comprehensively sanctioned because of its disregard
and defiance of both the Security Council and the General Assembly; and, fourthly, the Council must declare
categorically that linkage has no validity.
79. In conclusion, and although he is not here with us
today, I should like specially to address the following to
the new representative of the United States of America,
Mr. Vernon Walters, who brings to his job a long experience in diplomacy and a vast knowledge of world
affairs, I take this opportunity to welcome him to the
United Nations and to express the hope that we can work
together to strengthen the Organization and the principles
for which it stands. We hope that the United States, in
consonance with the clear manifestations of its public
opinion, will enable the Council unanimously to ask South
Africa to hold its hand. This is the time to let South Africa
know in very clear terms that the Council is determined to
proceed with the implementation of its plan for the independence of Namibia and is prepared to take firm and
decisive action to that end.

tional concern at the present situation in Namibia. This is
not a spontaneous emotional reaction which has brought
so many representatives together in New York. Rather, it
is a universal recognition of frustrations endured over
decades of efforts aimed at making South Africa share the
humanist ethics of those who apply the moral foundations of the Charter of the United Nations, which must
indeed “unite our strength to maintain international
peace and security” in the region.
85. One after the other the speakers in this chamber
recalled facts attesting to the atrocities perpetrated by the
South African rCgime, ,characterized by the denial of fundamental human rights, arrests unjustified in terms of
respect for the legal norms of a civilized society, brutal acts
of military occupation, indiscriminate murders of men,
women and children who could have dedicated their lives
to building an independent Namibia.
86. The democratic nature of this Organization, with
its universal mission, enables any nation that wishes to be
heard to make statements. Thus, the representatives of
the system of apartheid requested to speak and have been
heard.
87. The line of reasoning of the representatives of the
racist rCgime in the Council once again bore witness to
the cynical arrogance with which they try to hide their
true ambition: to dominate all of southern Africa, and
even those countries beyond the borders of that region.
For them the settlement of disputes must be done in
accordance with their conditions. Hence, all independent
nations should sacrifice their independence and security
to South Africa’s ambitions to dominate and to what
that country considers to be its legitimate interests.

80. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cameroon, Mr. William Eteki
Mboumoua. I welcome him and I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
81. Mr. MBOUMOUA
(Cameroon) (interpretationfrom
French): Mr. President, allow me to express my gratitude
to all the members of the Council for having given me the
opportunity to participate in this important debate My
country is particularly gratified at the importance the
Government of Trinidad and Tobago attaches to these
meetings in appointing a figure of your level and rank to
preside over the deliberations of these meetings. Your
country thus fully shares my country’s concern at the deterioration of the situation in southern Africa in general
and in Namibia in particular. We are convinced that the
noble ideals of your country regarding racial harmony
and the peaceful coexistence of peoples, in addition to
your well-known
statesmanlike qualities, will enable us
successfully to complete our work.

88. In other words, all the States of the region must
remain weak and adapt themselves to the definition of
democracy according to the racists and become satellites
of South Africa.
89. The statement of the South African delegation in
the Council vigorously denounced interference in the
internal affairs of its country, including in illegally occupied Namibia.
90. However, that same racist rbgime, while arrogating to
itself the right to defame Angola, supports rebellion there
and is trying to legitimize its aggression in that independent
and sovereign country. The Cuban troops invited by the
‘Government of Angola to strengthen resistance to such
racist aggression are today described as intruders in the
region. Here we wish vigorously to denounce the link
created between the Cuban troops in Angola and the full
implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

82. I also pay tribute to an outstanding son and representative of Thailand, Mr. Kasemsri, for having enhanced the
efforts of the Council during the month of May through his
special display of oriental wisdom and patience.
83. To the Secretary-General I should like to express the
appreciation of my delegation for his commitment to the
cause of peace, a crucial quality in the search for, and the
maintenance of, international peace and security.

91. In the context of self-determination, the Namibian
question is a subject of universal concern.
92. Given the new developments in the region that
threaten international peace and security, the Council,
which has the primary role in maintaining international

84. The high level of participation at these Security
Council meetings demonstrates the seriousness of interna10

security, should consider the situation with the urgency
and seriousness it merits,
93. It is important to put the current meetings of the
Security Council into the broadest possible context. The
Council is meeting at a crucial moment in history, when the
international community is marking the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations and of the victory over fascism
and totalitarianism.

99. Thus the Namibian problem is a shared and universal challenge. It should not be confused with issues that
are strategic and limited in nature. This is not an ideolog-,
ical battle between the East and the West; even less is it a
North-South confrontation. It is clearly a question that
requires this institution fully and effectively to exercise its
legal mandate over the Trust Territory. The United
Nations and in particular the Security Council must be
asked to exercise their primary role as laid down by the
Charter, namely, to avert threats to peace and security.

94. The principal body of the Organization for the maintenance of international peace and security is the Security
Council, whose mandate is “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”. With regard to the problem of
Namibia, the credibility of the Council, and, indeed, that of
the United Nations as a whole, is at stake in the international community for several fundamental reasons.

100. Cameroon continues to believe in the original ideal
of an effective international system capable of maintaining peace in a world that is increasingly interdependent
and complex. Like Namibia, Cameroon was at one time
in its history a Trust Territory. The difference lies in the
fact that, in the case of Cameroon, trust was not betrayed,
as it has been in the case of Namibia. The people of
Cameroon remain in solidarity with the fraternal people
of Namibia, who share the hope that they too will go from
being a Trust Territory to independence. Non-respect for
the authority of the United Nations can only provoke
indignation.

95. First of all, Namibia is, de jure, a Trust Territory. Its
fate therefore falls within the purview of international
responsibility, under the aegis of the United Nations, in
accordance with decisions taken by the Organization, and
in particular by the Council. Hence, one may conclude
that consideration of this question within the framework
of the United Nations is in no way interference in the
internal affairs of any State whatsoever.

101. The only legal basis for consideration of Namibia’s future is the decisions and resolutions adopted on
that subject by the United Nations, in particular Council
resolution 435 (1978). That resolution and the Charter of
the United Nations have stood the test of time, and their
relevant provisions remain valid. Like the provisions of
the Charter, the aforementioned resolution only needs concrete, courageous implementation to bring about Namibia’s peaceful transition to independence and self-determination, which have been delayed for so long. Cameroon,
like other peace-loving countries, is today, as in the past,
continuing to work in the search for a peaceful solution and
immediate cessation of the occupation and foreign domination of Namibia.

96. Secondly, viewed in their entirety, current events ip
Namibia pose a grave threat to international peace and
security. South Africa’s arrogance and intransigence are a
serious challenge to the authority, credibility and even the
very ruison d’e^tre of the United Nations. The numerous
tragic events experienced before and during the Second
World War led to the founding of the United Nations. It is
to be hoped, therefore, that international consensus will
emerge in order to avoid the re-emergence of the tragedies
and nightmares mankind has already experienced twice
within the course of a single century. In this nuclear era
when the world is living under the constant threat of total
destruction, the mission entrusted to the Council is both
urgent and especially important.

102. The critical period we are now experiencing is a
direct consequence of the occupying forces’ intransigence, and their refusal to implement the United Nations
plan for Namibia; of the resurgence of the use of force
within Namibia and against neighbouring independent
States; and of the continuing pillage of the natural
resources of Namibia, though that was forbidden by
Decree No. 1 of the United Nations Council for Namibia.* All these activities are a ticking time bomb that can
be defused only through peaceful means, which we hope
will happen very soon, for otherwise it will explode violently
with all the foreseeable consequences.

97. The time for rhetoric and diatribe is past. The more
time passes, the more prospects for peace in South Africa
are jeopardized. To allow opportunities for a peaceful
settlement to the problem of Namibia to be lost is to run
the risk of making the United Nations itself a victim of
procrastination. If the Organization can no longer exercise its authority over its Territory, which it has the right
to administer and to bring to independence; if the Organization, and in particular the Council, can no longer implement its decisions, especially those adopted in an area that
falls within its competence; and if the Organization can no
longer take measures to eliminate the threat to world
peace resulting from the ominous situation in Namibia,
then general doubt and concern regarding the functioning
of multilateral organizations could spiral into a danger&IS crisis of confidence for world public opinion.

103. Yes, time is running out for a peaceful solution.
The challenge given the Security Council is very clear:
either we adopt effective measures to force South Africa
to accept a peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem
based on resolution 435 (1978), or we can expect an inevitable and stepped-up armed conflict. In any case, the
final victory of the freedom fighters is beyond doubt, so
why not avoid futile, unproductive and costly resistance?
Pretoria should understand the inevitable consequences
of its negative and suicidal attitude.

98. That would be an unfortunate development, but it
would be understandable, given the frustration and disappointment of oppressed and disadvantaged peoples. Those
peoples have long considered the United Nations, and particularly the Security Council, their only hope for freedom,
security and possibilities of development.
11

104. The fortieth anniversary of the United Nations
must truly strcngthcn our dctcrmination to make more
rational and more cxhaustivc USCof the machinery of the
Security Council in accordance with the Charter-above
all as regards complex issues involving the maintenance of
international pcacc and security-including
the implcmcntation of Chapter VII, on sanctions. TIIC inability of
the Council to act resolutely and effectively could allow
and indeed passively exacerbate some of the crises confronting the Organization, including the question of Namibia. In the future, such an attitude could be
catastrophic, above all in view of the growing threat of a
nuclear holocaust.

noble objcctivc of preserving Africa from nuclear weapons. That ideal has now been brutally jeopardizcd by the
South African nuclear programme.
I IO. The Council must meet this challenge, for which
the five nuclear Powers, which are also the permanent
members of the Council, bear a special responsibility.
111. Camcroon is in favour of a full use of mankind’s
resources, including nuclear energy, for the peaceful construction of our societies. But it is to be doubted whether
we can hope to engage in nuclear co-operation for peaceful means with South Africa, a rigime for which the
policy of destabilization and aggression constitutes a
code of behaviour.

105. The Government of my country therefore attaches
the greatest importance to the Council’s role in the settlement of global conflicts such as the Namibian conflict and
makes in urgent appeal to the permanent members, the
founding fathers of the Organization, to demonstrate the
same collective foresight and sense of leadership and thus
enable the Organization to act effectively in the interests
of peace and security, as they originally conceived it.

112. South Africa’s authority over Namibia was withdrawn by the United Nations [General Assembly resohtion 214.5 (XX4 of 27 October 1964 because South
Africa betrayed the trust placed in it. To replace it, the
General Assembly created the United Nations Council
for Namibia [resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1964 as
the legal Administering Authority of the Territory. The
Security Council had the privilege yesterday of hearing a
statement by the Acting President of the Council for Namibia, Mr. Noel Sinclair [2583vd meeting]. He spoke of
the adoption by the United Nations Council for Namibia
during its Extraordinary Plenary Meeting, held at Vienna
from 3 to 7 June, of a Declaration and Programme of
Action [see S/17262, annex], in which the Council,
among other things, once again makes a fervent appeal
to the international community for maximum support
for the early attainment of independence by Namibia.
That document reiterates the responsibility of the Security Council to secure the implementation of its own relevant resolutions.

106. Aside from the clear interest in freedom, selfdetermination and independence, the question of Namibia raises other fundamental issues for young
developing and non-aligned States in the areas of security
and development. Complacency and the failure to avert
ancl punish South African acts of aggression and subversion directed against front-line States have clearly given
rise to new perceptions and concerns regarding security,
development and priorities in the subregion and throughout Africa and the world.
107. Because of the Council’s inability to respond effectively and appropriately to the requests of countries that are
victims of South African aggression, other countries of the
region have been forced to sacrifice for military and security
needs those meagre resources they desperately need for
economic development and the well-being of their peoples,
This climate of insecurity involves other military expenditures, thus creating a vicious circle ofgeneralized instability.
This encourages the arms race to the detriment of development. This situation increases the risk of generalized local
conflicts, which threaten peace and international security
and the very survival of mankind in this nuclear era.

113. Cameroon totally rejects the puppet “interim
government” in occupied Namibia as another illegal and
unacceptable attempt by South Africa to sidestep the
only internationally acceptable path towards a peaceful
settlement of the Namibian question.
114. We trust that the Council will act resolutely to
block other attempts by South Africa to escape implementation of the United Nations plan for the peaceful
transition of’ Namibia to freedom and sovereignty.

108, The nuclear aspect is therefore one of the ultimate
and perhaps the most terrible means used by South Africa
in its desperate effort to maintain its policy of colonization
and racial supremacy through aggression and intimidation.
This aspect is particularly relevant, inasmuch as South
Africa to this day continues to exploit Namibian uranium in
pursuing its nuclear programme.

115. Cameroon pays tribute to the fraternal front-line
States and to the leadership of SWAPO, the sole authentic representative of the Namibian people, for their courage, patience and firm devotion to the goals set out in
resolution 435 (1978).
116. The world knows the dangers posed by South Africa’s apartheid policy and by its illegal occupation of Namibia to peace, security and justice. Increasingly, the
world opposes the exploitation of cheap labour, organized racism and the illegal occupation of foreign territories. The world is rising up to defend our noble purposes,
as set out in the Charter, to secure the advent of a world
free from war and poverty, a free and peaceful world.

109. It is now more than 20 years since, during its first
regular session, held at Cairo from 17 to 21 July 1964,
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity adopted the Declaration
on the denuclearization
of Africa.3 That Declaration was
on several occasions endorsed by the Movement of NonAligned Countries and by the United Nations with the
12

117. The Namibian question, and, indeed, the international crime of apcrrlheid, can no longer be considered to
be the problems of any one sector or region. They affect
all of mankind. In an increasingly interdependent world,
we face shared threats and shared challenges,

that it should have given rise to the condemnation and
indignation of the international community as a whole.
125. That is why the Co-ordinating Bureau of NonAligned Countries, at the inaugural session of the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting on the question of Namibia,
held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April 1985, adopted a
statement which stated in part:

118. We welcome the wind of freedom which blows
across ideological, racial and geographical barriers as a
positive contribution to the international campaign aimed
at increasing the awareness of world public opinion and at
supporting the principles and purposes of the Charter as
regards the crucial question of the liberation of Namibia.

“The Ministers energetically condemn and reject
this latest action by South Africa and call upon the
international community to condemn it and refrain
from according any recognition to this latest ploy of
the racist Pretoria rtgime” [see S/17114].

119. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Morocco. I invite him to taki a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

126. In the statement issued by its President on 3 May,
the Security Council has already rejected this measure,
stating, inter alia, that:

120. Mr. ALAOUI
(Morocco)
(interpretation from
French): I wish first of all, Sir, to express my pleasure at
seeing you presiding over the work of the Security Council for the month of June. We hope that, under your
guidance, these anxiously awaited meetings of the Council
will mark a turning-point in the liberation process of the
Namibian people.

“Members of the Council condemn and reject any
unilateral action by South Africa leading towards an
internal settlement outside resolution 435 (1978) as
unacceptable, and declare the establishment of the socalled interim government in Namibia to be null and
void” [see S/17151].

121. I wish also to congratulate the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and representative of Thailand on having conducted the work of the Council in May with distinction
and effectiveness.

127. So categorical and unanimous a rejection by the
international community of this further manoeuvre by
the South African Government should have caused that
Government to forswear its plans and face the fact that it
must agree to immediate and unconditional implementation of resolution 435 (1978). But that was not to be, for
in its 4 May reply [S/1715,?, annex] to the statement
issued by the President of the Council, the Pretoria
Government showed itself to be consistent in its scorn for
United Nations resolutions, thus removing any lingering
doubts about its true intentions and about the real meaning of its so-called constitutional reforms.

122. Finally, I should like to thank all the members of
the Council for having granted me this opportunity to
reiterate the support of the people of Morocco for the
heroic struggle waged by the fraternal people of Namibia
to gain the exercise of their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence.
123. The current meetings are the first that the Council
has held on the question of Namibia since the adoption of
resolution 539 (1983). Nearly two years have passed without the efforts of the Secretary-General having led to the
implementation of the United Nations settlement plan.
For that reason, the Co-ordinating
Bureau of NonAligned Countries recommended that several Foreign
Ministers take part in these meetings. I venture to hope
that Council members will appreciate the great importance the Movement attaches to the question of Namibia
and will take decisive action to lend impetus to its
settlement.

128. Even yesterday we all noted the cynicism of the
representative of the South African Government when
he spoke to the Council; we witnessed his arrogance in
inviting us to see what was happening elsewhere, as if
that might somehow provide justification for South Africa’s repeated crimes against the peoples of South Africa
and Namibia.
129. He failed to understand that this series of meetings
in itself makes it unmistakably clear that the international community wants the question of Namibia settled
by peaceful means; he failed to understand that the presence here at the Council table of the President of
SWAPO, Mr, Nujoma, is highly symbolic inasmuch as it
demonstrates the sense of responsibility and desire for
dialogue of the legitimate representative of the Namibian
people.

124. These meetings are taking place at a critical
moment in the history of the struggle of the Namibian
people, at a moment when South Africa is trying yet again
to undermine the United Nations settlement plan with
another fait accompli. Pursuing its policy of defying the
international community, the Pretoria rCgime has decided
to establish, on 17 June, an “interim government” at
Windhoek. In its logic and aims, this newfait accompli is
similar to the so-called constitutional reforms, and it is
nothing but a way to prevent the exercise by the Namibian people of its right’ to self-determination and to
promote the establishment of’ a puppet entity. It was right

130. The question of Namibia has been on the agenda
of the Organization since its first session: the Security
Council alone has devoted 109 meetings to it and has
adopted no fewer than 22 resolutions, not counting the
resolutions of ol.her United Nations bodies and the rulings and opinions of the International Court of Justice,
13

13 1. The adoption of resolutions 385 (1976) and 435
(1978). in which the Council laid down the framework
for a peaceful and democratic settlement of the question
of Namibia, and their unreserved acceptance by the
Government of South Africa gave rise to the hope that
there would be a speedy settlement of the question of
Namibia. Unfortunately, every time there was some indication that progress was being made in establishing settlement machinery, South Africa managed to confuse the
issue and set up further obstacles to the independence of
Namibia.

137. At this time when the United Nations is prepared
to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, what better way of marking this event could there be than giving decisive momentum to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978),
which would have the effect of eliminating the last bastion
of colonialism in Africa?
138. The Namibian people and with it the whole of
Africa have demonstrated wisdom and moderation and
deserve a peaceful settlement of the question under the
aegis of the United Nations. It is incumbent upon the
Security Council, as the organ primarily responsible for
international peace, to take account of the frustrations of
the Namibian people and appreciate the bitterness of
African nations and the impatience of the international
community.

132. Notwithstanding
the injunctions of the Security
Council and the condemnations of the General Assembly,
South Africa continues with impunity to c)ppress the
people of Namibia, to impose its apartheid rCgime on
them and to imprison and torture its combatants,
133. Similarly, its intensive military buildup in the Territory of Namibia speaks volumes about South Africa’s
intention to use Namibia more and more as a springboard
for its acts of aggression against neighbouring countries,
in particular against Angola. By violating the territorial
integrity of neighbouring States and intervening in their
internal affairs, South Africa is running the risk of setting
the whole continent aflame, and of course Africa would
be increasingly exposed to foreign interventions as a
result. In these circumstances the preventive role of the
Council, in eliminating the seeds of instability in that part
of Africa, is of paramount importance.

139. The exemplary struggle of the Namibian people,
under the leadership of SWAPO, their legitimate representative, can only win our admiration and must be
crowned with the accession of the Namibian nation to
independence and national sovereignty. The victory of
the Namibian people is inevitable, as is the coming of the
day when an independent and sovereign Namibia will
join the independent nations and, we are convinced, will
join in our efforts in support of international peace and
co-operation.
140. Since the beginning of its own struggle for liberation, Morocco has by every means available supported
the national liberation movements on our continent, particularly in southern Africa. It is determined to persevere
along the same course until the achievement of Namibia’s independence, the ending of the inhuman system
of apartheid and the establishment in South Africa of a
free and democratic society without any distinctions as to
race or ethnic origin.

134. South Africa’s continuing threats to the peace and
security of Africa and the world at large require that the
Council take more concrete, more binding, measures,
including a demand that the Pretoria rtgime respect the
aspirations of the Namibian people for independence and
ensure Namibia’s territorial integrity, including Walvis
Bay and the Penguin Islands and other offshore islands.
135. The adoption of such measures must go hand in
hand with stricter application by all countries of the arms
embargo against South Africa decreed by the Council in
1977 [resolution 418 (1977)]; at the same time there must
be an end to all forms of co-operation which would be
likely to strengthen the military and, in particular, the
nuclear capacity of South Africa.

141. My country will continue to give its fraternal and
unconditional support to the Namibian people in their
struggle for independence and the safeguarding of their
territorial integrity. Morocco is convinced that settlement of the Namibian problem is to be found in the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978); we condemn
the attitude of the Government of South Africa,‘which,
after accepting the United Nations plan in all its details, is
trying to impose pre-conditions on its implementation.

136. Finally, it is imperative that there be an end to the
systematic and unbridled plundering of the natural resources of Namibia in violation of Decree No. 1 of the
United Nations Council for Namibia* and to the detriment
of the interests of the Namibian people. The ending of
foreign investments in the Territory of Namibia would be
an effective means of forcing South Africa to comply with
the international consensus. The United Nations Council
for Namibia, at its Extraordinary Plenary Meeting, held at
Vienna from 3 to 7 June 1985, reached certain conclusions
to which my country fully subscribes. The outstanding
work done by that Council, as the legal authority charged
with safeguarding the interests of the Namibian people
until they achieve independence, deserves our fullest
appreciation.

142. On behalf of my country, I wish to state that we
support the Secretary-General’s
efforts to break the
deadlock in the Namibian question; we hope that his role
will be strengthened and that the means will be made
available to him to enable him to carry out his mission in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations.
143. My country endorses the appeal made by the
Secretary-General in his report of 6 June 1985, in which
he urges
“that the Government of South Africa in particular,
and all others in a position to help, make a renewed
14

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write IO: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts ler librairies et les ngences dCpositaircs
du monde entier. Informcz-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes. New York ou Gentve.
KAK

IlOJlYqMTb

i’f3JlNiBR
OpWWi3aUtiH
H areHTCTBEiX
BO BWX

Marazmte
nponare
COMO

M3jJAHMII

OPTAHM3AuMM

O6ldWHeHHblX
PaROHW
MHpa.

HausR
HaBOllLfTe

nnw nrtmure
no anpecy:
GpraHnaanun
ssnaHirti,
HbH)-MOpK
wnki KeHeea.
CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

06’bE~MHEHHblX

HALJMti

MOXWO
KjWiTb
B KHWUHbIX
CflpaBKH
06 H’JLViHWlX
B BaUIehi
06WIHHeHHbIX
Harm&

MWaJHHZiX
KHWKHOM

DE LAS

NACIONES

CeKuws

no

IJNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras
en
tcdas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

90-61439-June

1994-1,925
