xv
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS
OF THE SIXffl COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS
DE LA SIXIEME COMMISSION
permanente a
adresser au Secretaire general de
!'Organisation des Etats amer1cains, le priant d'assister aux sessions de l' Assemhlee generale

253 (III). Invitation

253 (III). Permanent invitation to the
Secretary-General of the Organization of American States to he
present at the sessions of the Gen•
eral Assembly

L'Assemblee generale
Deci.de de demander au Secretaire general d'in..

The General Assembly
Resolves that the Secretary-General be requested
to invite the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States to be present as an
observer at the sessions of the General Assembly.

viter le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Etats americains a assister aux sessions de l'Assemblee generale en qualite d'observateur.

Cent-cinquante et unieme seance pleniere,
le 16 octobre 1948.

Hundred and fifty-first plenary meeting,
16 October 1948.

of treaties and international agreements

254 (Ill). Enregistrement et publication des traites et accords internationaux

A

A

The General Assembly,
Considering that the United Nations Charter

L 'A,aemb/Je genbale,
Considerant que la Charte des Nations Unies

requires that treaties and international agreements be not only registered but also published
as soon as possible; and
Con:ndering that the practical value, for Governments, scientific institutions and all the circles
concerned, of publishing treaties and international agreements also depends in large measure
upon the degree of accuracy and precision of the
published translations,
instructs the Secretary-General to take all
the necessary steps to ensure that registered
treaties or agreements shall be published with
the least possible delay and that the translations
shall reach the highest possible level of accuracy
and precision.

impose non seulement l' enregistrement mais la
publication des traites et accords internationam
le plus t6t possible,
Con,ulerant que la valeur pratique pour les
Gouvernements, les institutions scientifiques et
tous les milieux interesses, de la publication des
traites et accords internationaui: depend aussi,
dans une large mesure, du degre d'exactitude et
de precision des traductions publiees,
Charge le Secretaire general de prendre toutes
les mesures necessaires pour que les traites ou
accords enregistres soient publies avec le mains
de delai possible et pour que Jes traductions
atteignent le plus haut degre possible d'exactitude et de precision.

254 (III). Registration and publication

I

Hundred and fift!J-.fifth plenan; meeting,
3 Nonember 1948.

Cent-ci"nquante-cinqu,·eme seance plenidre.
le 3 novembre 1948.

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements (A/613 ),
Havine noted that relatively few treaties and
other international agreements have been registered to date, and that less than half of the number of States Members of the United Nations have
registered any treaties or other international
agreements,
Comi·deri"ng that all Member States have by
159

B

L',foembUe generate,
Ayant etudie le rapport du Secretaire general
sur l' enregistrement et la publication des traites
et accords internationaux (A/613);
Ayant note qu'a ce jour, un nombre relativement peu eleve de traites et autres accords internationaux ont ete enregistres et que moins de la
moitie des Etats Membres de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies ont fait enregistrer des traites ou
autres accords internationaux,
Connderant que tous les Etats Membres ont
