S/2021/703

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 August 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 3 August 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
India assumed the Presidency of the Security Council on 1 August 2021, at a
time when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) restrictions are slowly easing across the
globe, particularly in the United States of America, including in New York City. While
the situation is far from normal, including complications related to the new Delta
variant, the easing of restrictions in New York City has provided an opportunity to
hold meetings in person at United Nations Headquarters, in a controlled environment.
Against this background, and adhering to the advice of the Health -care
Management and Occupational Safety and Health Division of the Department of
Operational Support of the Secretariat, the Presidency plans to hold the majority of
the meetings of the Security Council in person in the Security Council Chamber at
Headquarters.
The conduct of meetings of the Security Council at Headquarters, in the Security
Council Chamber, shall be in compliance with the guidelines and the measures set out
in the letters from previous Presidents of the Security Council on working methods,
as appropriate. These include wearing a mask at all times, except while delivering
remarks. The Presidency encourages the vaccination of delegates and Secretariat staff
attending in-person meetings.
One high-level meeting is being planned in virtual format, in view of
international travel restrictions and quarantine guidelines. For that meeting, the
Presidency will continue to implement the relevant working methods set out in the
letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council ( S/2020/372).
The present working methods and guidelines are a response to the current
exceptional and unprecedented circumstances and will not set a precedent for the
future, and may be reviewed, adjusted or discontinued, subject to the agreement of all
members of the Council.
(Signed) T.S. Tirumurti
President of the Security Council

21-10689 (E)

050821

*2110689*
