S/2018/243

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 March 2018
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and
2393 (2017)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the forty-ninth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016) and paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017), in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the
implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system 1 and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for February 2018.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: February 2018
1.
On 24 February, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2401
(2018), by which it demanded, among other things, that all parties cease hostilities
without delay and engage immediately to ensure the full and comprehensive
implementation of that demand by all parties, for a durable humanitarian p ause for at
__________________
1

18-04045 (E)

Input provided by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the International Organization for Migration, the World Food
Programme, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, the United Nations Population Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republ ic, the
Mine Action Service, the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

210318

*1804045*

220318

S/2018/243

least 30 consecutive days throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, to enable the safe,
unimpeded and sustained delivery of humanitarian aid and services and medical
evacuations of the critically sick and wounded, in accordance with applicable
international law. While in some areas the conflict diminished in intensity, there has
been no cessation of hostilities.
2.
In eastern Ghutah, in particular, air strikes, shelling and ground offensives
intensified after the adoption of the resolution and ha ve claimed many hundreds of
civilian lives. The United Nations recorded 29 attacks on health facilities.
Notwithstanding the announcement by the Russian Federation of daily five -hour
humanitarian pauses to allow civilians to leave through the Wafidin cross ing, few did
so. Shelling from eastern Ghutah into Damascus resulted in death and injuries.
3.
Fighting between government forces and non-State armed opposition groups in
the southern and eastern countryside of Idlib Governorate slowed in the second hal f
of February, although civilian deaths and injuries continued to be reported. From 15
December 2017 to 10 February 2018, 385,000 internal displacements were recorded,
with those displaced moving to the central and northern parts of the governorate.
Fighting between the Levant Liberation Organization (Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham), which
is led by Jabhat Fath al-Sham (the former Nusrah Front), and an alliance of non-State
armed opposition groups known as the Syrian Liberation Front broke out on 20
February, disrupting the lives of civilians, the work of humanitarian organizations and
United Nations cross-border shipments for a few days.
4.
Some 20,000 civilians reportedly returned to the city of Raqqah in February,
even though it is not yet considered safe to do so. The widespread presence of
explosive hazards, including unexploded ordnance, landmines and improvised
explosive devices, throughout the city has continued to pose a significant risk to
civilians and humanitarian workers. According to partners on the g round, some 130
civilians have been killed and 658 injured in blasts since the city was retaken from
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in October 2017.
5.
United Nations humanitarian assistance reached millions of people in need,
including some 2 million who received food assistance through regular deliveries.
Access to hard-to-reach and besieged areas remained challenging, with only one interagency convoy reaching a besieged location, that of Nashabiyah, in besieged eastern
Ghutah, on 14 February, where it provided assistance to 7,200 people.
6.
The United Nations estimates that some 2.3 million people (in December, the
estimate was 2.9 million people) are now living in hard -to-reach and besieged
locations in the Syrian Arab Republic, including 413,920 in eight besieged locations
(in December, the figure was 417,566 people), following the removal of Bayt Jinn, in
Rif Dimashq, from the list of besieged locations.

3.
On 24 February, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2401
(2018), by which it demanded that all parties cease hostilities without delay; a durable
pause for at least 30 consecutive days throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, to enable
the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of humanitarian aid and services and
medical evacuations of the critically sick and wounded in accordance with applicable
international law; and the immediate deployment of humanitarian convoys each week,
following the start of the cessation of hostilities. It also called upon all parties to lift
the sieges of populated areas, including in eastern Ghutah, Yarmuk, Fu ’ah and

2/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

Kafraya. The Council affirmed that the cessation of hostilities would not apply to
military operations against terrorist groups and those associated with them, as
designated by the Council.
4.
In support of the implementation of the resolution, my Special Envoy for Syria,
Staffan de Mistura, oversaw a period of intense diplomacy with the Geneva -based
International Syria Support Group Humanitarian Task Force, led by his Senior
Adviser, Jan Egeland, and co-chaired by the Russian Federation and the United States
of America.
5.
The adoption of the resolution and the diplomatic efforts to implement it
notwithstanding, violence continued, in particular in eastern Ghutah and beyond,
including in Afrin, parts of Idlib and into Damascus and its suburbs, resulting in
civilian deaths, injuries and displacement and damage to civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools. Military activities also affected the ability of United
Nations agencies and their partners to deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance.
6.
In besieged eastern Ghutah, air strikes and daily shelling throughout the enclave,
hitting Duma, Harasta, Ayn Tarma, Irbin, Zamalka, Saqba, Hammurah, Misraba,
Mudayra, Jawbar, Jisrayn and Nashabiyah, resulted in civilian deaths and injuries and
the destruction of civilian infrastructure. There were also new allegations of chlorine
attacks. The annex to the present report provides a list of casualties reported by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). The
United Nations recorded 29 attacks on health facilities, 14 on hospitals, 11 on health
centres, 2 on ambulance stations, 1 on a psychiatric hospital and 1 on a medical
warehouse. A ground offensive that intensified on 25 February resulted in the
displacement of thousands towards Duma and Kafr Batna. Markets are reportedly
closed, with very few shops opening and then only intermitte ntly. Prices for basic
goods remain far beyond the purchasing power of most residents, with bread costing
15 to 20 times more than in Damascus.
7.
On 27 February, the three major armed opposition groups in eastern Ghutah —
the Army of Islam (Jaysh al-Islam), the Rahman Corps (Faylaq al-Rahman) and Ahrar
al-Sham — confirmed in writing their commitment to the implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), including ensuring humanitarian access and to expelling from
eastern Ghutah all elements of Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (the Levant Liberation
Organization), the Nusrah Front and Al-Qaida and anyone who belonged to those
groups (see S/2018/169). On 26 February, the Russian Federation announced a daily
five-hour humanitarian pause, starting from 27 February, to allow civilians to leave
eastern Ghutah through the Wafidin crossing. Two people were reported to have left,
but some were reportedly not permitted to do so by non-State armed opposition
groups inside the enclave.
8.
Attacks on residential neighbourhoods of Damascus also continued from eastern
Ghutah, resulting in deaths, injuries and damage to civilian infrastructure.

18-04045

3/21

S/2018/243

Figure I
Key dates in February 2018

25 February

9.
Fighting between government forces and non-State armed opposition groups in
the southern and eastern countryside of Idlib Governorate slowed in the second half
of February, although civilian deaths and injuries continued to be reported. From
15 December 2017 to 10 February 2018, 385,000 displacements were recorded, with
those displaced moving to the central and northern parts of the governorate. Many of
those who fled had already been displaced and are forced to live in makeshift camps
or in the open. Formal camps are operating at up to 400 per cent of their capacity. The
situation was further compounded by attacks by two non-State armed opposition
groups, Ahrar al-Sham and Nur al-Din al-Zanki, forming the Syrian Liberation Front,
against Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham across Idlib and western Aleppo Governorates,
impeding civilian movement, delaying United Nations cross-border shipments for
some days and creating a more challenging operational environment for humanitarian
partners.
10. From 19 February, sniper activity and artillery shelling was reported in
residential areas in the besieged towns of Fu’ah and Kafraya, Idlib Governorate. On
20 February, local sources reported that five medical cases and their family members
(16 people in total) had been evacuated from the towns by the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent to hospitals in government-controlled areas.
11. Turkish forces, along with Syrian non-State armed opposition groups affiliated
with Operation Euphrates Shield, continued Operation Olive Branch in Afrin, Aleppo
Governorate. On 20 January, the Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations
in New York had indicated that Turkey had “initiated a military operation on
20 January 2018 … aimed at ensuring [the country’s] border security [and]
neutralizing terrorists in Afrin” (see S/2018/53). There have been reports of civilian
deaths, injuries and displacement. The local authorities are also reportedly restricting
movement, with most civilians not permitted to leave the district at checkpoints. Some
5,000 people have, however, been registered as displaced from Afrin district to
elsewhere in Aleppo Governorate since 20 January.
12. Some 20,600 civilians reportedly returned to Raqqah in February, for an
estimated total of 86,600 since October 2017. The widespread presence of explosive
hazards, including unexploded ordnance, landmines and improvised explosive
devices, throughout the city has continued to pose a significant risk to civilians and
humanitarian workers. The systematic survey, marking and subsequent removal of
those hazards are a prerequisite for the safe return of civilians and the safe delivery

4/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

of humanitarian aid. Health actors are recording an average of between 25 and 30
blast-related civilian injuries and deaths per week. The number of child victims,
especially boys, is increasing as more families return. Some 130 civilians have been
killed and 658 injured in blasts since the city was retaken from ISIL in October 2017.
Medical and other services remain limited there, with only one maternity hospital and
a health clinic operating. The lack of clean water is another serious concern.
Humanitarian agencies continue to emphasize that, owing to the high prevalence of
landmines, booby traps and explosive remnants of war, it is not safe for civilians to
return to the city. Owing to the conditions, humanitarian organizations have only a
limited presence on the ground.
13. Government forces and the Syrian Democratic Forces have continued to clash
with ISIL in southern rural Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, along the eastern bank of the
Euphrates and the border with Iraq, reportedly resulting in civilian casualties and
small-scale displacement. Explosive hazard contamination is also a threat there,
reportedly resulting in the death of 26 people during the reporting period. An
estimated 325,000 people remain in need of assistance in the governorate. Priority
needs include health support and water and sanitation. In the city of Dayr al -Zawr,
many streets remain inaccessible owing to accumulated rubble and the risk of
explosive hazards. Reportedly, more than 60 per cent of the city is damaged and
shelter limited, causing inflated rents.
14. The Ministry of Defence publicly reported that government forces and their
allies had conducted military operations in Aleppo, Hama, Idlib and Rif Dimashq
Governorates in February.
15. The combined joint task force known as Operation Inherent Resolve (United
States-led coalition) issued a statement on 8 February in which it declared:
Syrian pro-regime forces initiated an unprovoked attack against well established Syrian Democratic Forces headquarters on 7 February. Coalition
service members in an advise, assist, and accompany capacity were co -located
with SDF partners during the attack eight kilo metres east of the agreed-upon
Euphrates River de-confliction line. In defense of Coalition and partner forces,
the Coalition conducted strikes against attacking forces to repel the act of
aggression against partners engaged in the Global Coalition's defea t-Daesh
mission. The Coalition remains committed to focusing on the defeat -Daesh
mission in the Middle Euphrates River Valley and asserts its non-negotiable
right to act in self-defence.
16. The Department of Defense of the United States also publicly rep orted that, in
February, the coalition had carried out 135 strikes against ISIL targets in Dayr al-Zawr
and Hasakah Governorates, 129 of which near Albu Kamal, Dayr al -Zawr.
Protection
17. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians and to damage
and destroy civilian infrastructure. Explosive weapons continued to be fired into
populated areas, indiscriminately killing and injuring civilians, destroying and
damaging vital infrastructure and leaving communities littered with hazar ds that
killed and injured civilians and impeded humanitarian access. The use of improvised
explosive devices in some areas added to the complexity of the explosive hazard
threat. The many civilian casualties and the scale of civilian destruction remain a
strong indication that violations of the fundamental rules of distinction,
proportionality and precaution, and of the resulting prohibition on the launching of

18-04045

5/21

S/2018/243

indiscriminate attacks, are continuing. Children are particularly affected. The year
2017 was the deadliest for children in the country since the beginning of the conflict.
18. Fighting continued to have an impact on civilian infrastructure, including
medical facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. On the basis of information
received by OHCHR, civilian casualties occurred in various governorates, in possible
violation of international humanitarian law. OHCHR has documented alleged
incidents perpetrated by parties to the conflict, including government forces and their
allies, non-State armed opposition groups and their allies and Security Council designated terrorist groups.
19. In addition to violations documented by OHCHR, the Government provided
OHCHR with information on alleged violations. The United Nations cannot verify
these allegations independently. In notes verbales received on 14 and 15 February, the
Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic in Geneva claimed that “85 rockets
[were] fired by terrorist groups on Damascus between 22 January and 12 February
2018” and that “the total number of civilian deaths was 44 and 158 civilians injured,
most of them women and children”. In addition, in a note verbale received on
27 February, the Permanent Mission provided a list of “shelling with mortars and
missiles, and sniper attacks targeting residential areas in Damascus city, that contains
numbers, locations, casualties and injuries of civilians including children in the
Syrian Arab Republic which resulted from the terrorist attacks carried out by terrorist
armed groups in the period from 21 to 24 February”. It stated that “the total number
of civilian casualties was 5 deaths and 123 civilians injured, most of them women and
children”.
20. Notwithstanding the call upon the Syrian authorities by the Human Rights
Council in its resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22 to cooperate with OHCHR, including
through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote
human rights, OHCHR reporting remains limited, given that the Government has not
granted it access to the country.
21. The United Nations and its health partners verified 41 attacks that affected
health-care facilities and personnel in February, of which 29 were in the eastern
Ghutah area of Rif Dimashq and 10 were in Idlib, with 1 each in Damascus and Hama
Governorates. Collectively, the attacks resulted in at least 19 people killed and 28
injured, including four health workers killed and seven injured. The attacks comprised
22 incidents involving hospitals in Rif Dimashq, Idlib, Hama and Damascus, 15
involving health centres in Rif Dimashq and Idlib, 2 involving ambulance systems in
Rif Dimashq, where seven ambulances were damaged, 1 involving a medical
warehouse in Rif Dimashq and 1 involving a blood bank in Idlib.
22. Educational facilities also continued to suffer the impact of the fighting, with
the United Nations verifying three attacks affecting schools and children. On
2 February, nine children were severely injured by unexploded ordnance at a school
in the village of Judaydah al-Fadl, Rif Dimashq. On 6 February, air strikes on the
Shamali neighbourhood in the village of Tarmala, south-west Idlib, hit a secondary
school, causing partial damage. On 8 February, a school in Irbin, Rif Dimashq, was
seriously damaged by air strikes. On 21 February, two 14 -year-old boys studying at
an United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) school were reportedly killed as they walked home after school as a mortar
shell struck near the Jaramana refugee camp, Rif Dimashq. Two other children were
reportedly injured.

6/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points
1.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need, including from within the Syrian Arab Republic. Regular
programming reached more than 2 million people with food assistance through 1,744
deliveries.
2.
One United Nations inter-agency convoy reached a besieged location,
Nashabiyah, eastern Ghutah, on 14 February, providing assistance to 7,200 people.
The total number of people reached under the plan for January -February was 7,200,
or 0.8 per cent of the 844,720 people to whom access had originally been requested.
3.
Cross-border assistance remains a vital part of the humanitarian response. In
February, 499 trucks (17 consignments) delivered life -saving assistance to more than
1 million people in need in northern and southern areas of the country, through cross border deliveries.

23. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas as a result of active conflict, shifting conflict lines,
administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions imposed on the movement of
people and goods by the parties to the conflict. In particular, access by the United
Nations and its partners to people living in besieged and hard -to-reach locations
remained a critical concern. Bureaucratic impediments, such as the non -issuance of
facilitation letters by the Government, remained a significant factor in delays or non deliveries, the creation of a tripartite coordination mechanism to tackle such problems
notwithstanding. The most recent meeting of the mechanism was held in 12 December
2017, at which time there was no breakthrough on access-related issues.
24. The United Nations estimates that, as at February 2018, 413,920 people were
living in eight areas under siege, compared with 417,566 in December 2017. The Bayt
Jinn enclave, with a population of 3,646, in Rif Dimashq Governorate, has been
removed from the list of besieged locations, given that a local agreement was reached
in late December. The enclave remains on the list of hard -to-reach areas as
humanitarian access and the freedom of movement of civili ans remain constrained.
An area is considered by the United Nations to be besieged when it is surrounded by
armed actors, with the sustained effect that civilians, the sick and the wounded cannot
regularly leave and humanitarian assistance cannot regularly enter. Of the eight
besieged locations, five (accounting for 95 per cent of the total besieged population)
are besieged by government forces, one (3 per cent of the total besieged population)
is besieged by both government forces and non-State armed opposition groups and
two (2 per cent of the total besieged population) are besieged by non -State armed
opposition groups. In addition, it is estimated that some 1.9 million people are living
in hard-to-reach locations. That figure represents a decrease compared with the
previous estimate of 2.49 million, mainly as a result of access improvements in Rif
Dimashq Governorate, in particular around Tall, in north-eastern parts of the country,
notably rural areas around Raqqah, and in some subdistricts in Hasakah and Dayr
al-Zawr.

18-04045

7/21

S/2018/243

25. Under the United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for January and February,
access was requested to 26 locations in besieged and hard -to-reach areas, with the
objective of reaching 844,720 people. Convoys are prepared for areas with
multisectoral needs where access is limited, to ensure that United Nations support is
based on needs. Only one convoy was able to deploy, to Nashabiyah, eastern Ghutah,
with assistance for 7,200 people (see table 1). The total number of people reached
under the plan for January-February was 7,200, or 0.8 per cent of the total number of
people to whom access had originally been requested. This number does not include
convoys carrying supplies delivered by other humanitarian actors.
Table 1
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, February 2018

Date

Location

14 February

Nashabiyah

Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries
reached

16 500

Type of assistance

7 200 Multisectoral

26. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single-agency deliveries.
Such deliveries are undertaken in areas in which access is less challenging through
an agency’s regular programming. In February, the World Food Programme (WFP)
submitted 1,744 official requests to the Syrian authori ties to obtain facilitation letters
for the transport of food assistance to locations throughout the country, all of which
were approved. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) submitted 28 requests for facilitation letters for the movement of core relief
items and livelihood kits, of which 22 were approved and 6 rejected for security
reasons.
Figure II
Percentage of people reached each month in besieged areas through
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

October

November

December

January

February

27. United Nations partners continued to face response challenges in north -eastern
parts of the country, owing to, among other things, administrative restrictions,
pending security approvals for access to restricted areas and high levels of explosive
hazard contamination. Following the suspension of non-governmental organization

8/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

activities in January 2018 owing to restrictions by the national and local authorities,
which affected 25 national non-governmental organizations, an agreement was
reached on 31 January to allow for the resumption of United Nations regular
programming in the north-east and for some humanitarian partners to resume their
work. The agreement is, however, valid only for two months and covers a limited
number of partners. It is critical that all humanitarian partners be permitted to
continue to provide much-needed assistance to affected people in sites for internally
displaced persons and host communities without restrictions, including to deter push
factors compelling the displaced to return in the absence of safe and sustainable
conditions. The United Nations continued to engage with the local administration and
the Governor of Hasakah to identify a long-term solution to national
non-governmental organization registration issues and enable the full, unhindered
resumption of humanitarian activities in the north-east.
Figure III
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations, February 2018

7,200 people reached
People reached in hard-to-

People reached in besieged

Cross-line convoys

reach areas

areas

0

7,200

1

0%

1.3 %

Proportion of people in hardto-reach areas reached

Proportion of people reached in besieged areas

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas: 1.9 million
Number of people in besieged areas: 413,920
28. Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for 3,810 treatments
were rejected or removed from inter-agency convoys by the Syrian authorities,
according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Details regarding the treatments
and supplies removed are shown in table 2. Additional medical supplies were
scheduled to be delivered as part of the inter-agency convoy plan; however, only one
inter-agency convoy was able to proceed in February.
Table 2
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys, February 2018

18-04045

Location

Number of treatments

Types of supplies

Nashabiyah

3 810

Syringes, IV catheter, sterile surgical gloves,
anesthetics, adrenaline, anti-asthma medicines

9/21

S/2018/243

Humanitarian response
29. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners reached millions of people
in need through all available access modalities, including regular programming from
within the Syrian Arab Republic, whereby humanitarian deliveries reach those in need
without crossing conflict lines; cross-line convoys, whereby assistance from within
the country is delivered across conflict lines; and cross-border deliveries, whereby
assistance is provided to those in need from Jordan and Turkey (see tables 3 and 4).
In addition to the United Nations and its partners, non-governmental organizations
continued to deliver life-saving assistance to people in need. Local authorities in
many areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continued to
provide services where possible.
Table 3
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities, February 2018
Organization

Number of
people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

60 000

International Organization for Migration

32 760

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 747 460

United Nations Children’s Fund

1 500 000

United Nations Development Programme

256 534

United Nations Population Fund

57 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

247 480

World Food Programme

2 703 725

World Health Organization

1 321 068

30. Cross-border deliveries continued from Turkey and Jordan under the terms of
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017)
(see figure IV). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian
authorities in advance of each shipment, including of its content, destination and
number of beneficiaries expected to be reached.
31. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 752 cross-border
consignments, with more than 19,124 trucks (13,037 by way of Bab al -Hawa and
1,941 by way of Bab al-Salam from Turkey and 4,146 by way of Ramtha from
Jordan). These operations complement the aid provided by international and Syrian
non-governmental organizations that provide services to millions more from
neighbouring countries.
32. The United Nations and its implementing partners delivered food assistance to
more than 650,000 people through cross-border deliveries from Turkey and Jordan
(see table 4). Moreover, the United Nations conducted health and medical deliveries,
providing more than 77,000 treatments through the cross-border mechanism. In the
northern part of the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) delivered winter kits, child protection assistance, nutrition, education,
health and water, sanitation and hygiene supplies in four shipments. Winter clothes
and blankets benefited 5,000 and 25,000 children, respectively. Child protection

10/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

supplies, including recreation kits, benefited 40,500 children. Nutrition supplies,
including high-energy biscuits and micronutrients, served 39,725 women and
children. Education supplies, including school bags and school -in-a-box supplies,
served 50,500 children. Health supplies, including essential medicines and
equipment, benefited 35,000 people, while water, sanitation and hygiene supplies,
including family hygiene kits and water purification tablets, served 32,500 people. In
the Governorates of Dar‘a and Qunaytirah, water and sanitation and nutrition supplies
were delivered in two trans-shipments. Water disinfectants served 475,000
beneficiaries, while nutrition supplies, including micronutrients and high -energy
biscuits, benefited more than 27,000 people.
33. Moreover, as part of the second phase of the polio outbreak response, WHO and
UNICEF, together with the Ministry of Health, conducted an inactivated polio vaccine
immunization round that successfully concluded in Damascus and Hasakah
Governorates, parts of Aleppo Governorate and the Jaramana district of Rif Dimashq
Governorate. A total of 233,518 children between 2 and 23 months of age received
the vaccine, representing 71 per cent of the estimated target of 330,000 children.
34. The first round of cash assistance in 2018 was launched by UNRWA on
14 January, targeting up to 418,000 Palestine refugees in need. In February, 186,167
beneficiaries (52,405 families) received cash assistance covering two months, for a
total of $64 million. In addition, UNRWA launched its first round of food assistance
for special hardship cases in January. In February, 4,378 people (1,440 families)
received 2,808 food parcels.
35. In the framework of its winterization programme, as at 26 February, UNHCR
had distributed more than 1.7 million winterized core relief items, including high
thermal blankets, extra plastic sheeting and winter clothes kits, to more than 1 million
people in Dayr al-Zawr, Raqqah, Hasakah, Qunaytirah, Hama, Homs, Aleppo,
Suwayda’, Ladhiqiyah, Tartus, Dar‘a, Damascus and Rif Dimashq Governorates.
UNHCR and its partners also continued to enhance the response to the protection
needs of internally displaced persons, returnees and other crisis -affected populations.
To that end, 4,088 protection interventions were conducted, reaching 65,871
beneficiaries, comprising 54,261 people through general protection activ ities, 1,527
through child protection activities and 10,083 through more than 400 awareness raising campaigns on prevention and response activities in relation to sexual and
gender-based violence throughout 12 governorates. The United Nations Population
Fund reached 294,723 people with reproductive health and sexual and gender -based
violence response activities.
36. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations, monitoring 499 trucks in 17 consignments by six United
Nations entities, confirming the humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian
authorities after each shipment. The United Nations provides 48 -hour notice to the
Government for all shipments. Once in the country, United Nations partners ensur e
that shipments arrive at the designated warehouses. Independent third -party
companies contracted by the United Nations ensure independent verification of the
assistance arriving at the warehouses and also monitor the distribution and/or service
provision. The Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of the
Governments of Jordan and Turkey.

18-04045

11/21

S/2018/243

Figure IV
Number of beneficiaries targeted by the United Nations and its partners by
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, February 2018
(Thousands)

1,080

560
277
91
Education

226

24
Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Non-food
items

Food

Health

Table 4
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries by sector and
by district, February 2018

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation and
hygiene

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items

Bab

–

–

2 500

–

–

2 500

Aleppo

I‘zaz

64 170

138 875

–

–

–

39 960

Aleppo

Jarabulus

1 105

–

14 973

–

–

5 000

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

17 000

87 850

–

18 000

–

12 000

Dar‘a

Sanamayn

–

18 075

38 000

–

2 082

–

Dar‘a

Dar‘a

–

145 522 243 387

–

10 757

–

Dar‘a

Izra‘

–

60139 115 470

–

–

–

Hama

Suqaylibiyah

14 500

–

–

–

–

–

Hama

Muhradah

6 500

–

–

–

Idlib

Ma‘arah

18 300

25 000

–

–

–

9,072

Idlib

Ariha

11 800

56 250

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Harim

33 500

407 140

10 000

19 990

6 275

31 439

Idlib

Idlib

24 500

106 850

–

53 026

–

474

Idlib

Jisr al-Shugur

35 000

–

62 000

–

3 450

80 000

Qunaytirah

Fiq

–

2 250

6 000

–

1 664

10 200

Qunaytirah

Qunaytirah

–

29 884

67 400

–

–

86 465

Suwayda’

Suwayda’

–

1 685

–

–

–

–

Governorate

District

Aleppo

–

37. The Russian Federation sent information bulletins to the United Nations from
the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other Member States also
continued to provide bilateral and other forms of humanitarian assistance.

12/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

Visas and registrations
38. A total of 80 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government in February. Of those, 50 were approved, 28 remain pending and 2 were
rejected. Of the 80 new visa applications submitted in December 2017 and January
2018, 56 were approved by February, while 24 remain pending. A total of 55 United
Nations visa renewal requests were submitted in February, of which 35 were approved
and 20 remain pending. An additional 30 requests for visa renewals submitted in
January were approved in February. For some United Nations entities in the Syrian
Arab Republic, a significant number of staff are not in plac e or cannot be replaced
owing to the non-issuance of visas for months, formal requests notwithstanding.
39. A total of 23 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government to operate in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
40. Programmes of the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
system are implemented in areas affected by frequent clashes among belligerents, air
strikes, regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and a symmetric attacks. In addition,
and as result of activities relating to the armed conflict, some areas of operation are
highly contaminated with explosive hazards that pose an elevated risk to the
implementation of United Nations activities in those areas. On 12 February, a mortar
shell landed on the UNRWA Zahirah distribution centre in Damascus. Minor damage
was reported.
41. Since the beginning of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nati ons or agencies of the United
Nations system, of whom 18 were UNRWA staff members, 66 staff members and
volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and 8 staff members and volunteers of
the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of international and national
non-governmental organizations are also reported to have been killed.
42. A total of 27 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme and 26
UNRWA staff members) are detained or missing.

III. Observations
43. I welcome the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018). It is true that in some areas
the conflict has diminished in intensity, yet there has been no ce ssation of hostilities.
In eastern Ghutah in particular, air strikes, shelling and ground offensives have
intensified since the adoption of the resolution and claimed many hundreds of civilian
lives.
44. Military escalation and the resulting increased civilian death and destruction
across the Syrian Arab Republic after months of diplomatic engagement by Member
States and parties to the conflict is an alarming development. It is civilians who are
suffering the devastating and long-lasting consequences. I remind all parties of their
obligations and responsibilities under international humanitarian and human rights
law. They must respect civilians and civilian infrastructure at all times and take
constant care to spare them from harm. They must also evacuate, c are for and protect
the wounded and sick and respect and protect medical personnel and facilities. Efforts

18-04045

13/21

S/2018/243

to combat terrorist groups designated by the Security Council do not supplant these
obligations.
45. Accountability for serious violations is a requirement under international law
and central to achieving sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my
call for the situation in the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
I also call upon all parties to the conflict, Me mber States, civil society and the United
Nations system as a whole to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under Inter national Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
46. The United Nations and its implementing partners remain focused on reaching
those most in need, including the 5.6 million people considered to be in acute need.
The impartial and needs-based approach means that the United Nations will continue
to seek to deliver aid and to provide services to millions of people in a principled
manner, regardless of their location.
47. My Special Envoy is working steadfastly towards the implementation o f
resolution 2254 (2015) and the pursuit of a political solution to this horrific conflict,
which enters its grim eighth year in March. I ask all Member States to continue to
support his efforts, notably through continuing engagement with the negotiating
parties to encourage their constructive commitment to the United Nations -led
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, and to support the establishment of a constitutional
committee. I continue to offer my fullest support to my Special Envoy in this pursuit.
48. Our common objective should be to alleviate and end the suffering of the Syrian
people. What the Syrian people need immediately has been made abundantly clear
and affirmed in resolution 2401 (2018). Civilians need a cessation of hostilities,
protection, access to basic goods and services and an end to sieges. Political efforts
to bring the war to an end must be accorded priority and redoubled by all parties to
the conflict. If those aspects are addressed together, it is possible to alleviate and truly
end the suffering of the Syrian people and bring about sustainable peace in their
country.

14/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
February 2018 *
Damascus and Rif Dimashq Governorates
• On 2 February, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in opposition-held
Hamuriyah, reportedly injuring a boy. On the same day, two strikes hit
residential areas, killing 3 civilians and injuring at least 20, including five
children.
• On 4 February, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in oppositioncontrolled Duma, reportedly killing 6 civilians, including two women and two
boys, and injuring at least 30 others, one of them a woman who died the
following day.
• On 5 February, an air strike hit a residential area in opposition-held Hazzah,
reportedly killing six civilians, including two girls and an ambulance driver.
• On 5 February, air strikes and ground-based strikes hit residential areas in
opposition-controlled Irbin, allegedly killing five civilians, including a woman
and two girls.
• On 5 February, air strikes hit a residential area in opposition -held Bayt Siwa,
reportedly killing 10 civilians, including two women and two boys .
• On 6 February, air strikes hit a residential area in Hamuriyah, allegedly killing
4 civilians, including a woman and a child, and injuring at least 20 others.
• On 6 February, air strikes hit a residential area in opposition -controlled Saqba,
damaging several residential buildings, and allegedly killing 3 civilians and
injuring at least 15 others, including women and children.
• On 6 February, air strikes hit residential areas of opposition -held Kafr Batna,
reportedly killing 6 civilians, one of them a child, and injuring at least 50 others.
An air strike also hit a building hosting a kindergarten, which was partly
destroyed.
• On 6 February, air strikes hit Kafr Batna, reportedly damaging the mental health
care department of a medical point and hitting a medical clinic, with no reports
of casualties.
• On 6 February, air strikes hit residential areas of Irbin, reportedly killing
12 civilians, including a male nurse, three women and four boys, and injuring
at least 50 others. Among the 12 casualties was a family of six, allegedly killed
as the building in which they were living collapsed while they were inside.

* In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments
on the ground and the incidents that occurred during the month that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has been able to corroborate re lates to
compliance with Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties
in the Syrian Arab Republic. The information is provided without prejudice to the work of the
Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a
comprehensive listing of all violations of international humanitaria n law and violations and
abuses of international human rights law that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the
reporting period.

18-04045

15/21

S/2018/243

• On 6 February, air strikes and ground-based strikes hit a residential area in
opposition-held Zamalka, reportedly killing four civilians, including a woman
and a girl.
• On 6 February, air strikes hit a medical facility in a residential area of
opposition-controlled Harasta, reportedly killing the son of an aid worker in the
facility and injuring seven other civilians, including an ai d worker.
• On 6 February, air strikes hit residential areas of Duma, allegedly killing at least
31 civilians, including 12 women and four boys, and injuring more than 100
others, including 37 children and 27 women. Ground-based strikes then
reportedly also hit those locations, injuring at least two volunteers from local
rescue teams as they were providing support to civilians.
• On 6 February, air strikes hit a residential area in the vicinity of opposition -held
Mudayra, allegedly killing 3 civilians, including two women, and injuring at
least 25 others. A school in the area, which was unoccupied at the time, was
damaged.
• On 6 February, air strikes hit a residential area of Misraba, reportedly killing
5 civilians, including two women and two boys, and injuring at least 40 others.
• On 6 February, ground-based strikes hit the government-held area of Homsi in
Jaramana, reportedly killing two boys and injuring four civilians, including a
woman.
• On 6 February, ground-based strikes hit the vicinity of a bus station in the
government-controlled Bab Tuma area in the old city of Damascus, allegedly
killing two civilians and injuring seven others, including an adolescent.
• On 7 February, air strikes hit residential areas of Hamuriyah, allegedly killing
at least 9 civilians, including four boys, two girls and two women, and injuring
at least 25 others, including women and children.
• On 7 February, air strikes hit residential areas in Bayt Siwa, reportedly killing
10 civilians, including a man, his two sons, another boy and two girls, and
injuring at least 15 others, including three women and three children.
• On 7 February, air strikes and ground-based strikes hit residential areas of
Duma, allegedly killing at least 19 civilians, including five women and three
boys, and injuring at least 30 others.
• On 8 February, ground-based strikes hit Faysal Street in the government-held
Amarah residential area of Damascus, reportedly killing a civilian.
• On 8 February, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the governmentheld Assad suburb, Rif Dimashq, reportedly killing two civilians and injuring
seven others, including three women.
• On 8 February, an air strike hit a residential area in Hamuriyah, reportedly
killing 6 civilians, one of them a boy, and injuring at least 17 others.
• On 8 February, a series of air strikes hit residential areas of Irbin, resulting in
the collapse of several residential buildings where civilians were seeking refuge
in the basements. The strikes reportedly killed 26 civilians, including two
women, eight boys, two girls and an aid worker, and injured at least 115 others.
Numerous ground-based strikes on residential areas were also reported.

16/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

• On 8 February, air strikes followed by ground-based strikes hit residential areas
in opposition-held Jisrayn, reportedly killing 16 civilians, including five
women, two boys and a girl, and injuring at least 25 others.
• On 8 February, air strikes and ground-based strikes hit residential areas of
Duma, reportedly killing 5 civilians, including a woman and a girl, and injuring
at least 30 others.
• On 8 February, air strikes hit a residential area in Saqba, reportedly killing
3 civilians, including a woman and two boys, and injuring at least 12 others.
• On 8 February, air strikes hit a residential area in Harasta, reportedly in the
vicinity of an education charity, killing a teacher and an adult student as they
were leaving the premises.
• On 9 February, air strikes hit residential areas in Irbin, reportedly killing seven
civilians and injuring at least seven others, including a woman and several
children.
• On 9 February, air strikes hit residential areas of Duma, allegedly killing
5 civilians, including two girls, and injuring at least 50 others.
• On 9 February, air strikes hit a residential area of Harasta, reportedly killing six
civilians, including a boy and a girl, and injuring at least six others.
• On 9 February, ground-based strikes hit a residential area of government-held
Warwar in north Damascus. One hit a residential building, which allegedly
caused a fire that killed two civilians and injured four others.
• On 19 February, air strikes and ground-based strikes hit a farm located in a semirural area of opposition-held Utaya, reportedly killing six civilians, including a
mother and her children (a boy and three girls).
• On 19 February, air strikes hit a residential area in Jisrayn, reportedly killing
four civilians.
• On 19 February, air strikes reportedly hit residential areas of Hamuriyah,
reportedly killing at least 20 civilians, including two women, two boys and a
girl, and injuring at least 35 others. Ground-based strikes allegedly hit the area
both before and after the incidents.
• On 19 February, air strikes hit residential areas of Saqba, alleg edly killing
13 civilians, including two women and a girl, and injuring at least 45 others.
• On 19 February, two air strikes hit residential areas of Kafr Batna, reportedly
killing two civilians, one of whom was a woman, and injuring at least 30 others.
• On 19 February, air strikes and ground-based strikes hit residential areas in
Misraba, reportedly killing 10 civilians, including a woman, a boy and two girls.
• On 19 February, air strikes hit residential areas in Duma, allegedly killing at
least two girls and a boy and injuring at least 20 other civilians.
• On 19 February, several air strikes hit a residential area in Hazzah, reportedly
killing 7 civilians, including five women and a child, and injuring at least
30 others.
• On the evening of 19 February, several medical facilities located in residential
areas were reportedly hit and either partly damaged or put out of service by air
strikes, including the Hayat hospital located in a residential area in Hazzah, the

18-04045

17/21

S/2018/243

obstetrics hospital in Saqba, a medical point in Saqba and a hospital located in
a semi-rural area in Marj, where a doctor was reportedly killed and at least one
patient injured.
• On 20 February, air strikes hit a residential area in Bayt Siwa, reportedly killing
22 civilians, including eight women, seven children and a first responder.
• On 20 February, air strikes hit residential areas in Hamuriyah, allegedly killing
5 civilians, including a woman, an aid worker and a media worker, and injuring
at least 15 others.
• On 20 February, air strikes hit a residential area in Irbin, reportedly killing seven
civilians, including two boys and two girls.
• On 20 February, air strikes hit residential areas in Saqba, reportedly killing
10 civilians, including a woman, three girls and a medical worker, and injuring
at least 25 others.
• On 20 February, ground-based strikes hit the vicinity of the Presidential Square
in government-controlled Jaramana, reportedly killing 2 civilians, one of whom
was a woman, and injuring at least 12 others.
• On 20 February, ground-based strikes hit near Abbasiyin Square in governmentcontrolled Damascus, reportedly killing a female civilian.
• On 20 February, ground-based strikes hit in the vicinity of a school located in
government-held Sha‘alan, Damascus, reportedly killing three children.
• On 20 February, ground-based strikes hit the government-held area of the
National Museum and reportedly killed two civilians, including a taxi driver,
and injured five others.
• On 25 February, air strikes hit a hospital with surgical women’s and paediatric
departments in Saqba, reportedly putting it out of service and destroying some
of the remaining stocks of medication.
• From the morning of 25 February, air strikes and heavy shelling hit the
opposition-held town of Shaffuniyah. OHCHR received reports that toxic agents
might have been released following the strikes and that several civilians,
including six children, were experiencing respiratory difficulties. One of them
reportedly died on the same day, and a second on 1 March.
• On 26 February, air strikes hit a residential area of Duma. One reportedly hit a
residential building, which then collapsed, allegedly killing 13 civilians,
including four women, six girls and a boy, who had sought shelter in the
basement.
• On 26 February, air strikes reportedly hit the building of the opposition -run local
council of Shaffuniyah, reportedly killing six civilians in the basement,
including the council’s head and two other council members. Sources on the
ground allege that incendiary weapons were used.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 1 February, air strikes hit a residential area of the opposition -controlled
village of A‘bad, in southern Aleppo, reportedly killing six civilians, including
a woman and three children.

18/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

• On 2 February, air strikes around a camp for internally displaced persons on the
outskirts of the village of Tall Hadiyah, in the vicinity of opposition -controlled
territory in southern Aleppo, allegedly killed seven civilians, including two
women and a child.
• On 19 February, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the village of
Basutah in Shirawah district, just south of Afrin, allegedly killing a 13 -year-old
girl and injuring at least seven other children between 7 and 14 years of age
from the same family.
• On 21 February, a ground-based strike hit a street in the centre of Afrin,
reportedly damaging civilian infrastructure, including the building that housed
the Malak Association, which provides services for children with disabilities
and orphans. Two boys inside the building were slightly injured by shattered
glass. The Association reportedly hosted 12 children and seven staffers, all of
whom were relocated to another building in the city.
• On 27 February, ground-based strikes hit near a moving vehicle in the village
of Yalanquz, Jindayris district, allegedly killing a civilian accompanying his
mother to their home in the village. The pair had earlier fled towards Afrin as a
result of the fighting.
Idlib Governorate
• On 4 February, air strikes hit a residential area of opposition-controlled Kafr
Nubl in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man district, reportedly killing 9 civilians, including
two women and three boys (several from the same family), and injuring at least
20 others.
• On 4 February, air strikes hit a large hospital in opposition-controlled Ma‘arrat
al-Nu‘man, allegedly causing substantial damage. The incident also reportedly
injured at least five newborns and several other patients, including some
wounded in an earlier incident, who displayed symptoms of suffocation. Patients
had to be evacuated to nearby houses or to the hospital in Kafr Nubl.
• On 4 February, air strikes hit a residential area in opposition -held eastern
Saraqib, reportedly injuring 11 civilian men, including three first r esponders.
OHCHR spoke to a medical source who had treated the injured and who reported
that the victims all presented symptoms such as suffocation, burning eyes and
agitation, which he noted was consistent with exposure to toxic agents.
• On 4 February, air strikes hit a building in a residential area of oppositioncontrolled Wadi al-Nasim, in the south-east of the city of Idlib, allegedly killing
12 civilians, including four women and four girls (one of whom a 1 -month-old
infant), and injuring at least 21 others, including five women and four children.
• On 5 February, air strikes hit a surgical hospital in Kafr Nubl, reportedly
resulting in extensive damage, including to the emergency room and patients ’
rooms, and the destruction of an ambulance parked outside the building. The
patients, some of whom were brought from another hospital struck the day
before, had to be evacuated.
• On 5 February, air strikes hit a primary health centre in the opposition -held
village of Mardikh, Saraqib subdistrict, allegedly causing substantial damage
and putting it out of service. On the same day, air strikes hit a blood bank in
Saraqib, allegedly causing further material damage. The facility was previously
hit and rendered inoperable on 18 January.

18-04045

19/21

S/2018/243

• On 6 February, ground-based strikes hit the Bayan camp for internally displaced
persons in the opposition-controlled town of Atimah, near the border with
Turkey and in the vicinity of Afrin, reportedly killing an 8 -year-old girl from
Raqqah and injuring seven civilians, including two girls, a boy and two women.
• On 7 February, air strikes hit a residential area in the Western neighbourhood of
Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man, reportedly killing 12 civilians, including a woman, and
injuring at least 10 others.
• On 8 February, air strikes hit a primary health centre in the opposition-held
village of Mishmishan and a nearby high school in eastern Jisr al -Shugur,
allegedly killing eight civilians, including two women and four children, and
injuring at least 15 others, including three first responders. The strikes
reportedly damaged the school and put the medical facility out of service.
• On 8 February, air strikes hit a residential area of the opposition -controlled
village of Kafr Sajnah in Khan Shaykhun, reportedly killing a woman a nd her
child and injuring at least eight other civilians, six of them children.
• On 8 February, air strikes hit a first responder facility in Khan Shaykhun,
reportedly killing three male first responders and injuring four others. The
facility was damaged. In addition, a nearby hospital, understood to be out of
service following a previous strike, was further damaged, with a male civilian
working as a guard allegedly killed.
• On 9 February, air strikes hit residential areas of the opposition -controlled town
of Has in Kafr Nubl, reportedly killing 15 civilians, including eight women and
three children, two boys and a girl, and injuring at least 22 others.
Homs and Hama Governorates
• On 1 February, air strikes hit residential areas in opposition-controlled Kafr
Nabudah, reportedly killing 5 civilians, including two women, and injuring at
least 10 others.
• On 6 February, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the oppositioncontrolled village of Sam‘alil, Hulah district, reportedly killing two civilian
men.
• On 9 February, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Lataminah,
reportedly injuring two civilian women.
• On 16 February, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of oppositioncontrolled Ghantu in Hulah, reportedly injuring at least five civilians, including
a woman and two children.
• On 18 February, air strikes hit residential areas of the opposition -controlled
village of Latmin in Lataminah, reportedly killing a married couple and injuring
at least three other civilians.
• On 20 February, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the oppositioncontrolled village of Zakah in Lataminah, reportedly killing a 6-year-old boy.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 3 February, air strikes hit a school in the town of Bahrah (held by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)), in the eastern part of the governorate,

20/21

18-04045

S/2018/243

reportedly killing at least 40 civilians, including 12 women and 19 children, the
majority of them persons displaced from Safirah in eastern Aleppo Governorate.
• On 10 February, two children were allegedly killed when explosive hazards
detonated in the ISIL-controlled Jubaylah neighbourhood of Dayr al-Zawr city.
• On 17 February, a girl and boy were reportedly killed when explosive hazards
detonated in the ISIL-controlled Hawi neighbourhood of Abu Hamam, in the
eastern part of the governorate.
• On 20 February, air strikes hit residential areas of the ISIL -controlled town of
Hajin, in the eastern part of the governorate, allegedly killing at least
16 civilians, including six women and five children from two families.
• On 23 February, three children were reportedly killed in Bahrah, in the eastern
part of the governorate, when explosive hazards detonated in their house.
• On 25 February, air strikes hit a gathering of internally displaced persons in
Zahrat Alluni, between the towns of Susah and Sha‘fah, in the south-eastern part
of the governorate, allegedly killing at least 11 civilians. The majority of those
killed were persons displaced from Baghuz, in the eastern part of the
governorate.
Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates
• On 15 February, a civilian was reportedly killed in the city of Raqqah when
explosive hazards detonated inside his house.
• On 15 February, Kurdish forces raided the Nashwah neighbourhood in the city
of Hasakah and reportedly took three civilian men from their homes for military
recruitment purposes.
• On 16 February, two children were allegedly killed as a result of explosive
hazards that detonated in the street in the Nawawi Mo sque neighbourhood of
Raqqah.
• On the night of 18 February, at least nine civilian men were allegedly taken from
their homes by Kurdish forces in the Ghuwayran neighbourhood of Hasakah.
Their whereabouts remain unknown.

18-04045

21/21
