m.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of lhe Finl Committee

manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons and, where necessary, specific agreements on particular types of such
weapons;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to submit a report on the results achieved to the General Assembly for consideration at its thirty-fifth session;
3. Once again urges all States to refrain from any
action which could adversely affect the talks aimed at
working out an agreement or agreements to prevent the
emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to
the consideration of this item by the General Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Prohibition of
the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons: report of the Committee on Disarmament".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34 / 80.

Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, and recalling also its resolutions
2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3080 (XXVIII)
of 6 December 1973, 3259 A (XXIX) of 9 December
1974, 3468 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/88 of
14 December 1976, 32/86 of 12 December 1977,
S-10/2 of 30 June 1978 and 33/68 of 14 December
1978,
Encouraged by the continued support extended to the
Declaration by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, 25
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action in
furtherance of the objectives of the Declaration would
be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Deeply concerned at the intensification of greatPower military presence, conceived in the context of
great-Power rivalry, leading to an increase of tension
in the area,
Considering that the continued military presence of
the great Powers in the Indian Ocean, conceived in the
context of great-Power rivalry, with the danger of a
competitive escalation of such a military presence, gives
greater urgency to the need to take practical steps for
the early implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of peace
in the Indian Ocean requires co-operation among the
regional States to ensure conditions of peace and security within the region, as envisaged in the Declaration,
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the littoral
and hinterland States,
Further considering that, at its tenth special session,
it noted the proposal for establishing the Indian Ocean
as a zone of peace, taking into account its deliberations
25

See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, paras. 142-151.

and its relevant resolutions and the need to ensure the
maintenance of peace and security in the region, 20
Noting that talks were initiated between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America regarding their military presence in the Indian
Ocean, and that the two countries have kept the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean informed of the
current situation concerning those talks,
Regretting, however, that the talks remain suspended,
Encouraged by the holding of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, which
provided an opportunity for the further harmonization
of the positions of the littoral and hinterland States,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Oceani· and the report of the Meeting
of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian
Ocean; 28
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the issues on
which the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States
of the Indian Ocean succeeded in harmonizing a common position;
3. Expresses the hope for the early implementation
of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of
Peace;
4. Urges that the talks between the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
regarding their military presence in the Indian Ocean
should be resumed without delay and that the parties
should refrain from any activity prejudicial to the implementation of resolution 2832 (XXVI);
5. Renews the general mandate of the Ad Hoe
Committee as defined in the relevant resolutions;
6. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a full report
on its work;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendations contained in paragraphs 34 and 35 of the report of the Meeting of the
Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean, 29
1. Decides to enlarge the Ad Hoe Committee on the
Indian Ocean by the addition of new members to be
appointed by the President of the General Assembly on
the recommendation of the Ad Hoe Committee;
2. Invites the permanent members of the Security
Council and major maritime users of the Indian Ocean
referred to in paragraph 12 (c) of the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian
Ocean that have not yet done so to serve on the expanded Ad Hoe Committee;
3. Decides to convene a Conference on the Indian
Ocean during 1981 at Colombo for the implementation
of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of
Peace, contained in General Assembly resolution 2832
(XXVI) of 16 December 1971 ;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to undertake the
preparatory work for the convening of the Conference,
26
27

Resolution S-10/2,,ara. 64 (b).
Official Records o the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/34/29).
2 s Ibid., Supplement No. 45 (A/34/45 and Corr.I).
2 9 Ibid.

52

General Alllembly-Tblrty-fourtb Session

including consideration of appropriate arrangements
for any international agreement that may ultimately
be reached for the maintenance of the Indian Ocean as
a zone of peace, as referred to in paragraph 3 of resolution 2832 (XXVI), and to hold its preparatory sessions
at United Nations Headquarters and at least two such
sessions, including the final one, in Mauritius;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neeessary provision for the Conference, including the essential background information, relevant documentation
and summary records, and to render all necessary assistance to the expanded Ad Hoe Committee, including interpretation in the languages of the General Assembly,
as required.
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/so that, in accordance with paragraph I of resolution B above, he had appointed the following
members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean:
BULGARIA, DJIBOUTI, EGYPT, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC,
PANAMA, POLAND, ROMANIA, SEYCHELLES, SINGAPORE, SUDAN and
YUGOSLAVIA.

As a result of the above appointments and of the implementation of paragraph 2 of resolution B above, the Ad Hoe Committee is composed of the following Member States: AUSTRALIA,
BANGLADESH, BULGARIA, CANADA, CHINA, DEMOCRATIC YEMEN,
DJIBOUTI, EGYPT, ETHIOPIA, FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC, GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF, GREECE, INDIA,
INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, ITALY, JAPAN, KENYA, LIBERIA, MADA·
GASCAR, MALAYSIA, MAURITIUS, MOZAMBIQUE, NETHERLANDS,
NORWAY, OMAN, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, POLAND, ROMANIA, SEY·
CHELLES, SINGAPORE, SOMALIA, SRI LANKA, SUDAN, UNION OF
SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TAN·
ZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, YEMEN, YUGOSLAVIA and
ZAMBIA.

34/81.

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3183
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3260 (XXIX) of
9 December 1974, 3469 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
31/190 of 21 December 1976, 32/89 of 12 December 1977 and 33/69 of 14 December 1978,
Reiterating its conviction that all peoples of the world
have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that all States should be in a position to
contribute to the adoption of measures for the achievement of this goal,
Stressing anew its belief that a world disarmament
conference, adequately prepared and convened at an
appropriate time, could promote the realization of such
an aim and that the co-operation of all nuclear-weapon
Powers would considerably facilitate its attainment,
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the World Disarmament Conference,31
Recalling its decision, taken at the tenth special session, that, at the earliest appropriate time, a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal
participation and with adequate preparation, 82
so A/34/854.
31 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 28 (A/34/28).
32 Resolution S-10/2, para. 122.

1. Notes with satisfaction that in its report to the
General Assembly the Ad Hoe Committee on the World
Disarmament Conference stated the following:
"Having regard for the important requirements of
a world disarmament conference to be convened at
the earliest appropriate time, with universal participation and with adequate preparation, the General Assembly may wish to decide that, after its second special
session devoted to disarmament, a world disarmament
conference would take place as soon as the necessary
consensus on its convening has been reached"; 88
2. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to maintain
close contact with the representatives of the States possessing nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed of their attitudes, as well as with all other States,
and to consider any possible relevant proposals and observations which might be made to the Committee, especially having in mind paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "World Disarmament Conference".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34/82.

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/70 of 14 December 1978,
in which it expressed its conviction that the suffering of
civilian populations and of combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement could be reached
on the prohibition or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use of specific conventional weapons, including any which might be deemed to be excessively
injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
Reaffirming its belief that positive results as regards
the non-use or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific conventional weapons would serve, in
addition, as encouragement in the broader field of
disarmament,
Also recalling that, by its resolutions 32/152 of
19 December 1977 and 33/70, it decided to convene
in 1979 the United Nations Conference on Prohibitions
or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or
to Have Indiscriminate Effects and established the mandate of the Conference,
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects on the work of its session held at Geneva from
10 to 28 September 1979;34
2. Notes with appreciation that the Conference
reached agreement with regard to a draft proposal concerning non-detectable fragments;
38 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 28 (A/34/28), para. 15.
s, A/CONF.95/8.
