A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/180
7 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 91 (i)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/717/Add.10)]
48/180. Entrepreneurship and privatization for economic growth
and sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/98 of 14 December 1990, 45/188 of
21 December 1990, 46/166 of 19 December 1991 and 47/171, 47/181 and 47/199 of
22 December 1992,
Taking note of Agenda 21, 1/ the Cartagena Commitment, 2/ the
International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development
Decade 3/ and the Declaration on International Economic Cooperation, in
particular the Revitalization of Economic Growth and Development of the
Developing Countries, 4/
__________
1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
2/
"A New Partnership for Development: The Cartagena Commitment",
see Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Eighth session, Report and Annexes (TD/364/Rev.1) (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.II.D.5), part one, sect. A.
3/

Resolution 45/199, annex.

4/

Resolution S-18/3, annex.
/...

A/RES/48/180
Page 2

Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
entrepreneurship and national development, 5/
Taking note of chapter VII of the World Economic Survey, 1993, 6/
Taking into account the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Comparative Experiences with Privatization and the Intergovernmental Working
Group of Experts on Restrictive Business Practices, of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development,
Recognizing the importance of the market and the private sector for the
efficient functioning of economies in various stages of development,
Recognizing the sovereign right of each State to decide on the
development of its private and public sectors, taking into account the
comparative advantages of each sector, bearing in mind the economic, social
and cultural diversity in the world,
Acknowledging that broad participation by individuals and major groups
in decision-making is a fundamental prerequisite for the achievement of
economic growth and sustainable development, with entrepreneurship as an
important element of that goal,
Noting that many countries continue to attach major importance to the
privatization of enterprises, demonopolization and administrative deregulation
in the context of their economic restructuring policies, as a means to
increase efficiency, economic growth and sustainable development,
Recognizing the important role of Governments in creating, through
transparent and participatory processes, the enabling environment supportive
of entrepreneurship and facilitative of privatization, in particular the
establishment of the judicial, executive and legislative frameworks necessary
for a market-based exchange of goods and services and for good management, as
described in paragraphs 27 and 28 of the Cartagena Commitment, 2/
Emphasizing the importance of a supportive international economic
environment, including investment and trade, for the promotion of
entrepreneurship and privatization in all countries,
Noting the difficulties that countries encounter in promoting
entrepreneurship and in implementing privatization programmes owing to a lack
of appropriate experience and technical capacities in those areas,
Welcoming the activities that have been and will be undertaken by the
organizations, bodies, programmes and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system for the benefit of recipient countries and in conformity with
their own policies and priorities for development, in supporting national
efforts aimed at creating enabling environments for entrepreneurship and for
the implementation of privatization programmes,
__________
5/

A/48/472.

6/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.II.C.1.

/...

A/RES/48/180
Page 3

Recalling with satisfaction the active collaboration between the United
Nations system and private-sector associations, such as the ongoing efforts of
the United Nations Development Programme with the International Chamber of
Commerce, the Business Council for Sustainable Development and the Chamber of
Commerce and Industry of the Group of 77,
Mindful of the resource constraints of the Secretariat and, therefore,
of the need to rationalize related agenda items and requests for reports,
1.
Invites interested Member States to enhance the exchange of
information among themselves and all relevant organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system on activities, programmes and experiences of
Member States and the United Nations system concerning entrepreneurship,
privatization, demonopolization and administrative deregulation, in order to
increase the efficiency and effectiveness of technical cooperation in this
field;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen, within existing
resources and with due priority, the activities of the United Nations system
related to the promotion of entrepreneurship and to the implementation of
privatization programmes, demonopolization and administrative deregulation,
through, inter alia, better coordination;
3.
Calls upon the relevant organs, organizations and programmes of
the United Nations system, according to their mandates, to develop and, upon
request, increase technical assistance, and to incorporate in their respective
programming and activities specific objectives that will:
(a)
Facilitate, as appropriate, the creation of enabling environments
for the establishment and growth of small and medium-size enterprises and for
the support of local entrepreneurs;
(b)
Facilitate, as appropriate, the design and implementation of
privatization, demonopolization and administrative deregulation policies, and
assist relevant national institutions in developing the capacities to
institute appropriate policy, legal, regulatory and fiscal frameworks and
incentives to promote entrepreneurship;
4.
Encourages the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, in pursuing those activities, to foster active
partnerships between public and private entities, taking into account the
capacities for self-organization of entrepreneurs, through, for example:
Mechanisms for discussion and consultation by relevant parties as
(a)
to the appropriate ways to enhance the environment for entrepreneurship,
privatization, demonopolization and administrative deregulation;
(b)
Promoting initiatives, such as national and, where appropriate,
regional workshops, to review and disseminate experience and lessons learned
locally and internationally on the promotion of entrepreneurship and on the
implementation of privatization, demonopolization and administrative
deregulation;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a biennial report, in
consultation with the heads of relevant organs, organizations and programmes
of the United Nations system, on policies and activities related to
/...

A/RES/48/180
Page 4

entrepreneurship, privatization, demonopolization and administrative
deregulation, clarifying the focus of their respective activities;
6.
Decides to review and appraise at its fiftieth session the
activities related to the present resolution under an item entitled
"Development and international economic cooperation: Entrepreneurship and
privatization for economic growth and sustainable development".
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
