A/RES/58/95

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 December 2003

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 83

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 2003
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/58/472)]

58/95. Assistance to Palestine refugees and support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 212 (III) of 19 November 1948, on assistance to
Palestine refugees, and 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, by which, inter alia, it
established the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East,
Recalling also all its subsequent resolutions on the question, including
resolution 56/52 of 10 December 2001,
Recalling further relevant Security Council resolutions,
Acknowledging the essential role that the Agency has played for more than
fifty years since its establishment in ameliorating the plight of the Palestine refugees
in the fields of education, health and relief and social services,
Aware of the continuing needs of Palestine refugees throughout all the fields of
operation, namely the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, Jordan, Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic,
Gravely concerned about the increased suffering of the Palestine refugees,
including the loss of life, injury and destruction and damage to refugee shelters and
properties, as well as the safety of the staff and the damage to the facilities of the
Agency,
Regretting the death of six Agency staff members during the reporting period,
Deeply concerned about the continuing restrictions on the freedom of
movement of the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, which adversely affect the
ability of the Agency to provide its services, including its educational, health and
relief and social services,
Stressing the necessity for compliance with Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities

03 45861

A/RES/58/95

of the United Nations 1 with regard to the safety of the personnel of the Agency, the
protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities,
including throughout the occupied territories,
Stressing also the need for respect of international humanitarian law,
Emphasizing the obligations of all parties in accordance with the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, 2
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering
the period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003, 3 the report of the Working Group on
the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, 4 the letter dated 25 September 2003 from the
Chairperson of the Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East addressed to the CommissionerGeneral, 5 and the report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for
Palestine for the period from 1 September 2002 to 31 August 2003, 6
Deeply concerned about the continuing financial situation of the Agency,
which has affected and affects the continuing provision of necessary Agency
services to Palestine refugees, including the emergency-related and humanitarian
programmes,
Affirms the necessity for the continuation of the work of the United
1.
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the
importance of its operation and services for the well-being of the Palestine refugees
and for the stability of the region, pending the resolution of the question of the
Palestine refugees;
Calls upon all States to make the most generous efforts possible to meet
2.
the anticipated needs of the Agency, including those mentioned in recent emergency
appeals, and to support the Agency’s valuable work in providing assistance to the
Palestine refugees;
Takes note with approval of the report of the Working Group on the
3.
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East,4 for its efforts to assist in ensuring the financial security of the
Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary services and
assistance to the Working Group for the conduct of its work;
Endorses the efforts of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
4.
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to continue to
provide humanitarian assistance, as far as practicable, on an emergency basis and as
a temporary measure, to persons in the area who are currently displaced and in

_______________
1

Resolution 22 A (I).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 13 and corrigendum and
addendum (A/58/13 and Corr.1 and Add.1).
4
A/58/450.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 13 and corrigendum
(A/58/13 and Corr.1), p. viii.
6
A/58/256, annex.
2

2

A/RES/58/95

serious need of continuing assistance as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent
hostilities;
5.
Strongly appeals to all Governments and to organizations and individuals
to contribute generously to the Agency and to the other intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations concerned for the above-mentioned purposes;
Reiterates its previous appeals to all States, specialized agencies and
6.
non-governmental organizations to continue and to augment the special allocations
for grants and scholarships to Palestine refugees, in addition to their contributions to
the regular budget of the Agency;
Appeals to all States, specialized agencies and other international bodies
7.
to extend assistance for higher education to Palestine refugee students and to
contribute towards the establishment of vocational training centres for Palestine
refugees, and requests the Agency to act as the recipient and trustee for the special
allocations for grants and scholarships;
Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the Agency,
8.
as well as to all of the staff of the Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable
work, particularly in the light of the increasingly difficult conditions throughout the
past year;
Also expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the
9.
Agency, and requests it to continue its efforts and to keep the General Assembly
informed of its activities, including the full implementation of Assembly decision
48/417 of 10 December 1993;
10. Commends the efforts of the Commissioner-General to increase the
budgetary transparency and efficiency of the Agency, as well as the support of the
host Governments for the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
11. Calls upon all relevant parties to take effective measures to ensure the
safety of the personnel of the Agency, the protection of its institutions and the
safeguarding of the security of its facilities;
12. Notes the success of the Agency’s microfinance and enterprise
programmes, and calls upon the Agency, in close cooperation with the relevant
agencies, to continue to contribute towards the development of the economic and
social stability of the Palestine refugees.
72nd plenary meeting
9 December 2003

3
