V.

capabilities to mitiga te the effects of future droughts and
promote sustained economic and social development;
8. A/so requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To mobilize international assistance for the populations affected as a result of drought and other natural
disasters in the four countries concerned;
(b) To send, as a matter of urgency, a multiagency
mission to Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda to
assess the medium-term and long-term needs of the
Governments of those countries for their droughtafflicted populations;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1981 on the results of the multiagency mission concerning the medium-term and long-term needs
of the Governments concerned and also to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.

84th p/enary meeting
5 December I 980

35/91.

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second C ommittee

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of
Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Ethiopia, 187 prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 34/54 of 29 November 1979, with regard to the
progress made in the implementation of all the relevant
resolutions of the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
Having heard the statement made by the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator before the Second
Committee, on 3 November 1980, ' 88
Noting the statement by the Commissioner for Relief
and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia' 8" outlining the measures taken by the Government of Ethiopia to deal with
relief and rehabilitation in the drought-stricken areas of
that country as well as the critica) food situation for the
year 1980/81,
Noting further the call made in the report of the recent
multi-donor mission for urgent assistance to the
drought-stricken areas of Ethiopia,
Noting with appreciation in this regard the continued
efforts of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the United N ations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme,
Noting a/so with appreciation the determined efforts
being made by the Government of Ethiopia, through its
National Development Campaign, to mitigate the effects of the drought and to make the country selfsufficient in food,
Deep/y concerned at the gravity of the food situation
due to the devastating drought that has affected two
thirds of the country,
·
Recal/ing that, despite the generous assistance offered
to Ethiopia by the Governments of Member States, or"1 A/35/584.
'" Official Records of the General Assemb/y, Thirty-fifth Session,
Second Commillee, 36th meeting, paras. 6-17.
'" !bid., 42nd meeting. paras. 42-45.

ganizations ofthe United Nations system and voluntary
agencies, the persistent and recurring drought and other
natural calamities have rendered the task of recovery
and rehabilitation of the drought-stricken areas extremely difficult,
1. Take1> note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on assistance to the drought-stricken
areas of Ethiopia;
2. Requests the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the United Nations Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund and other
organizations of the United Nations system to continue
and intensify their assistance to Ethiopia in its relief and
rehabilitation efforts, particularly the Government's resettlement programme, in their respective areas of competence and to implement promptly and fully the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974. 3441 (XXX) of9 December 1975
and 31 / 172 of 21 December · 1976, and Economic and
Social Council resolutions 1876 (LVII) of 16 July 1974,
1971 (LIX) of 30 July 1975. 1986 (LX) of 6 May 1976,
1978/2 of 2 May 1978, 1979/2 of 4 May 1979 and
1980/2 of 16 April 1980:
3. Appeals to the Governments of Member States
and to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and ali voluntary agencies to continue and
increase their assistance to the Government of Ethiopia
for the relief, rehabilitation and recovery of the droughtstricken areas;
4. Calls upon all concerned to ensure that the international assistance provided shall be used for the sole
purpose of relief and rehabilitation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, to report to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1981 and to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the implementation of paragraphs 2 and 3 above and of the
other relevant resolutions of the Assembly and the
Council.
84th plenary meeting
5 December /980

35 /92.

Assistance to Chad'"º
A

ASSISTANCE FOR THE RECONSTRUCTION.
RF.HABILITATION ANO DEVELOPMENTOFCHAD

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/120 of 14 December 1979
concerning assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Chad,
Taking into account the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 26 September 1980'"' on the reasons why
that resolution has not been implemented,
Deep/y concerned about the massive destruction of
property and the serious damage to the economic and
social infrastructure of Chad caused by the progressive
deterioration of the political situation marked by armed
contlict during the past fourteen years,
'"' See also sect. X.B.J, decision J5/42:l.
,.,, A/35/488.
.

148

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session
-

-

-- - - -

Affirming the urgent need for international action to
assist the Government of Chad in its efforts for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the
country,
Bearing in mind the concern expressed by Member
States about the situation existing in Chad and the interest they have shown in its speedy return to normal
conditions of life and its reconstruction and development,
Considering that Chad is in a particularly disadvantageous position as one of the least developed countries
which is land-locked and suffering from drought,
Noting the urgent appeal made to the international
community by the Vice-Chairman of the delegation of
Chad before the General Assembly on 10 October
1980, 192
l. Commends and encourages the efforts exerted by
the Government and people of Chad for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
2. Urgently appeals to ali Member Sta tes, specialized
agencies and other organizations of the U nited N ations
system and international economic and financia! institutions to provide generous emergency aid to Chad,
through bilateral or multilateral channels, with a view to
meeting its reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To organize an international programme of
financia!, technical and material assistance to Chad to
enable it to meet its short-term and long-term needs with
respect to reconstruction, rehabilitation and development;
(b) To dispatch a mission to Chad, as soon as peace
is restored, to review with the Government its needs for
the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of
the country, and to communicate the report of the mission to the international community;
4. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the International Fund for Agricultura! Development,
the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the United Nations
Children's Fund-to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
mobilized to assist the country;
5. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account for Chad which has been
established under the auspices of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Special Economic Assistance Programmes for the purpose of facilitating the channelling
of contributions to Chad;
6. Invites the U nited N ations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank and
the International Fund for Agricultura! Development to
,,n Official Records of the General Assemhly, Thirty-fifth Se.l'sion.
Plenary Meetings, 33rd meeting. paras. 36- 109

bring the special needs of Chad to the attention of their
governing bodies, for their consideration, and to report
on the decisions of those bodies to the SecretaryGeneral by I 5 A ugust 1981;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To ensure that adequate financia! and budgetary
measures are taken for the organization of an effective
international programme of assistance to Chad and for
the mobilization of such international assistance;
(b) To keep the situation in Chad under review and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
B
EMERGENCY HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO CHAD

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/120 of 14 December 1979
on assistance for the reconstruction. rehabilitation and
development of Chad,
Deeply concerned at the deterioration of the economic, social, food and health situation as a result of the
continued fighting throughout the country and in the
capital, Ndjamena,
Recognizing the need for emergency humanitarian
assistance from the international community for the
people of Chad affected by the war,
Affirming the urgent need for financia! and material
support from the international community to assist the
Government of Chad in its efforts to meet the immediate needs of its people,
Considering that Chad is in a particularly disadvantageous position as a least-developed, land-locked and
drought-stricken country,
Taking note of the ürgent and moving appeal addressed to the entire international community by the
Vice-Chairman of the delegation of Chad before the
General Assembly on 10 October 1980, 14 '
l. Takes note with approval of resolution CM/
Res.818 (XXXV) on the assistance of the Organization
of African Unity to refugees and displaced persons from
Chad, adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary
session, held at Freetown from 18 to 28 J une 1980; '"'
2. Appeals to ali Member States, governmental and
non-governmental organizations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations system, in
particular the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme and the World
Health Organization, to provide the necessary assistance, as a matter of urgency, to the Government of
Chad to enable it to come to the aid of the people affected by the civil war;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to contact the
Government of Chad as a matter of urgency with a view
to the appointment of a resident co-ordinator in Chad
who will also act as special representative for emergency relief operations;
4. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other
Uí!ited Nations bodies, and voluntary and non-govern-- --

,.. , See A/35/463 ami Corr. l, annex l.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

149

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/187 of 21 December 1976,
in which, ínter alía, it expressed deep concern at the
serious economic and social situation in Sao Tome and
Principe as a result of the total lack of infrastructure for
development and appealed urgently to the international
community to assist the Government of Sao Tome and
Principe to enable it to establish the necessary social and
economic infrastructure for development,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 32/96 of 13 December
1977, 33/125 of 19 December 1978 and 34/131 of 14 December 1979, in which it reiterated its appeal to the international community to provide financia!, material
and technical assistance to Sao Tome and Principe,
Recalling further that in its resolution 33 / 125 it noted
the recommendation of the Committee for Development Planning at its fourteenth session, that Sao Tome
and Principe should be assisted during the remainder of
the current decade and that the special difficulties and
upheavals experienced by that country required special
measures, 194
Bearing in mind its resolution 31 / 156 of 21 December
1976 in which it urged ali Governments, in particular
those of the developed countries, to lend their support,
in the context of their assistance programmes, for the
implementation of the specific action envisaged in
favour of developing island countries, and its resolution
32/185 of 19 December 1977 in which it urged ali organizations in the United Nations system to implement,
within their respective spheres of competence, appropriate specific .action in favour of developing island
countries,
Aware that the economic and social development of
Sao Tome and Principe has been seriously hindered not
only by inadequate health, educational and housing facilities but also by inadequate transport infrastructure,
and that ·urgent improvement in these sectors is a prerequisite for the country's future progress,
Taking note of the current development priorities of
the Government of Sao Tome and Principe, notably in
agriculture and livestock, fisheries, manufacture, mining, transport and other infrastructure, and in education, training, health and housing,
Recalling its n;solutions 32 / 160 of 19 December 1977
and 33 / 197 of 29 January 1979 on the Transport and
Communications Decade in Africa,

Noting, in this connexion, that substantial international assistance is needed to improve the infrastructure in sea, air and land transport in Sao Tome and
Principe,
Noting section I of decision 80/ 16 of 26 June 1980
adopted by the Governing Council of the United
Nations 1>evelopment Programme 19 ' to assign a resident representative to Sao Tome and Príncipe on a fulltime basis,
Noting a/so paragraph 2 of decision 80/30 of 26 June
1980 adopted by the Governing Council of the U nited
N ations Development Programme, 1"'
Noting further Economic and Social Council decision
1980/161 of 24 July 1980, in which the Council requested the Committee fo{ Development Planning to review the economic situation in Sao Tome and Principe
with a view to its inclusion in the list of the least developed countries,
A/so noting that the Government of Sao Tome and
Principe will convene a conference of donors early in
1981,
Noting with concern that a large number of the projects and programmes identified in the report of
21 August 1980 of the Secretary-General, '"" to which was
annexed the report of the review mission to Sao Tome
and Principe, have not yet been financed,
A/so concerned by the conclusion of the report that,
unless there is a significant increase in the volume of international assistance, the Government of Sao Tome
and Principe will not be able to finance a development
programme,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General; 1"°
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States and
international organizations for the assistance provided
to Sao Tome and Principe, both in food aid and development assistance;
4. Regrets, however, that the assistance so far
provided falls far short of the needs of Sao Tome and
Príncipe;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental bodies to provide financia!, material and technical assistance to Sao Tome and Principe to permit the
implementation of the projects and programmes identified in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral and to enable the Government to launch an
effective programme of economic and social development;
6. Urges potential donor countries and international
financia! organizations to participate in and respond
positively at the forthcoming conference of donors;
7. Requests Member States and the organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system to take
special measures on behalf of Sao Tome and Principe,
pending the examination of its situation by the Committee for Development Planning;
8. Urges the United Nations Development Programme, the appropriate specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to respond
favourably to requests from the Government of Sao

194
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /978.
Supp/ement No. 6 (E/ 1978/46 and Corr. l ), para. 99.

''" /bid .. /980 Supp/emenr No. 12 (E/1980/42/Rev. 1), cha p. XI.
'" A/35/333.

mental organizations to co-operate fully with the resident co-ordinator, once appointed;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To dispatch a mission to the Government of
Chad, as a matter of urgency, to assess the scope of the
problem and the volume of humanitarian assistance required;
(b) To mobilize humanitarian assistance from the
international community on behalf of those suffering
from the war;
(e) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenafy meeting
5 December 1980
35/93.

Assistance to Sao Tome and Principe 190
